Oe Nae ee PET

tie =

- “-- a ee. ee She ee ee Se . * -
etntetak 4B oh E sTitetesets See iene geet acon te so: ry

FLT Pea yn 8 ve hehe
REP Py BR 52 5

hans
4 Sa Posienets = ~
ibbieet B ate +

Se Sy
Ste

ee

ace b '
iS ele Sheets ret

ares

PR TP AM leteny eins Sennen ee

tivenisi3gl tai deena ate a

8 SMe ther
Ls trieh ShSa;

PE SSA
Tusetios

FT ape Rt mrt ad
- ek ae ak
= FTmge hy Shee e,

eas tome ‘ : . Nea iatee Maukces

Sl teaver see neste & een kaae Se Sk,
Base eet! Sieteoie: ‘Seika
nibbasiebreadilibbere tare nt
> ~ eS ee a ee
SOS ene muses ss

INT apae fet

aerate ae hawaiian Sete eiee eos ~
onseJh 423 'p-evoaeicre Aree kT Rite St AS EES PN PME Criprice sr trerte =jritenstieqeicl :
Shins Sass r cues : ser gohelneien Sartre aetsaaetias é HMetnsas
x PSSST ESR Eid Ce ih SC ee rhe re Et =i aie TET Satay ; Tad
iTS HRD ENE ETS EA (Sea pad oes ‘

eee

* MEY

Seotces ors aes
SRR OT SE

= Ole
‘ om, ae e i

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND

IN THE

HKIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, M.A.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

Vor, SLE:

LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
1874.

All réghts reserved.

| ie

PH HORTON ee

‘»
i ae
W- oy, ~
oe ’

2)", &

‘ne . ee ome
aa 7 A

‘

J

“7
re

CONTENTS.

BOOK VIII. "

CHAPTER I.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

SECTION

iE

II.

IIT.

TV.

VI.

Meaning and causes of Democracy .

Philosophy of progress

Increase of discontent in Ireland

Wolfe Tone

United Irishmen

Tone’s Programme .

Effects on Ireland of the Bienoh een ints

Celebrations at Belfast

Mr. Pitt and Catholic Tieneracion)

Supposed conservative character of the Catholic
religion. Views of Edmund Burke

Two parties in the Catholic Committee

Skirmishes in the Irish Parliament .

The Dublin Foundling Hospital

. Richard Burke and the Government

Administration of Lord Westmoreland
Catholic policy of the Cabinet .
Grattan on Reform of Parliament
Petition of the Catholic Committee .
Rash proceeding of Richard Burke .
Debate on Emancipation .

Catholic Petition rejected

vl CONTENTS.

SECTION PAGE
VII. The Catholic Committee and the United Irishmen . 56
Wolfe Tone and his friends : rg et)
Alliance of the Catholics with the Rercinten : AG
Effects of the Battle of Valmy . : homo

The Catholic Convention . ; : ; toy
National Guards . ; 69

Mission of Delegates from the Ganseaien to Bupland 71
Remonstrance of the Irish Government against the
reception of the Delegates. : mee

CHAPTER, II.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

I, Opinion of the Cabinet . : ati.
Letter of Lord Westmoreland . ; ee
Arthur Wellesley in the Irish Raviianent 80
Lord Edward Fitzgerald . : : ci, ates
Catholic Relief Bill . , ; . 84
Dr. Duigenan . ; Bape ds
Speech of Sir Lawrence Partons ; , ee
The Oligarchy . : : ! ea
Fitzgibbon in the House of fords < ; ape!

II. Catholics admitted to the franchise . : . 104
The Defenders in arms . : : : , . 105
Disturbances in Belfast . : : . 106
The Catholic Committee . : ; ; - 109
Civil War in Limerick . : : Pe} is |
Convention Bill , ; : ; : Ame BE:

III. Lord Moira . . . edie HE:
The French Dinsstory ancl Mr. by deleson, ele
Escape of Hamilton Rowan . F ’ ‘ > ee
Trial and suicide of Jackson . 120

IV. Recall of Lord Westmoreland sett Hontination of
Lord Fitzwilliam . ‘ : : : ; .* 122
Policy of religious equality . LeU
Bill of Mr. Grattan . : { : ; ; ; 128
The King interferes : : ia! 3)
Recall of Lord Fitzwilliam f , : ; . 134
Confusion in Dublin ; ‘ , ‘ . 186
Lord Camden appointed Vi gee : ; spies

The Duke of Portland’s instructions to tind , ¥ 183

SECTION

V.

VI.

III.

CONTENTS.

Reception of Lord Camden in Dublin
Catholic Relief Bill .

Grattan’s manner as a speaker
Defeat of the Catholic Bill

Spirit of the North.

Battle of the Diamond

The Orangemen

B.O.0 Keil:

CHAPTER I.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

. Alternative Policies.

Overtures of Ireland to eesti
Mission of Wolfe Tone

. Union of the United Irishmen and the Derekaies

Plans for Insurrection

Views of the Duke of Dorian
Conspiracy Bill

Strength of the Orangemen
Insurrection Bill

Lord Edward Fitzgerald and Belfer 0” Ganon? in

Switzerland .
Secret informations .
Formation of the Yeomanry
The Opposition in Parliament .

. Inclination of the Cabinet towards the Catholics

Dr. Hussey and the Militia
The potato-diggers :

. Wolfe Tone in Paris

Communications with the Directory
Plans for Invasion .

General Hoche

Preparations at Brest

French expedition sails

Bantry Bay

French troops neanie to nae :

PAGE

154
155

Vill

SECTION

VI. Effect in Ireland of the Rareecante of tie yeah on

II.

IIT.

IV.

WV I.

CONTENTS.

Fleet returns to Brest

the coast
Peasantry EppReentle wellicienowed
English negligence .
Explanation of the apathy of thé seepioN

CHAPTER II.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

. Theory of a Parliamentary Bi roaas

Trish popular tendencies .
Probable views of Grattan
Address of Arthur O’Connor .

Debates in Parliament on the French pees

Proposed Absentee Tax

Associations for murder .

The disarming of Ulster .
Denunciations of General Lake
Vacillation of the Cabinet

Fresh murders in Ireland

Mutiny of the Nore

Hffects of concession in Teierd

Plot to assassinate Lord Carhampton
Secession of the Irish Opposition

Proclamation for the disarming of the Thana

Divided counsels among the Rebel leaders
Fresh applications to France .

Lord Cornwallis declines the command of ses Trish

army

. Plan for invasion oe Hater

Battle of Camperdown

Irish incendiary Newspapers .
Tyrannicide

Agrarian murders

Lord Moira in the Beane Par niente
Character of the Irish conspirators .

Curious communication made to Lord Datnahive

Lady Edward Fitzgerald

PAGE

207

209
211
214
217

220
222
223
225 |
229
231
233
234
239
243
246
24.6
249
250
255
256
259
260

261
262
265
268
269
271
274.
277
278
283

SECTION

I:

(ae

IIT.

VI.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER III.
THE EVE OF ’98.

Situation of the Irish Government .
Irish gentry wavering

‘The Press ’

Lord Moira’s speech in Ireland

Reply of Lord Clare .
Historical treatment of Clare .

Fresh information

Thomas Reynolds .

The army and Sir Ralph Abertrombie
Resignation of Abercrombie

Arrests at Margate .

Arrests in Dublin on March 12

Trial of O’Coigley and Arthur O’ otincrt
Conduct of the English Whigs
Execution of O’ Coigley ‘

. The Orangemen

Resolution to disarm the South
Fresh murders a eg
Intended confiscation of the property of ihe Trish

gentry

. General Lake in MBS

Severities exercised on the Irish

Judkin Fitzgerald .

The Brothers Sheares_ .

Arrest of Lord Edward THiterernldas

Arrest of John and Henry Sheares .

Strength and weakness of the Irish donspiminy

CHAPTER I.
THE REBELLION.

. Meaning of the Rebellion

Military force in Ireland .
Calculated treachery of the rebels
The rising round Dublin .

VOL. III. a

352
304
356
357

».4

SECTION

Ly

Kil.

IV.

IX.

CONTENTS.

Massacre at Prosperous .

Fight at Clane

Attack on General Dundas
Attack on Carlow :
Disposition of the Irish gentr i
Anxiety of Lord Camden
Apologists for the Rebellion
Fight at the Curragh of Kildare
Rising in Wexford .

The beacon-fire on Corrigrua Hill
Father John Murphy

Attack on Enniscorthy

Camp on Vinegar Hill

First massacres there

Danger of Wexford

Battle of Three Rocks . :
Hvacuation of Wexford by the frodps
Plan of the rebel campaign
State of Ulster

Battle at New Town Barry
Defeat of General Walpole
Appeal of Lord Camden .

. Attack on New Ross

Battle in the streets
Defeat of the rebels

. Sculiabogue
. Dublin again in danger

Fresh discoveries
Battle of Arklow

. Partial rising in Ulster
Change of temper in the eeany arian
Letter from Camden to the Duke of Portland .

Regiments sent from England
State of Wexford

Scenes on Vinegar Hill .
Concentration of troops .
Advance of the army .
Massacre on Wexford Bridge .
Panic in the town

. Capture of Vinegar Hill ie General face

The rebels evacuate Wexford .
Retribution
Execution of Father J oie Mur phy .

PAGE

360
364
365
366
367
369
371
370

385
388

395
398

SECTION

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER II.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

I. The Opposition in the British Parliament

IT.

III.

The Whig Peers. ,

Recall of Lord Camden .

Lord Cornwallis Viceroy :

Mistakes of Lord Cornwallis .
Ignorance of Irish history and shapaober!
The Irish gentry

Remedies, real and unreal

True need of Ireland

Trials and executions in Dublin
Confessions of the leading conspirators
Unsent letter from the Duke of Portland

. The French at Killala

Defeat of Lake at Castlebar
Surrender of Humbert P
Capture, trial, and death of Wolf Tone

. Character of the Rebellion

The Union
Reasons why it had ‘become necessary’.
Means by which it was carried

Speech of Lord Clare in the Irish House of ionis ,

X1

PAGE
451
4.53
4.56
4.58
4.59
4.60
4.62
4.66
472
473
478
479
4.82
483
4.84,
485
488
490
491
4.92
494,

; 5 uns, vaN, ? a Ais
oY rm} Y Owes ay a J! ve ne
Bi i aeey ie Seah
PEN ey AA NR ad cs ae

! f

‘Berens hak Ma hieKt aa 2 i seine 6

one t
A Bei 8 7

THE HNGLISH IN IRELAND

IN THE

EIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

BOOM LEK

a

CHAPTER I.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.
SECTION I.

Tue Dungannon Volunteers had asserted that free- Chea
dom was the indefeasible birthright of man, and they ————
defined freedom to consist in the consent of the go-
verned to the laws which they were required to

obey. They might as well have said that their
consent was required to the law which would break

their necks if they fell over a precipice. The con-
ditions under which human society will cohere har-
moniously are inherent in the nature of things; and
human laws are wise or unwise, Just or unjust, so far

as they are formed on accurate discernment of the
purpose of the Maker of the world. To live well is

the most difficult of arts. The rules to which indivi-

duals must conform, if the State is to prosper, can
@xOr--I11. B

2

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book be discerned only by men of practical intellect and

EB

——— nobleness of character; and in growing and vigorous

nations the functions of government are, therefore,
entrusted not to those persons only who have given
proof of energy and ability, but to those who by
birth and station are raised above the temptations
of self-interest.

Strength brings security, and security negligence.
Civilization and prosperity introduce luxurious ha-
bits and extravagant expenditure. The high persons
and privileged classes to whom the care of the
Commonwealth has been entrusted forget their duties
in their pleasures. They believe that the State
exists only for themselves. They pass unequal laws,
and the people are oppressed, and clamour naturally
to share the powers which can be no longer trusted in
the old hands.

Hence come reforms and revolutions, the shaking
off of rulers who have become incompetent and mis-
chievous. The change is called progress, and is
admired and applauded as some grand political achieve-
ment, a thing excellent in itself, an entrance into a
new era of universal happiness. Many times in the
world’s history these glorious hopes have been enter-
tained, but always to be disappointed. Onlyat critical
moments, when some patent wrong has to be redressed,
will the better kind of men leave their proper occupa-
tions to meddle with politics. The peasant and the
artisan, the man of business and the man of science,
all of all sorts who are good in their kind, give them-
selves to their own work, caring only to do well what
nature has assigned to them todo. The volunteer po-
liticians in every class, those who put themselves for-
ward in elections to choose or to be chosen, are usually

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

the vain, the restless, the personally ambitious ; and
therefore the same causes which undermine aristocra-
cies destroy even more rapidly popular Governments.
Democracies are proverbially short-lived. They can
destroy class privileges, they can overthrow insti-
tutions, but their function ends in destruction; and
when the generations pass away which, under a sterner
system, had learnt habits of self-command, and could
therefore for a time dispense with control, they pass
away to give place usually to despotism. Private
character degenerates. Individuals forget their country
to care only for themselves, and therefore dwindle to
their personal level. The men of the first French
Revolution and the American Revolution were greater
than any which either country has produced in the
days of universal suffrage, equality, and miscalled
liberty.

The aristocracy in these islands lost the confidence
of the people in the last century. Their power and
privileges have melted from them and are still melt-
ing, and we have again committed ourselves to the
enthusiastic beliefs of which the Dungannon resolu-
tions were no more than a crude expression. We
have a new philosophy to gild a phenomenon which
would look less pretty were its character confessed.
Once more we have made an idol of spurious freedom,
and we are worshipping it duly with unflinching de-
votion and the inexorable logic of faith. Universal
happiness waits to appear where the rights of man shall
have been completely recognised. JBattle after battle
is fought and won. Paradise is still unattained, but we
do not doubt the truth of our theory ; we conclude
only that the process of destruction is incomplete.
The enemy still lets, and will let, till he be taken out

B2

CHAP.

+

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK of the way. When all men shall be free to think, free

Vill.

——— tospeak, free to act at their own secret wills, and pre-

judice and tyranny cease to interfere with them, then
at length the universal brotherhood will be a fact, and
misery will cease out of the land. All men are by
nature equal and free. All men being free have a right
to share in the making of the laws. Being alike in-
terested in the results, we assume that they will
choose the best representatives to make them, and will
become themselves elevated and ennobled in the ex-
ercise of their lofty prerogative. The propositions
are as false as the anticipation is delusive. Men are
not equal, but infinitely unequal. No manis free by
nature, and becomes free only by the discipline of
submission, by learning to command himself, or
by submitting to be commanded by others. The
multitude, who are slaves of their own ignorance,
will choose those to represent them who flatter their
vanity or pander to their interest. Emancipation
from authority cannot elevate, but can only degrade
those who are not emancipated by nature and fact.

False though it be, however, in its principles, the
philosophy of progress pushes its way towards its
goal with unflinching confidence and logical cohe-
rence. ‘That which is unsound must fall before it ;
that which is untrue must be seen to be false; that
which is unjust must perish. Then at length the
wheel will have come full round, and finding ourselves
not in Paradise at all, but sitting in arid desolation
amidst the wrecks of our institutions, we shall pain-
fully wake from our dream and begin again the long:
toil of reconstruction.

The history of Ireland in the concluding years of
the last century forms a remarkable episode in this

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

yet uncompleted drama. The degeneracy of autho-

Or

CHAP.

rity which precipitates civil convulsions had developed sh Lil

itself in Ireland more rapidly than in the rest of the
empire. The executive Government was unequal
to the elementary work of maintaining peace and
order. The aristocracy and legislature were corrupt
beyond reach of shame. The gentry had neglected
their duties till they had forgotten that they had
duties to perform. ‘The peasantry were hopelessly
miserable; and finding in the law not a protector and
a friend, but a sword in the hands of their oppressors,
they had been taught to look to crime and rebellion
as the only means.of self-defence. Never anywhere
were institutions more ripe for destruction than those
which England had planted in the unfortunate island
which to their common misfortune nature had made
part of her dominions. For ten years the Irish people
had been fed, chameleon-like, with promises of imme-
diate redemption. The Parliament had achieved its
independence. Volunteer battalions had celebrated
the triumph with the music of musketry and cannon.
Platform and newspaper and flying placard had echoed
and repeated the florid rhetoric of Grattan and his
friends. Liberty had not prevented rents from rising,
landlords from multiplying whisky stills, or whisky
stills and middlemen and tithe proctors from driving
the people into lower depths of misery and madness.
The most enthusiastic patriots were inclining to lie
down and despair, when before the astonished eyes of
Ireland, as of all Europe, rose the portent of the French
Revolution, preaching on scaffold ‘and at cannon’s
mouth the long waited for emancipation of mankind.
Young Ireland, fed from boyhood on Grattan’s de-
clamation, passionately believing in freedom, and mad

6

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK with disappointment at the failure of the Constitution

VAIGE

of ’82, responded with ecstasy. The cause of Ireland’s,
as of all other misery, was the tyranny of classes who,
by chicanery and fear, had made the masses of man-
kind their slaves. France was pointing the way for
all who had hearts to follow. Grattan had obtained
the independence of Parliament ; the independence
was a shadow without political equality. Let Irish-
men recover their personal rights, and independence
would become a fact, and the long-waiting era of
blessedness would at last arrive. The soil was un-
equally prepared. The Catholic religion assimilates ill
with visions of political liberty, and except occasionally
and for immediate objects disclaims connection with
theories to which it is naturally anenemy. The special
grievances of which Irish Catholics complained might
incline them, however, to make common cause with
those whose aim was universal emancipation. Mean-
while the northern Presbyterians were hereditary
republicans. Smarting with the additional wrongs
which had been inflicted on them in Ireland, they had
sympathised ardently with the revolt of the Ameri-
can colonies, and in the American success they had
seen an earnest of the ultimate success of their prin-
ciples. They had furnished the strength of the Volun-
teer movement, they had been clamorous for Parlia-
mentary reform, and though baffled so far, had lost no
atom of their faith or their enthusiasm. No less
strong were the liberal emotions of the rising genera-
tion of educated Irish gentlemen. Trinity College
was a hotbed of liberal sentiment. Every clever
Irish lad was a born orator, and the orator every-
where is the natural champion of wild imaginations.
Among the lawyers, the younger men of business, the

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

aspiring tradesmen, the men of letters, the poets, the
artists, the feeling was the same. Grattan was the
universal idol, while in the lower stratifications, among
the houghers and the tarring and feathering com-
mittee, the city mob was in perfect enmity against the
authors of the tyrannous Police Bill.

In union alone was there to be found strength.
The Protestant reformers who were in earnest felt
that they were nothing without the Catholics. Paris
had abolished distinctions of creed. JIreland’s first
ery was to recall three million fellow-citizens to the
national standard. Catholic and Protestant were to
shake hands over the buried memories of ancient
quarrels, and combine in a glorious struggle against
the common foe.

Vill

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

Tue character of the new movement may be conve-

——.—— niently studied in the person of its most celebrated

1790.

representative. Theobald Wolfe Tone was born on
the 20th of June, 1763. His grandfather was a
farmer at Naas ; his father a coachmaker in Dublin.
Theobald was the eldest son. He was educated at a
good school, where he showed talents, but was in-
curably idle. His fancy was for the army, but his
father, ambitious for him of a higher career, sent him
instead to Trinity College, where, though the idleness
was uncured, he maintained his reputation for ability.
When he was nineteen he was second in a duel be-
tween two fellow-students, where his friend killed his
antagonist. Such a misfortune was too common to
attract notice. ‘Tone finished his college career as if
nothing had happened, and immediately after he fell
in love. His fair one returned his affection. As
neither of them possessed a sixpence, they feared their
parents might interpose delays, so they shortened the
road to happiness by an elopement. This, too, was
in keeping with the general recklessness of the time.
The young couple were forgiven, but Theobald, leaving

his airy ways, was condemned to a profession. The wife

remained in Dublin. The husband was sent to Lon-
don, according to Irish custom, to study law for two
years at the Temple. The responsibilities of matri-
mony failed to steady so mercurial a temperament.
Young Tone hated law as he hated all regular studies.
He never opened his Blackstone. He eked out his

THE UNITED IRISHMEN,

resources by writing articles for newspapers. He

Me

meditated emigration to the South Sea Islands, and ——

addressed a memorial to Pitt on the propriety of
founding a military college there. His communica-
tion being left unnoticed, he vowed that he would
make Pitt smart for neglecting him. He returned
to Dublin to be called to the bar in 1789, ‘ knowing,’
he says, ‘as much of law as he knew of necromancy.
He went circuit and paid his expenses ; but prefer-
ring to conquer fame and fortune by a less tedious
process, he turned to politics, composed a patriotic
pamphlet on the Round Robin, and attracted the
favourable notice of the Opposition leaders. George
Ponsonby smiled upon him. The Northern Whig
Club, the brother society of the club in Dublin,
established by Lord Moira and Lord Charlemont,
elected him a member.

Tone, however, had already outgrown the Whig
philosophy. He had found a friend in the gallery of
the House of Commons of more congénial tempera-
ment, a retired ensign, who had been in India, named
Russell. These two, with Tone’s young wife, spent
the summer of 1790 together by the sea. They had
little hopes of their own country. ‘Tone turned his
thoughts again to emigration, a second time he drew
an outline of his colonial scheme, and sent it, not
again to Pitt, but to Lord Grenville. The project
was not without sense, for Lord Grenville sent hima
courteous acknowledgment, and promised to bear his
overtures in mind.

‘ If the plan had been followed,’ says Tone, ‘ Russell
and I were both going instead of planning revolutions

-in Ireland;’ but Lord Grenville thought no more of
the matter, and confessing frankly that personal

10

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

resentment was the explanation of his subsequent

—— ~ conduct, he renewed his vow to make the Cabinet

1790

repent. In the winter he founded a rival club in
Dublin, composed of spirits like his own. Among
the members were Mr. Stack, a clerical fellow of
Trinity ; Whitly Stokes, the dean, keeper of the
college lions, as Tone nicknamed him ; Dr. Drennan,
a physician ; Peter Burrowes, a rising barrister ;
Thomas Addis Emmett, a barrister also, elder brother
of Robert, all of whom left their mark in the develop-
ment of the Irish drama.

Of this party, Tone liked Whitly Stokes the best,
their opinions most nearly coinciding ; the sole fault
of Stokes being that he was not for lawless measures.
‘What he would highly that he would holily.’ A
reservation which Tone early concluded it would be
impossible to allow.

The Bastile fell in July 1789 ; in 1790, Burke
published his letters on the French Revolution, to
which Tom Paine replied with ‘ The Rights of Man.’
Tone and his friends were for Tom Paine, and young
Ireland was of the same way of thinking. In Tone’s
own words, ‘ oppressed, plundered, insulted Ireland ’
was electrified into life. The Northern Whig Club,
spite of its aristocratic connections, was scarcely less
sympathetic. The Irish Parliament was dissolved in
the summer, and the members spared neither their
fortunes nor their energies to defeat the Castle can-
didates. Robert Stewart,” then an ardent patriot,
carried Down in the popular interest after a struggle
of fifty-four days. Sir Hercules Rowley and Mr.
O’Neil, both members of the club, were returned for

1 Memoirs of Theobald Wolfe * Afterwards Lord Castlereagh,
Tone, by himself. then twenty-one years old,

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

11

Antrim. They were carried through Belfast in a cmap.
triumphal car with cannons firing. Volunteers re- ell

vived for the occasion, marched at their side; and
Hibernia walked before them with a wreath in one
hand and a pole with a cap of liberty in the other.
The town was illuminated at night. Fires blazed on
all the adjoining hill tops, and the Volunteer Light
Dragoons met on Bunker’s Hill, name of significant
omen, to swear that they would never lay down their
arms till their country was free. The city deter-
mined that in the ensuing year it would observe the
14th of July with becoming solemnity as the anni-
versary of the fall of the Bastile.

Fired with these scenes, and seeing, as he supposed,
the fields ripening rapidly for the harvest, Ensign
Russell, who was now living at Belfast, invited Tone
to sketch an outline of policy to be ready for the
celebration. Tone replied with composing a sin-
gular and characteristic paper, which, however ex-
travagant and absurd it may appear, yet must be read
also with the recollection that it kindled a fire in
Ireland which a hundred thousand men scarcely
sufficed to extinguish, and which cost sixty thousand
Irish lives. ‘

The object was to, form a society of ‘ United
Irishmen.’ It was to be instituted ‘ with the secrecy
and something of the ceremonial of Freemasonry ;
secrecy to pique curiosity; ceremonial to strike the
soul through the senses, and addressing the whole
man, animate his philosophy by the energy of his
passions.’

‘ Secrecy,’ writes Tone, ‘is expedient and necessary. It
will make the bond of union more cohesive and the spirit of

1 History of Belfast, p. 346.

1790.

12

BOOK
VU.

—_—_--—_—~—
1791.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

union more ardent and more condensed. It will envelope
the dense flame with a cloud of gloomy ambiguity that will
not only facilitate its own agency, but will confound and
terrify its enemies by their ignorance of the design, the
direction, or the consequences. It will throw a veil over
those individuals whose professional prudence might make
them wish to lie concealed. . . . A country so great a
stranger to itself as Ireland, where North and South and
East and West meet to wonder at each other, is not yet
prepared for the adoption of one political faith; while there
may be individuals from each of these quarters ready to
adopt such a profession, to propagate it with their best
abilities, and, when necessary, with their blood. Our pro-
vinces are ignorant of each other; our island is connected ;
we ourselves are insulated, and distinctions of rank and
property and religious persuasion have hitherto been not
merely lines of difference, but brazen walls of separation.
We are separate nations, met and settled together, not
mingled but convened— uncemented, like the image which

Nebuchadnezzar saw, with a head of fine gold, legs of iron,
feet of clay—parts that do not cleave to one another.

‘In the midst of an island where manhood -has met and
meets with such severe humiliation, where selfish men and
classes have formed a malignant conspiracy against public
good, let our beneficent conspiracy arise—one plot of patriots
pledged by solemn adjunction to each other in the service
of the people—the people in the largest sense of that mo-
mentous word. Let the cement of this constitutional com-
pact be a principle of such strong attraction as completely
to overpower all accidental and temporary repulsions, and
thus consolidate the scattered and shifting sand of society
into an adhesive and immovable caisson, sunk beneath the
dark and troubled waters.

_ € Our society will not call itself a Whig Club or a Revo-
lution Society. It will not be an aristocracy affecting the
language of patriotism. . . . It will not by views merely re-
trospective stop the march of mankind, or force them back
into the lanes and alleys of their ancestors. Let its name be
the “Irish Brotherhood.” Let its aim be to make the light

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

of philanthropy—a pale and ineffectual light—converge, and
by converging kindle into ardent, energetic, enthusiastic
love for Ireland that genuine, unadulterated enthusiasm
which descends from a luminous head to a burning heart, and
impels the spirit of man to exertions unequivocally great.
What is our end? The rights of man in Ireland! The
greatest happiness of the greatest numbers in this island ;
the inherent and indefeasible claims of every free nation to
rest in this nation; the will and power to be happy; to
pursue the common weal as an individual pursues his pri-
vate welfare, and to stand in insulated independence an
imperatorial people.

‘ The greatest happiness of the greatest number! On the
rock of this principle let this Society rest; by this let it
judge and determine every political question ; and whatever
is necessary for this end let it not be counted hazardous, but
rather our interest, our duty, our glory, our common reli-
gion. ... Let every member wear, day and night, an amulet
round his neck, containing the great principle which unites
the brotherhood, in letters of gold on a ribbon striped with
all the original colours, and enclosed in a sheath of white
silk, to represent the pure union of the mingled rays and
the abolition of all superficial distinctions,‘all colours and
shades of difference, for the sake of an illustrious end. Let
this amulet of union, faith, and honour depend from the
neck, and be bound about the body next to the skin, and
close to the heart. . . . This is enthusiasm! It is so. And
who has a spark of Hibernicism in his nature who would
not feel it kindle into a flame of generous enthusiasm? Who
that has a drop of sympathy in his heart, and sees how hap-
piness is heaped up in mounds, how misery is diffused and
divided among the millions, does not exclaim, * Alas for
the suffering, and oh for the power to redress it!” Who is
there that has enthusiasm sufficient to such an exclamation
tiat would not combine with others as honest as himself
to make the will live in the act, and to swear he will re-
dress it?

‘Let the Society meet four times a year, and an acting
committee once a month. Let these meetings be convivial,

13

CHAP.
z

as
aed.

14

BOOK
v1.

ee
1791.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

but not the transitory patriotism of deep potations. Con-
fidential— the hearé open, but the door locked. Conver-
sational— not a debating. society. There is too much
haranguing in this country already—a very great redun-
dance of sound. Would that we spoke more laconically and
acted more emphatically ! and we shall do so when our aim
is at something nobler and fairer than even the sublime and
beautiful of Mr. Burke—the sublimity of common-sense,
the beauty of common weal.

‘Our Society should be chaste and cautious in the selec-
tion of members, shunning equally the giddiness of the boy
and the suilen indifference to the public good which comes
with decline of years. They should be honest Irishmen,
of whatever rank, of whatever religion, who know liberty,
who love it, who wish to have it, and who will have it.

‘ The external business of the Society will be—

‘1. Publications to propagate their principles, and effect
their ends.

‘2. To keep up communication with the different towns,
and to use every exertion to accomplish a national conven-
tion of the people of Ireland.

‘3. To communicate with similar societies abroad, as the
Jacobin Club in Paris, the Revolution Society in England,
the Committee for Reform in Scotland. Let the nations
go abreast. Let the mterchange of sentiment among man-
kind concerning the rights of man be as immediate as pos-
sible.

‘Eulogies of such men as have deserved well of their
country until death should be from time to time delivered
by one of the brotherhood. Their works should live in a
library, to be founded by the Society, and dedicated to
liberty ; and the portraits of such men should adorn it. Let
the shades of the mighty dead look down and consecrate our
meetings. The Athenians fastened their edicts on the statues
of their ancestors. Let our laws and liberties have a similar
attachment, taking heed always to remember what has been
too much forgotten, that we are to be ancestors ourselves;
and as our bodies moulder down atter death, merely to pass

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

lo

into new forms of life, let our spirits preserve a principle of CHAP.
L

animation to posterity, and germinate from the grave.

‘What time is most appeals for the establishment of
this institution? Evennow. Le grand art est dans l’apropos.
Why is administration so imperious? Because the nation
does not act. The Whig Club is not a transfusion from the
people. We do not understand that club, and they do not feel
for us. When the aristocracy comes forward, the people
fall backward. When the people come forward, the aristo-
cracy, fearful of being left behind, insinuate themselves into
our ranks, and rise into timid leaders or treacherous auxili-
aries. They mean to make us their instruments. Let us
rather make them our instruments. One of the two must
happen. . . . On the 14th of July, which shall ever comme-
morate the French Revolution, let this Society pour out
their first libation to European liberty, eventually the liberty
of the world, and with their hands joined in each other, and
their eyes raised to heaven, in His presence who breathed
into them an everliving soul, let them swear to maintain the
rights and prerogatives of this nation as men, and the rights
and prerogatives of Ireland as an independent people. ‘Dieu
et mon droit” is the motto of kings. Dieu et la liberté,”
exclaimed Voltaire, when he first beheld Franklin. ‘“ Dieu
et nos droits,” let Irishmen cry aloud to each other—the
cry of mercy, of justice, and of victory.’!

Accompanying this singular production were a
series of resolutions for Parliamentary reform and
Catholic emancipation, adopted and printed imme-
diately afterwards in the programme of the society,”
and a private letter evidently addressed to Russell,
in which the writer explained his views more fully
than in a paper intended for wider circulation.®

1 Abridged from a copy in the Irishmen.’ Dublin, 1794, pp. 3, 4.
State Paper Office.—Irish MSS., 3 A copy of this letter also fell
June 1790, privately furnished to into the Viceroy’s hands, probably
the Government, and transmitted by treachery, and was enclosed to
by Lord Westmoreland. the Cabinet in the same packet.

2 ¢ Acts of the Society of United

—
W791.

16

BOOK
VII.

—-—_—
1791.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘The foregoing resolutions,’ said the writer, ‘contain my
true and sincere opinion of the state of this country, so far
as in this present juncture it may be advisable to publish it.
They fall short of the truth, but truth itself must sometimes
condescend to temporise. My unalterable opinion is that
the bane of Irish prosperity is the influence of England.
I believe that influence will ever be extended while the con-
nection between the countries continues. Nevertheless, as
I know, that opinion is for the present too hardy, though
a little time may establish it universally, I have not made
it a part of the resolutions.

‘The Whig Club are not sincere friends to the popular
cause. They dread the people as much as the Castle does.
I dare say that my Lord Charlemont, and I am pretty sure
that Mr. Grattan, would hesitate at the resolutions which I
send. I beg you will dismiss the respect for great names.
Read them, and read what I have now said,! and determine
impartially between us. I have alluded to the Catholics,
but so remotely as not to alarm the most cautious Protes-
tant. It is, indeed, nonsense to talk of a reform in Ireland in
which they shall not have their due share. To fear the
Catholics is a vulgar and ignorant prejudice. Look at France
and America; the Pope burnt in efigy at Paris; the Eng-
lish Catholic at this hour seceding from his Church; a
thousand arguments crowd on me; but it is unnecessary
here to dwell on them. The opportunity for publishing the
resolutions will be the 14th of July, at the commemoration
of the French Revolution—that morning-star of liberty to
Treland.’

1 The resolutions were three:— method of opposing that influence

‘Jl. That the weight of English was by Reform of Parliament.
influence was so great as to require ‘3. That no Reform was prac-
a cordial unon of all the people of — ticable which did not include Ivish-
Ireland to maintain liberty. men of every religious persuasion.’

‘2. That the only constitutional

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

SECTION III.

17

As a preparation for the celebration of the taking of ¢yap.

i

the Bastile at Belfast, the Northern Whig Club held a ;

preliminary meeting on the 15th of June, the anni-
versary of the signature of Magna Charta. The aris-
tocratic composition of that body was unsatisfactory
to the ardent reformers. Its sentiments were con-
sidered timid and hesitating. Liberal public opinion
nevertheless must have been far gone, even in those
circles, when a society which contained Charlemont,
Moira, Lord Clifford, Robert Stewart, and Sir
Hercules Rowley could accept as toasts, and drink
with wild enthusiasm, ‘ the Revolution,’ ‘ the National
Assembly of France,’ ‘the Majesty of the People,’
‘Tom Paine,’ and ‘ the Rights of Man.’? In the féte
which followed on the 14th Belfast rivalled Paris in
extravagance. The event of the day was described as
the grandest in human history. The heart that could
not sympathise with it was declared depraved. The
ceremonial commenced with a procession. The Volun-
teer companies, re-filled to their old numbers, marched
first, with banners and music. <A battery of cannon
followed, and behind the cannon a portrait of Mirabeau.
Then a gigantic triumphal car, bearing a broad sheet
of canvas, on which was painted the opening of the
Bastile dungeons. In the foreground was the wasted
figure of the prisoner who had been confined there
thirty years, melting all eyes to tears; in the near
1 Afterwards Lord Castlereagh,
* History of Belfast, pp. 347-8.
VOL. III. c

L391.

18

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK distance the doors of the cells flung back, disclosing the

VITl.
‘Wek

skeletons of dead victims or living wretches writhing
in chains and torture. On the reverse of the canvas
Hibernia was seen reclining, one hand and one foot in
shackles, and a Volunteer artilleryman holding before
her radiant eyes the image of Liberty.

The Whig Club brought up the rear, walking two-
and-two, in green cockades, the entire Society except
Charlemont being present to do honour to the occa-
sion, and among them, therefore, Lord O'Neil, Moira,
and Castlereagh.

In the evening three hundred and fifty patriots
sat down to dinner in the Linen Hall. They drank
to the King of Ireland. They drank to Washington,
the ornament of mankind. They drank to Grattan,
Molyneux, Franklin, and Mirabeau—these last two
amidst applause that threatened to shake the building
to the ground.

Belfast evidently was in fine revolutionary con-
dition, and was therefore well-selected by Tone as the
scene of his first operations. In his diary he informs
the world ‘ that he was determined to subvert the
tyranny of an execrable Government, and make
Ireland free.’ He was sure of the Catholics. ‘ He
knew that there existed, however it might be con-
cealed, in the breast of every Irish Catholic an inex-
tinguishable abhorrence of the English name and
power.’ He was sure, too, of sympathy from the
Presbyterian Liberals of the Ulster towns. He
hoped to gain all the Presbyterians, seeing how long
they had suffered from the proud Establishment.
But the Catholic question was a difficulty, both in
town and country. There were unpleasant rumours
of the Peep-of-Day Boys, of farmers in the Down and

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

Antrim hills so far behind their age as to think more
of the defence of Derry than the taking of the Bastile,
to hate Popery worse than they hated England. To
them he addressed himself in a pamphlet which his
friends in the North printed and circulated. In Oc-
tober he went down to Belfast with his friend Russell,
to inaugurate there the first lodge of the society which
he had succeeded at last in founding, and to contend
against anti-Catholic prejudice. In his diary he has
drawn the portraits of the two bold youths who were
setting forth to measure swords with the British
Empire, and of the dreams which inspired them.

‘October. Belfast. — Secret Committee. Dined
with Sinclair! Politics and wine.  Paine’s book.
P. P.? very drunk.

‘October 16 (Sunday ).—Vile sermon against smug-
eling and about loyalty, and all that. Put the ques-
tion to D. relative to Ireland’s existence independent
of England. D.’s opinion decidedly for independence.
France would help, and Ireland without debt would
spring up like an air-balloon and leave England far
behind.

‘October 21.—Dinner with D. Battle on the Ca-
tholic question. They agree to the justice of emanci-
pation, but boggle at expediency—damned nonsense.
Russell eloquent. Ready to fight. Arguments over a
bottle foolish.

‘October 23.—Dinner at A. Stewart’s, with a
parcel of squires from Down. Persuaded myseif and
Russell afterwards that we were hungry. Went to
Donegal Arms. Supped ona lobster. Drunk; ill-
natured to Russell. Mem., to do so no more.

‘ October 24.—Woke sick. Couldn’t eat.

1 A leading Belfast Republican. 2 His friend Russell.
C2

19

CHAP.
ie

a
Devt.

20

BOOK
Vill.

{oe ae
igdl.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘ October 25.—Dinner at ——. Furious battle on
the Catholic question. Neither party convinced.
Damned stuff. Home early. Russell well on, but not
quite gone,’ &c., &e.

Under such auspices, and by such men, the Society
of United Irishmen was launched at Belfast; and a
start thus made, the two apostles of liberty returned
to Dublin, to found a sister lodge in the metro-
polis. Simon Butler, younger brother of Lord
Mountgarret, was the first chairman. Napper Tandy,
‘with the frenzy-rolling eye,’ volunteered as secretary.
On the 9th of November the first meeting was held,
at the Eagle, in Eustace Street, when the three reso-
lutions already accepted in the North were adopted
as principles of action: to emancipate Ireland from
Iinelish influence, to reform the Parliament, and to
unite the people of Ireland of all creeds and races in
a common bond. ‘The third resolution was essential
to the first and second, yet to obtain its acceptance
proved a harder task than Tone anticipated. He
was assured of the hatred of the Catholics to
England. ‘The hatred was rather to Protestants,
Presbyterian as well as Anglican, and a signal
illustration of it had just shown itself in Ulster.
Mr. Jackson, of Armagh, who died in 1787, had
left an estate to maintain schools where there was
to be no distinction of religion. These schools
were condemned by the priests. The trustees were
repeatedly fired at. In the spring of 1791 the house
of one of the masters, Alex. Barclay, was broken
open. Three men rushed in, twisted a cord about his
neck till they pressed his tongue out, and cut it off.
They cut off the fingers and thumb of his right hand.
They seized his wife, cut out her tongue, and cut off

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

her fingers. They then cut out her child’s tongue,
and slashed away the calves of his legs. The one
offence which the man had committed was the teach-
ing in a school of which the priests disapproved.
They made no concealment. They went with torches
along the road to their work as if for a public pur-
pose. This act was the admiration of the barony,
and it was said openly that unless the schools were
abandoned all concerned in them should suffer-in the
same way.’

The mutilation of Barclay was a spurt from the
old fire of 1641. ‘There were other Catholics of
course who, as in 1641 also, abhorred the cruelties
which brought discredit on their cause, who repre-
sented themselves as eager for an opportunity of
showing their loyalty, who undertook, if Government
would trust them with arms, to be the first to repress
and punish the atrocities of their wilder brethren.
For their sakes the penal code had been relaxed.
The Castle had been long on kindly terms with their
prelates. Liberal opinion in England had long been
working in their favour. Pitt, an advocate for Reform,
was an advocate equally for Catholic Emancipation.
He had sought the opinion of the Universities of
France and Spain, on the charges generally alleged
against Catholics, that their allegiance to their sove-
reign was subordinate to their allegiance to the Pope;
that they held that heretics might be lawfully put to
death, and that no faith was to be kept with them.
The Universities had unanimously disavowed doc-
trines which they declared at once inhuman and
unchristian, and on the strength of the disavowal the

1 «Report of the Trustees of the Jackson Charity,’ February 1, 1791.—
Muserave’s History of the Irish Rebellion, vol. i,

+.

22

BOOK
WALL.
_——”

1791.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

British Parliament repealed the Penal Acts of William
for England and Scotland, restored to the Catholics
the free use of their chapels, and re-admitted them to
the magistracy.

Which of the two parties among the Catholics of
Ireland would direct the action of the general body,
if similar confidence was extended to them in that
island, might still be uncertain. Pitt believed, on the
whole, that the Liberal policy would be the safest
policy; that the savage spirit was sustained by the
disabilities, and that the hatred on which Irish
faction relied would disappear before judicious concili-
ation. ‘The Belfast demonstration made him the more
anxious to anticipate the projected union of disaffec-
tion. As affairs in France assumed a darker aspect,
the great antagonist of the Revolution desired to rally
to the side of order every influence which could be
ealled Conservative. Of such influences the most
powerful was religion, and where could he find a
surer friend than in the ancient Church which the
Jacobins were trampling under their feet? He saw
before him a certain struggle with the potent, over-
crowing spirit which was shaking Europe to its founda-
tions, and with such a prospect the Irish problem
became of pressing consequence. Disaffection in
Ireland had been a most mischievous factor in the
war with America. A union of Irishmen in the in-
terest of nationality and revolution might prove
incomparably more dangerous, while there never
could be a fairer occasion to recover the loyalty of the
respectable portion of the Irish Catholic community,
and to give them an opportunity of washing out the
stains which clung to them in the traditions of the past.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

In these views Pitt had an ardent supporter in
Edmund Burke. Swept as he was into the stream
of English politics, identified with English states-
manship, and occupied with the great questions of
the imperial and internal policy of the British domi-
nions, Burke had never forgotten the land of his
birth, and had never missed an opportunity of being
of service to her. He read her history with a pre-
sudiced affection; which saw the wrongs which she
had suffered, and was blind to the crimes which had
provoked them. He had been her advocate in the first
Whiteboy insurrection. He had braved the anger of
his Bristol constituents by reprobating the restrictions
on her trade. He had denounced the Irish Penal Laws
as without example for inhumanity and cruelty, al-
though they were almost a transcript from the laws
passed in France on the revocation of the Edict of
Nantes, although the laws against Protestants in
Papal Italy and Spain were more cruel by far than
the laws in Ireland against Catholics. His opinions
on these subjects had long been openly expressed.
The conviction became more keen with the progress
of the French Revolution. Welcome as it had been
to him at its dawn, when it appeared only to be the
rising of an oppressed people against aristocratic
tyranny, the Revolution became an object of abhor-
rence to him when it declared war against priests.
Burke was not himself a Catholic, but as little was
he a Protestant. His sympathies were with the old
faith. His most intimate friends were Catholics to
the end, and at the end even more than at the begin-
ning. His advice to Pitt, his advice to the world,
was to save his countrymen from the revolutionary

24

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

tempter by restoring to them the privileges of citi-

Ae zenship.

WA

Thus the Irish Catholics, who in the eyes of Swift
were hewers of wood and drawers of water, doomed
to immediate extinction, and protracting their waning
existence by the condescending toleration of the Go-
vernment, found themselves with two roads opening
before them, either of which might restore them to
the ascendancy which they had lost at the Boyne
and at Aghrim. ‘Tone was doubtless right in saying
that at the bottom they all hated England; but some
of them hated the Revolution worse, and dreaded
besides the possible consequences to them of another
war; while the fiercer spirits, identifying religion
with nationality, dreaming of the recovery of their
lost estates, and of revenge on the old oppressors,
looked, like Phelim 0’ Neil and Roger Moore, in 1641,
to a general overthrow of authority. Let the in-
vader be swept first out of the island with any help
that offered itself; other accounts could be settled
afterwards, when they had the island to themselves.

The Catholic Bishops and clergy, Irish at heart, yet
terrified at the aspect of France, were inclined rather
to order and to the English connection, if England
would give them what they asked. By them the
Catholic Committee in Dublin had hitherto submitted
to be guided. In 1790 they prayed Parliament for a
further removal of their disabilities. Not a member
of the House of Commons could be found to: present
their petition. Confident in Pitt’s disposition towards
them, the Catholic prelates published a letter con-
demning revolutionary principles. At the beginning
of 1791 a sub-committee advised another attempt of
the same kind, not to ask for definite measures of

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

relief, but mildly to express a hope that they were
not to continue strangers in their own land, to de-
clare their confidence in the benignity of their Sove-
reign, and their willingness to submit their claims
to the wisdom and benevolence of the Legislature.
The leaven of the new spirit had by this time pene-

trated the Catholic organisation. A majority in the Ge-

neral Committee refused to sue any longer for rights
which they were entitled to demand; and relying on
promises from Belfast, exclaimed against an attitude
which would encourage a continuance of tyranny.

The line of division became thus definitely appa-
rent. Lord Kenmare, Lord Fingal, Lord Gormans-
town, and sixty prelates and gentlemen, withdrew from
an association with whose views they were no longer
in harmony. The Government accepted the seceders
as the true representatives of Catholic sentiment.
In September, after the Belfast demonstration, John
Keogh, a Dublin merchant, a man of some ability and in
the Bishops’ confidence, went to London, and had an
interview with Pitt. He was told generally that Eng-
land would make no objection if the Irish Parliament
would admit Catholics to the Bar and to the Commis-
sion of the Peace. The franchise was a future ques-
tion which would be open to consideration. Lord
Westmoreland was instructed to smoothe the way to-
wards concessions, and on the 21st of November he
was able to inform Dundas ‘that he had pretty well
reconciled most of the friends of Government to the
policy of following the example of England.’?

1¢ Lord Westmoreland to Dundas, November 21, 1791.’ §S, P. O,

25

CHAP.
Le

——_—,_ —”
iia

26

BOOK
VIL,

ed
1790.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

THE plot was now rapidly thickening. Before pro-
ceeding with the story attention must be recalled to
the proceedings of the Irish Parliament during the first
two years of Lord Westmoreland’s administration.

Lord Buckingham had shown the agitators of the
House of Commons that Government was too strong
for them. They revenged themselves by abusing
Lord Buckingham’s memory, and worrying, though
they could not control, his successor. In the debate
on the Address at the opening of the session of 1790,
when Mr. Grattan produced as usual the list of Ire-
land’s grievances, Egan, a blunt, humorous barrister,
spoke of Buckingham as ‘our late execrated Chief
Governor ;’ of Ireland as ‘the political Botany Bay of
Great Britain;’ of the Irish Parliament as being,
‘like the Temple of Jerusalem, polluted with money-
changers.’*

Grattan denounced Buckingham’s corruption. The
friends of Government were insolent in their majo-
rity. Dennis Browne spoke of the complaints of
undue influence as ‘the clamour of jobbers and
peculators, whe had been repelled by the Viceroy with
contempt, and who therefore reviled and abused him.’
Toler ridiculed the Opposition as apostles of revo-
lution, whose language in plain English meant, ‘ Swal-
low our faith, and it shall make you whole, and damn
him everlastingly who will not thus think of our
politics.’ Beresford, the new Commissioner of Re-
venue, carried the war into the enemy’s camp. He

1 Trish Debates, J anuary 22, 1790,

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

27

admitted that ‘there was a certain influence in the cap.
State ;’ and ‘it was better placed,’ he said, ‘in a known ‘nas

and responsible power than in the indentured appren-
tices of English faction.’

The inglorious battle raged from day to day, the
patriots dashing themselves against the chains, and
flinging into words the passion for which they could
find no escape in action.

Beresford’s defence brought up George Ponsonby.
‘Good God, sir,’ said the future Chancellor, ‘ how
long shall we be told that influence is not too great ;
we who saw in the last session the very members
who joined in the censure of the Viceroy go up ten
days after to him cringing and crawling with an
address of congratulation ? If the House does not
resist such a system, there will be a day when the
contest will rest between the people and them, and
the nation as a nation will do themselves justice.’
‘Let Ministers beware,’ said Lawrence Parsons,
‘how they teach the people that nothing short of
separation will attain for them good government.
Will any minister of England dare to say to the
people of Ireland, You are an independent kingdom,
the laws of England no longer bind you? You
have gained all that you asked. But I will make
you feel that you have gained nothing. I will increase
my influence over you and your Parliament, and I will
keep you to the end of time a degraded and depressed
dependency.’

‘Modern patriotism,’ said Mr. Johnson, with a
sarcasm which might have come from the Dean of
St. Patrick, ‘is to the political what a modern in-
fection is to the animal constitution. They are
equally the children of licentiousness, equally manifest

1790.

28

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

pee their vigour by their venom, and nothing but the
—— application of a metallic poison can stop the progress

1790.

of either. Gold is to the political what mercury is to
the animal constitution, and the ministers and phy-
sicilans who apply them are equally justified by the
necessity.’

‘ The i of peerages,’ said Curran, with a coun-
ter-thrust, ‘ is as notorious.as that of the cast horses
in the Gustle Yard; the publicity the same, the terms
not very different, the horses not warranted sound,
and the other animals warranted rotten. When ar-
gsuments fail we are threatened! A million will be
expended in bribing the country at the next election
—to make us what? A catacomb of ministerial mum-
mies—not a scene of honest contest, not a temple of
liberty, but a den of thieves.’

Among gentle recriminations such as these the
session of 1790 passed away, some natural misgiving
never, it appeared, occurring to the patriot orators
that among a people so willing to be bribed, what
they called liberty was for ever impossible.

Karly in the summer there was a dissolution and a
general election. The patriots carried Dublin and a
few counties in Ulster, but on the whole Curran’s
prophecy was fulfilled. The owners of property were
frightened by the revolution, and the Castle majority
was rather increased than diminished. The novel
feature in the new House was the introduction into it
of three men who, in their several ways, were to be-
come notable. Robert Stewart, the future Castlereagh,
was returned, as was said above, for Down; Arthur
Wesley, or Wellesley, for Trim; and Arthur O’Connor
for Philipstown.

' Irish Debates, February 4, 1790.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

29

A short session was held in July to choose a cnap.

Speaker. The strength of parties was exhibited in
the selection of John Foster against William Pon-
sonby, who was put forward by the patriots. In the
succeeding January the House assembled for business
in a mood conspicuously sobered by the events on the
Continent. Grattan, as the day seemed going against
him, was more than usually magnificent, but his
oratory failed of its effect. Mervyn Archdall said,
and the House seemed to agree with him, that the
public owed more to the practical motions of honour-
able gentlemen who usually sate in silence ? than to in-
vective and brilliant rhetoric which died as it flashed
and left no mark behind it. To bid Grattan cease
his oratory was to bid him cease to be, for there was
nothing else which he could do. How little Grattan
knew of the real needs of Ireland, how careless he
could be on subjects which furnished no room for
appeal to political passion, he had now a remarkable
opportunity of showing. :

There was in Dublin an institution called the
Foundling Hospital. It had large private funds, and
was assisted liberally by grants from Parliament.
Three hundred peers and gentlemen were the gover-
nors, and twenty-one at least were required to be pre-
sent at the periodical meetings of the board. Sir John
Blaquiere, in bringing the condition of the Hospital
before the House, stated that from the day of its
foundation as many as twenty-one governors had
never been in attendance save when some office was
to be given away. They had delegated their authority
to the treasurer. The treasurer had been bedridden

1 He was referring particularly for a committee of enquiry into the
to Mr, La Touche, who had moved increase of whisky-shops.

1790.

30

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book for six years. In consequence Sir John had to men-

ea,

——_ tion circumstances ‘too horrible for the ear,’ which

1790.

the reporter, for the honour of his country, thought it
necessary to conceal. Insubstance he stated that the
number of infants received in the past year into the
Hospital was 2,180, and that of that number as many
as 2,087 were:dead or unaccounted for. A story so
startling was received with outcries of incredulity.
Ireland’s character was at stake before the world.
The Corporation of Dublin met and made enquiries,
and reported that the charge was utterly without
foundation. Blaquiere had moved for leave to intro-
duce a Bill to remodel the governing body. Grattan,
as member for the city, presented a petition that leave
be refused, and spoke warmly in vindication of the
existing management. Blaquiere was too sure of his
ground to be beaten from it by clamour. He was
surprised, he said, that so eminent a person as Mr.
Grattan should have become the advocate of abuses
which disgraced the society of men. He repeated
that out of 2,187 children introduced in one year
into the establishment more than 2,000 had disap-
peared. He held in his hand, he said, a return for
the last ten years which had been given upon oath.
In that time 19,368 children had been entered on
the books, and almost 17,000 were dead or missing.
A committee of enquiry was appointed. The con-
dition of the Hospital was sifted to the bottom. The
result was laid before the House by Blaquiere in the
ensuing year. The average annual number of infants
who survived admission to this beautiful institution,
taken on a large number of years, was 130. The

1 Irish Debates, March 2, 1791.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

31

annual expenses were 16,000/. Each child, therefore, CHAP.

who was saved from death was costing the public
1107. He expected to find, he said, that his original
information had understated the frauds, but had
exaggerated the cruelty. He had been sorry to find
that. although the robbery was, as he anticipated,
greater, the murders were no fewer than he had
before declared. The wretched little ones were sent
up from all parts of Ireland, ten or twelve of them
thrown together into a ‘kish,’ or basket, forwarded
on a low-backed car, and so bruised and crushed and
shaken at their journey’s end that half of them were
taken out dead and were flung into the dungheap.

The Irish members were not especially soft-hearted,
but they could not listen without emotion to so hor-
rible a tale. One speaker appealed to his fox-hunting
friends whether they would not be more careful in
transmitting the whelps of their hounds. Dennis
Browne said truly that of all stories he had ever read
or heard of, the report of the committee ‘was the most
horrible.*

Such was the actual discharge of the common du-
ties of humanity in Dublin in the days when Ireland
had her own Parliament, and patriotic hearts were
at white heat to raise their country in the scale of
nations. But the popular tribunes, who were so busy
with the removal of ideal grievances, had no leisure
for the petty details of crime and misery. Sir John
Blaquiere was no political saint, but he could see the
horrors of wholesale infanticide. Grattan preferred to
rave against corruption, and even in his raving was

but half-sincere. When he divided the House upon

1 Trish Debates, March 12, 1792.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the mode in which the Castle influence was exerted,
Arthur O’Connor, the most advanced Radical in the
House, voted against him. The Castle majority
had been created only to overcome the yet grosser
monopoly of power and patronage by the Boyles and
Ponsonbies. O’Connor refused to assist Grattan in
re-invigorating an aristocracy ‘who had misgoverned
Ireland from the day of the Conquest.’ +

1 Irish Debates, March 19, 1791.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN,

SECTION V.

THE session of 1791 was as barren as its predecessor.
The working forces of the drama were no longer in the
Parliament. Could the Catholics be kept from dan-
gerous courses, they had a prospect of immediate and
perhaps complete emancipation from the English
Cabinet. The more disturbing, therefore, to their
moderate friends in both countries was the institution
and rapid growth of the United Irishmen. At Beacons-
field especially they were watched with an emotion
which became at last unbearable. Mr. Richard
Burke, as often happens with the children of men of
genius, resembled his father in the form and manner
of his mind. The intellect only was absent, and the
place of it was supplied by vanity. In his own family
his defects were invisible. Edmund Burke regarded
Richard as immeasurably his own superior. They had
met and spoken with Keogh when he was in London
on the business of the Catholic Committee. It was
then perhaps that Richard Burke offered his services
to reconcile the two Catholic factions, and secure for
both the confidence of the British Government.

No time was to be lost. The Dublin Lodge of
United Irishmen contained already many Catholics.
It was even spoken of as a Catholic society.1 Napper
Tandy, the noisiest of the demagogues, was its secre-
tary, and the violence of its manifestoes was fast
neutralising the efforts of the Viceroy to reconcile in-
fluential Protestants to emancipation.

1 ‘Lord Westmoreland to Dundas, November 21, 1791.’
VOL. III. D

CHAP.
Ey
——— a”

1L79L,

04

BOOK
VIII.
————_—_

1791.
December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Describing himself as the agent of the Catholic
Committee, young Burke waited on Pitt and Dundas.
They expressed their pleasure that the Irish Catho-
lics should have chosen a representative whose name
was a security that they did not mean to join with
the revolutionists. They acknowledged their own
general wish to see the Catholics restored to their
rights as citizens. But Pitt, itis likely, saw the cha-
racter of the person with whom he was dealing—he
declined to say anything specific till he knew the
sentiments of the Irish Government. Richard Burke
said that he was going himself to Dublin. He asked
to be allowed to correspond privately with the Ca-
binet. Pitt declined to communicate with him except
through the Secretary at the Castle. He begged to
be allowed to take over with him ‘a confidential
communication of the sentiments which Mr. Pitt had
expressed,’ that he might show it to his friends. Pitt
told him positively ‘ he could not gratify him in that
matter.’ He asked whether Mr. Pitt would recom-
mend him to go. Pitt said that he must judge for
himself, and declined to advise. He consented, how-
ever, to give Burke a letter of introduction to the
Lord-Lieutenant. ‘From the anxiety which Mr.
Burke expressed that the Catholics and Dissenters
should not form a union together, the Cabinet had
no desire to restrain though they could not hinder his
journey.’ *

Such was the account given by Dundas of this in-
terview, and had he told the whole truth, Westmore-
land would have had no cause of complaint. But in
the unguarded freedom of a private conversation the

1 «Dundas to Westmoreland, January 29,1792, Private.’ S, P. O.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

Ministers had evidently gone further than Dundas
acknowledged. They had allowed Burke to talk at
length to them on the history of Ireland, to dilate on
the penal laws, to represent the Catholics as the
harmless victims of Protestant tyranny, and perhaps
unconsciously they had permitted these views to in-
fluence their policy. The same packet which carried
Burke to Dublin carried a public and a private letter
from Dundas to Westmoreland. The public letter
instructed him to recommend to the Irish Parliament
the concessions which had been already made in Eng-
land, the admission of the Catholics to the bar and
the magistracy, the repeal of the Intermarriage Act,
and the repeal of the law which forbade them to pos-
sess arms. On the franchise, too, the language was
scarcely ambiguous. The Viceroy was not formally
directed to make enfranchisement a Government
measure. It was admitted to be dangerous. But he
was informed that ‘the Cabinet considered that the
risk to the Protestant interest would be greater by
the total exclusion of the Catholics than by their
admission.’ *

Such instructions were, to say the least of them,
extremely serious. The franchise was a point on
which Protestant opinion in Ireland was passionately
sensitive, and on which the Catholic Committee was
itself divided. It was still withheld even in England,
and at that very moment Fingal, Kenmare, Gormans-
town, and the other moderate Catholics who had
seceded from the more violent faction, were sending
in addresses, in which they deprecated the premature
agitation of so critical a question,” and desired to leave

1 «Dundas to Westmoreland, * December 27, 1791. Printed
December 26, 1791.’ in Plowden, -

D2

35

CHAP.
‘8

—— ee
1791.

December.

36

BOOK
VIII.

—-—”
1792.

January.

TIIE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

their pretensions to the discretion of the Legislature.
For the Cabinet to make itself the advocate of imme-
diate action and to throw the responsibility of refusal
on the Irish Parliament was ungenerous and ill-
advised. But this was not all. The secret com-
munication which accompanied the official despatch
was of a far more serious character.’ ‘ In your private
letter,’ Lord Westmoreland wrote in reply,

‘I am directed to impress on the minds of leading people,
as a guide for their decision in the present discussion, that
they must not expect the power and resources of England
to be exerted in any contest that may arise for pre-eminence
or power between religious distinctions of Irishmen; that it
is your decided opinion all such differences, as far as regards
political considerations, should be done away. I must tell
you the inevitable results of communicating these sentiments
of yours. ‘The fears and jealousies that universally affect
the Protestant mind are not confined to Parliament, but
affect almost every individual and every public body. The
steadiest friends of British government apprehend that
indulgence will give the Catholics strength to press for
admission to the State. In this they see the ruin of poli-
tical power to the Protestants, and—triflng as you may
consider the danger—a total change of the property of the
country. The final consequence will be a confederacy of
the Protestants, with very few exceptions, to resist every
concession. ‘They will resolve to support their own situa-
tion by their own power. You will lose for the Catholics
the very indulgence which you desire to procure. You will
cause the conviction which it is your object to prevent.
The Catholic body can only act against the Protestant by
outrage and intimidation, and you will be obliged by the
necessary principles of government to spill the blood of the
very people whom the expectation of your indifference may
have raised to a state of ferment. The next consequence

1 This letter is not in the State it can be gathered from Lord
Paper Office, but the substance of | Westmoreland’s reply.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

will be a general confederacy against the present Adminis-
tration, the Protestant interest considering themselves made
a sacrifice to false policy or resentment. What is the state
of this country? The Government strong; the Parliament
well-disposed ; the country quiet; the Catholics of respec-
table landed property and clergy disavowing every turbu-
lent sentiment, stepping forward and separating themselves
from the agitators. Some concession is due to them, but
the publication of your sentiments would at once shut the
door. Why sacrifice our present strength? Why sacri-
fice an old and established policy which has for a century
maintained the Government of Ireland, to the intimidation
of Napper Tandy and his associates at the head of the
lower rank of Catholics in Dublin unconnected with the
nobility, landed gentry, or clergy of their communion ?

‘If I am to understand that I am directed to endeavour
to reconcile the minds of Protestants to the English conces-
sions, or admission to the franchise, by an information or
intimidation that England will not interfere in any contest
produced by refusal, and that even those concessions are to
be considered as a prelude to the abolition of all religious
distinctions, | must request you will again take the sense
of his majesty’s confidential servants, and if: they continue
of the mind that such language shall be held, that you will
send me positive directions how I am to proceed, that I may
not be counted as responsible.’!

The writing of the private letter had, unfortunately,
not been the limit of Dundas’s rashness. What he
had written to Westmoreland he had said to the im-
petuous youth who was coming forward as the Ca-
tholic champion. Young Burke had rushed over
open-mouthed, declaring himself empowered to inform
the Catholic Committee of the real intentions of Mr.
Pitt’s Administration. He called on the Secretary,
Major Hobart, at the Castle, and presented Pitt’s

1 ¢ Westmoreland to Dundas, January, 1792. Private.’ Abridged.
= BAT OF

37

CHAP.
Ne
>

1792.

January.

38

BOOK
Vir.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

letter. Hobart invited him to his house, and talked

——~ freely with him on the subject of his mission, but

January.

soon found ‘he would not continue on that footing,’
but insisted that he had separate authority from the
Cabinet.’ The introduction from the Prime Minister
gave a quasi countenance to this strange pretension.
Mr. Burke’s next proceeding was to furnish Hobart
with a dissertation on the rebellion of 1641, and to
protest, in the Committce’s name, against the recep-
tion or publication of any more moderate addresses
from the loyal Catholics. ‘ If such a step was perse-
vered in,’ he said, ‘it would lay the foundation of a
complicated and incurable civil war.’ ?

Hobart wrote to Dundas, enclosing this produc-
tion, and informing him of the behaviour of his pro-
tégé. ‘I should undervalue your understanding,’
he said, ‘if I troubled you with a comment upon this
composition: the folly and insolence of it is in
keeping with the whole of his conduct. There is
not a man in the country with whom he has con-
versed, except those belonging to the Catholic Com-
mittee, that does not consider him the most barefaced
incendiary that ever hazarded the peace of the
country. He has made many people believe that the
English Cabinet has determined to sacrifice the Pro-
testants of Ireland to the Catholics.’®

Dundas savagely disclaimed having given Burke
authority to speak for the Administration,* but he
could not dispel the impression already created, nor did
the disclaimer arrive in time to prevent most serious

1 “Major Hobart to Dundas, 3 “Major Hobart to Dundas,
January 17.’ 5S. P.O. January 17,1792. Private.’ S.P.O.
* Alluding perhaps to the diffe- 4 “To Westmoreland, January
rence between the Kilkenny Parlia- 29, Private.’ S, P.O.
ment and the native Irish.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

confusion. The Catholic Committee, relying on
Burke’s language, denounced the Kenmare address.
Dr. McKenna, a prominent member of the advanced
faction, issued a counter-manifesto. Burke called on
Fitzgibbon to inform him that all communications of
the Castle with the Catholics must pass through the
Committee, and to tell him ‘that if at some early
period the Catholics were to be admitted to seats in
Parliament,’ the Committee would for the present be
contented with the English concessions.’ On reflec-
tion he felt that he had been too modest. Prepara-
- tory to the meeting of Parliament he conveyed to
Hobart the Committee’s ultimatum. Their present de-
mand was for admission to the Bar, to the magistracy,
to the grand and petty juries, and fora right of voting
at the county elections. ‘I shall be happy,’ he said,
‘to receive the answer of Government as soon as is
convenient on these points. If I am not favoured
with it before next Saturday, I shall conclude that
your silence proceeds from a natural reluctance to
employ your pen in conveying to me the disagreeable
intelligence that the representations made to Govern-
ment by the Catholics of Ireland have failed of
success, and I shall inform my clients accordingly.’ ”
Never was Irish Viceroy in such a situation as
Lord Westmoreland. Parliament was to meet on the
19th of January, and as yet there had been no time
to receive from England a retractation of the ill-con-
sidered language of Dundas. A son of Edmund

1 «Edward Cooke to Bernard
Scrope, January 11. Private.’
ee

Fitzgibbon spoke of McKenna’s
manifesto, and called it conceited
bombast. Burke said that for him-

self he highly approved of it, and
that Grattan, who had seen it be-
fore it was printed, approved of it
also.

* ‘Richard Burke to Major Ho-
bart, January 11,1792. 8S. P.O.

39

CHAP.
I.

a
1792.

January.

40)

BOOK
VIII.

“~

January.

Dee genet
1792.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Burke had appeared in Dublin as the agent of a re-
volutionary body, yet introduced by the Prime
Minister, declaring himself in the confidence of the
Cabinet, and insisting on measures unhappily iden-
tical with those recommended in the private letters
of the Home Secretary. It was hardly possible to
doubt that he was speaking the truth. He was tell-
ing the Catholics that if they chose to rebel they had
nothing to fear from England. Dundas had said the
same thing, and had not yet unsaid it. The most
moderate Catholics were beginning to ask ‘how it
was to be expected that they should desist from
pressing the point of suffrage, when it was thrown
at their heads by the Ministers of England?’

‘If you suppose,’ wrote Major Hobart to Dundas,

‘That the Protestants will yield without a struggle, be
assured you are misinformed. Let me impress upon your
mind that the connection between England and Ireland
rests absolutely on Protestant ascendency. Abolish dis-
tinctions, and you create a Catholic superiority. If ever
the Catholics are persuaded that the Protestants are not
certain of English support, they will instantly think it worth
while to hazard a conflict. It may be said, What is it to
England whether Protestants or Catholics have the pre-
eminence in Ireland? It is of as much consequence as the
connection between the two countries, for on that it depends,
While you maintain the Protestant ascendency the ruling

powers in Ireland look to England as the foundation of their

authority. A Catholic Government could maintain itself
without the aid of England, and must inevitably produce a
separation of the Executive, to be followed by a separation
of the countries. You must be aware of all the property
which Englishmen possess in Ireland. It will be forfeited
on the first appearance of success on the part of the Catho-
lics. Are you prepared to meet the clamours of those who
have an interest in property in Ireland? You will never

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

have the country quiet till strong and decided language is
held by the British Government on the principle of exclu-
sion from the suffrage—the language which would have
answered every purpose before Mr. Burke’s arrival. He
has so completely impressed an opinion that the British
Cabinet has acquiesced, that nothing short of a positive
declaration to the contrary will remove the alarm of the
Protestants, or check the threatening importunity of the
Catholics.’ }

On the eve of the session the Viceroy called a
meeting of such of the servants of the Crown as he
could best depend on—Fitzgibbon,” Wolfe,® Beresford,
the Archbishop of Cashel, Charles Agar,* Sir John
Parnell,’ and Prime Serjeant Fitzgerald. He laid be-
fore them the instructions of the Cabinet, and invited
their opinion. They agreed unanimously that neither
‘the point of arms nor of the franchise’ could be
carried in the present humour of Parliament, and
that the attempt to force them would be as impolitic
as it would be useless. Beresford objected to the
principle of concession, but under the circumstances
was inclined to yield unimportant points. The Arch-
bishop was for maintaining the existing law in its
fullest stringency.

Westmoreland suggested that if trouble followed
on the refusal of the relaxation which the British
Parliament had granted, the English Government
might decline to support the Protestant party.

The Archbishop said truly that the situations of
England and Ireland were totally different. In Ire-
land the private fortune of every Protestant was at
stake. Parnell was scarcely less determined, but

1 ¢Major Hobart to Dundas, Lord Kilwarden, and murdered in
January 17. Private.’ 8. P.O. Emmett’s insurrection.

* The Chancellor. * Afterwards Lord Somerton.
3 Attorney-General, afterwards ® Chancellor of the Exchequer.

4]

CHAP.
i.

——
Ware

January.

42

BOOK
Vill.

+’
1792.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

considered it might be prudent to give way in trifles
till ‘ the Reform frenzy’ had burnt itself out in France.
The conclusion at last arrived at was, follow the Eng-
lish model, open the professions, and repeal the Inter-
marriage Act. The object of Napper Tandy and
the Committee was to prevent moderate concessions,
to keep up the ferment. Some effort, it was thought,
must be made by the Government to prevent the
better-disposed Catholics from falling under their
control.

The Council, nevertheless, though admitting the
necessity, were still strongly opposed to the mention
of the subject from the Throne. Dundas had in-
sisted that the matter should be so handled ‘that the
grace of the suggestion should belong to Govern-
ment.’ But it was felt that the announcement of
concessions in the Speech would confirm the mis-
givings which had been excited by Burke’s language,
‘that Ministers had resolved to abandon the Protes-
tant cause. The Address would commit Parliament
before the subject had been discussed.

‘ Instead of the relaxation of the penal laws having
tended to unite Protestants and Catholics,’ wrote
Westmoreland, as if it was something to be surprised
at, ‘it has increased the apprehension and hatred.’

It was decided that a Relief Bill should be en-
trusted to Edmund Burke’s friend, Sir Hercules
Langrishe, and that Major Hobart should speak in its
favour. At the last moment, before the opening of
Parliament, the Viceroy called a meeting of the sup-
porters of Government ; and to quiet their alarms
assured them that neither the suffrage nor the right to
arms would be conceded, however violently the Catho-
lics might demand them. Finally, Lord Westmoreland

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

wrote for leave to contradict officially the pretensions
to authority which young Burke had advanced. If
the Cabinet would ‘play fair,’ he undertook for the
quiet of the country. The only dangers to be appre-
hended would arise from a belief that the Home
Government was irresolute, and that Burke and not
the Viceroy was the true exponent of their sentiments.

Dundas’s answer was the strongest condemnation
of his past precipitancy, for it showed that neither
he nor Pitt had formed any real policy for Ireland,
although he had gone so far as to threaten that Eng-
land might be a passive spectator of a civil war. He
deprecated and resented the supposition that the
Cabinet ‘intended to play what was called a Catho-
lic game.’ ‘The Cabinet,’ he said, ‘urged nothing
which the Irish Council might think unsafe.’ ‘They
had no bias.’ ‘They had no interest separate from
that of Ireland.’ On second thoughts, they consi-
dered after all that it was ‘inexpedient’ to license the
Catholics to possess arms; and as for the franchise,
they wished only ‘that the Protestants should decide
for themselves how far a slight concession might
safely be made.’ ?

1 “Dundas to Westmoreland,
January 29, 1792.’ 8. P.O.
In ‘a most private,’ separate, and

summer and autumn they were ex-
pressing their fears to us of a union
between the Catholics and the Dis-

autograph letter of the same date,
Dundas adds :— -

‘IT have nothing further to say,
except that I and all his Majesty’s
Ministers have some reason to com-
plain of the spirit and temper which
have manifested themselves among
our friends in Ireland on this busi-
ness. If they had made no ad-
vances to us on the matter, we
should have left it to their own
judgment. But all through the

senters. They asked for our opinion,
and we gave it. What motive
could we have except an anxious
concern for the security of the Irish
Establishment ? Whether we are
right or wrong time will show; but
there is no imaginable reason why
this opinion should have been re-
ceived with jealousy.

‘Mr, Pitt concurs in every thing
Thave said. Heand I have not had
a shade of difference in our opinion,’

CHAP.
1,

ns
1792.

January.

+4

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

On the 19th of January the session began which at

——-  Pitt’s bidding was to open the sluices and make re-

January.

bellion eventually inevitable. The Speech was silent,
as the Council advised, on the great subject. Mr.
Grattan, had he dared, would have at once challenged
the omission and have entered notice of a Bill to give
the Catholics the franchise. But his constituents of
Dublin, though their politics were revolutionary, had
not divested themselves of Protestant prejudice. The
Corporation had insisted that he should take no part
in assailing the ascendency. He could not afford to
quarrel with them, and when he rose, as usual, to
attack the Address, he confined himself to general
invective. In an oration which was considered one
of his most splendid efforts he demanded Parliamen-
tary Reform, taking as the ground of his argument
the events of the past ten years.

‘There was a time,’ he said, ‘when the vault of
liberty could hardly contain the flight of your pinions.
Some of you went forth like a giant rejoicing in his
strength. You now stand like elves at the door of
your own Pandemonium. ‘The armed youth of this
country like a thousand streams thundered from a
thousand hills and filled the plain with congregated
waters, in whose mirror was seen for a moment the
image of the British Constitution. The waters sub-
side, the torrents cease, the rill ripples within its own
bed, and the boys and children of the village paddle
in the brook. By the traffic of Parliament the King

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

is absolute. These Houses are as much an instru-
ment in his hand as a bayonet in the hands of a regi-
ment. Like a regiment, we have an adjutant who
sends to the infirmary for the old and to the brothel
for the young, and men thus carted to their places to
vote for the Minister are called the representatives of
the people.’

The oratory flowed for several hours. When the
trick of rhetoric is once mastered it may stream for
ever. The Irish Parliament was growing weary of
it. Sir Hercules Langrishe gave notice, when Grattan
sate down, of his intended Catholic Relief Bill. The
vexation of the Viceroy was hourly increasing at
the gratuitous embarrassment which had been forced
upon him. ‘I am sure,’ wrote Edward Cooke, the
Army Secretary, ‘that in point of real dignified
policy nothing at all ought to be done for the Catho-
lics this session. There is but one mind in the
House of Commons. The Administration is obliged
to canvass for measures which must weaken Govern-
ment and lay the groundwork of perpetual discord.’ }
‘Mr. Burke’s stories, wrote Major Hobart, ‘are
hourly gaining ground. The effect of them already
has produced a determination against all concession
however trifling, so I fear we shall carry nothing.’ ?
The knot might well have proved insuperable but

1 ¢This country is not known,’
Cooke continued. ‘It is the most
easily governed in the world, if the
true line is proceeded upon. How
are you now? The British Go-
vernment and Grattan coinciding
in the same measures with different
views, the one to strengthen, the
other to abolish English influence ;
the Irish Ministry in opposition to
the English in principle, and with

them in acquiescence; the sup-
porters of Government seeing ruin
to themselves in standing by ad-
ministration, the Ponsonbies on the
watch to defeat administration by
gaining the confidence of the Pro-
testant interest.’—‘ Edward Cooke
to Bernard Scrope, January 21,
1702, ¢, SaP?0.

4 ¢ January 22,’ §S. P.O,

45

CHAP.
I,
—-—’

1792.

January.

46

BOOK
7s

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

for the fervid enthusiasm of the English agent of

ae the Catholic Committee. So long as he was sup-
January, Posed to be in the confidence of Pitt, the Irish

Radicals had endured Richard Burke for the sake of
the advantages which they looked to gain through
him. A character less congenial with the Hibernian
temperament could not easily have been found.
Though sometimes ridiculous themselves, the Irish
have the most acute perception of absurdity in others.
Richard Burke supposed himself a person of extraor-
dinary genius. His letters and essays show no-
thing but impassioned commonplace and unbounded
vanity. He was brought in contact with men in
Dublin who were as much his intellectual superiors as
he conceived himself to be theirs. He tried their pa-
tience severely, and at times overstrained it. Receiv-
ing no reply to the ultimatum which he had addressed
to Hobart, he had prepared a petition in the name of
the Committee for a full measure of enfranchisement.
He was looking for a member of the House of Com-
mons to whom he could entrust it, to be levelled as a
thunderbolt at the expected imperfect Bill which was
to be introduced by Langrishe. The Opposition
members met at Leinster House to hear it read.
They liked neither the petition nor its author. He
said, as if he was conferring a favour, that he was
willing to entrust it to any one of them, excepting only
to Mr. Egan, who had before objected to expressions
init. Egan, a big coarse man, with a red face, whose
wit was as sharp as Curran’s, rose amidst general
laughter, walked across the room to where Burke
was sitting, looked him in the face and bowed deeply.
‘Sir,’ he said, ‘ with the highest reverence for your
derivation, I entertain none whatever for the modesty

THE UNITED IRISHMEN. |

of your vocation.’? The supposed representative
of Pitt was a person with whom it was imprudent
to quarrel. Mr. O'Hara at length took charge of the
petition, touching it, however, as if it was red-hot
iron. |

On all grounds it was undesirable to prolong the
suspense. On the 25th of January Langrishe’s mea-
sure was brought in. He spoke with studied mode-
ration. He spoke of the harshness of the penal laws.
He sketched the successive removals of their most
oppressive features in 1778 and 1782. He consi-
dered that the Catholics ought to be grateful for the
concessions which were then made, and he believed,
he said, that they were not insensible to the gene-
rosity which in so many important respects had
replaced them on a level with their fellow-citizens.
Other claims were now advanced in their behalf in
the name of the rights of man. Mr. Paine might
know of such rights. To him the word was without
meaning. There might be natural rights in a state
of nature, but there were none in political society.
His interest in the Catholics had been diminished by
recent publications which professed to express their
sentiments. If the Catholics embraced those opinions
the State could not embrace them in the Constitution ;
and if the House of Commons yielded to intimidation
it would betray the country. He was able to say,
however, that the influential Catholics, laity and
clergy alike, repudiated and denounced these extra-
vagant pretensions. They had been tempted to com-
bine with the Dissenters for revolution, but they had
refused to taste the cup of sedition. Neither he nor

1 Life of Grattan, vol. iv. p. 57.

47

CHAP.
1G

_——
1792.

January.

48

BOOK
VIII.
—-———_—

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

they were advocates for a sudden extravagant trans-
fer of power and authority. He would ask the House
merely to admit them to the practice and profession
of the law, to remove the remaining restrictions
which interfered with their education, to repeal the
Intermarriage Act, and abolish the limitations on the
number of apprentices which they might take into
their houses or places of business.

If this had been all, if these few concessions would
have closed an angry controversy, the House would
have been mad to hesitate at them. But they knew
well that it was not all. Even Langrishe had spoken
of a sudden transfer of power as if a transfer still lay
ahead of them which should be effected gradually.
Major Hobart did not relieve their anxieties. He
seconded the motion, but did not speak upon it. Mr.
Cuffe, a Privy Councillor, expressed the general senti-
ment when he said tbat any indulgence granted now
to the Catholics must be accompanied by an intima-
tion to the Committee that Government would not be
intimidated either by them or by their English agent.
The Establishment in Church and State should be
protected on the principles of the Revolution of 1688,
and men of any or all religions who sought to disturb
the peace of the country should be made to know
that they would be punished.

A desultory conversation followed. Allusions were
made to the good conduct of the Catholics during the
American war. Presently up rose Mr. O’Hara, with
Burke’s petition in his hand.

The House, he said, seemed uncertain what the Ca-
tholics really desired. He was in a position to tell
them from authority. He had been requested to lay
before the House a statement which completely

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

expressed their wishes and their expectations. It was
not drawn by themselves. It was drawn by an indi-
vidual a particular friend of his own, who was not
himself a Catholic. Mr. O’Hara offered it for consi-
deration, but begged he might not be understood to
be its particular patron.

Charles Sheridan was observing that a paper not
sanctioned by any public body, and written by a
Protestant, was a curious authority for the views of
the Catholics, when there was a rush at the doors,
a noise, and agitated movement. Richard Burke,
who had been listening in the gallery, and was
unable to endure to hear his performance ironically
handled, plunged down into the body of the House and
was about to speak. Amidst shouts of ‘ Custody’ and
cries for the Sergeant-at-Arms the daring young gen-
tleman retreated as fast as he entered. Disgust with
his impertinence might easily have taken a serious
form, when Toler, now Solicitor-General, rose and,
with happy adroitness, said he feared the House could
not accept the petition. It was a strangeaffair. He
had never seen or heard the like of it, save in a cross-
reading ina London newspaper. ‘On such a day a
most violent petition was presented to the House of
Commons; it missed fire and the villain made off.’
Amidst shouts of delighted laughter leave was given
to bring in Langrishe’s Bill. Richard Burke had
helped the Government out of the mire, while he had
ruined his own mission.’ No one can survive in

1 ‘Mr. Burke is certainly the think his folly and madness have
most unaccountable animal ever been beneficial to us. His impru-
employed in any mission. It was dence has been beyond expression,
a chance whether he produced un- and has given general offence. The
exampled mischief and ruined the _ stories about the petition are hardly
Government. J am inclined to credible. This composition was

VOL. III. E

49

CHAP.
i

—— ee
1792.

January.

50

BOOK
VIEL

SSP Teed
1792.
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Ireland being made publicly ridiculous. The Catholic

- Committee gave him 2,000 guineas, sent him about his

business, and resumed the management of their own
affairs. ‘he present Bill being now likely to be passed,
as a complete settlement of the Catholic question, the

revolutionary factions of both creeds were earnest to

show that it would be no settlement at all, to frighten
the House into rejecting it, and soto leave the sore open.
Mr. O’Neil presented a petition from the Belfast Pres-
byterians for the complete removal of all Catholic disa-
bilities. The Catholic Committee in Dublin drew a
similar one of their own, which, with an evident slight
to Burke, they entrusted to Egan. The Belfast petition
was rejected on the motion of Mr. Latouche, the House
refusing to receive it. They had consented against
their own judgment to accept Langrishe’s Bill, but
‘the alarm being still universal that Government
had ulterior views,’ they desired to mark emphatically
that they would go no further.t | On whether the
Catholic petition should be received there was a sharp
debate, the supporters of the Catholic clauses insisting

shown to Kgan,Curran,andGrattan, Burke would not consent. The

who were inclined to support it, but
they struck out some objectionable
words, They must be pretty strong
that this trio would object to. Mz.
Burke would not permit an iota to
be altered. Ofcourse these gentle-
men declined to present it. Burke
proposed sending a challenge to
Evan for his refusal, upon pretence
that he had promised. Mr. O’Hara
was next pitched upon. He begged
leave to read it, but Burke would
not consent to that, and O’Hara
agreed. Upon what passed in the
House of Commons, Burke called

“a meeting of his committee, to ve-

rify their signatures before Mr.
O’Hara. They wished to alter the
objectionable parts of the petition.

Catholics refused to acknowledge
their signatures, and the Catholics
and Burke parted with mutual
criminations. We have heard no
more of the petition; so whether
it will be presented or not seems
doubtful. Iam in hopes this Re-
publican and factious committee, a
species of Parliament most exces-
sively dangerous, will now lose
their consequence. An advantage
already derived is the universal dis-
like to the levelling spirit, and
the ruin of Napper Tandy and his
associates. — Westmoreland to Dun-
das, January 28.’ §S, P.O.

1 ¢ Westmoreland to Dundas,
February 13.’ S. P. O.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

on being heard. Prominent among their champions
was Colonel Hutchinson, the Provost’s son, who
inherited his father’s eloquence without his shrewd-
ness. He talked the Liberal cant of the day, which
may be compared instructively with the modern
Papal syllabus. The sentiments of mankind on reli-
gion, he said, were altogether changed. The spirit
of Romanism was softened, the influence of the Pope
was feeble as the decrepit hand which wielded it.
Catholics loved lberty as much as Protestants, and
would cease to be bigots when the Protestants ceased
to be persecutors.

In the same spirit George Ponsonby maintained that
modern enlightenment had exploded the old super-
stitions. Mankind were now content with the great
truths of the Gospel, unperplexed with the mystic
jargon of school theology. Religious mysteries had
fallen into the contempt which they deserved, and it
would be the fault of the Legislature if by submitting
to threadbare prejudice they allowed the public mind
to be again disturbed by such ‘ despicable nonsense.’

Francis Hutchinson, the Provost’s second son,
soared into nationalist rhetoric. ‘When the pride
of Britain was humbled in the dust,’ he said, ‘her
enemies led captive, the brightest jewel of the Impe-
rial crown torn from her diadem, at the moment
when the combined fleets of the two great Catholic
powers of Europe threatened a descent upon our
coasts, from whom did we derive our protection
then?’ Truth would have answered from Rodney
and from Howe, who sent the combined fleets of
France and Spain to the bottom of the sea. Ireland

1 Afterwards General Lord Hutchinson, who succeeded Abercrombie

in Egypt.
E 2

52
BOOK

1792;
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

would have answered, ten years before, from her
glorious Protestant Volunteers. Francis Hutchinson
said, ‘ We found it in the support of three millions of
our fellow-citizens, in the spirit of our national char-
acter, in the virtue of our Catholic brethren.’

The burning eloquence of the House was all on the
side of emancipation, but it was based as usual upon
illusion. There was no longer Fitzgibbon to show
folly its proper figure. The defence of truth and
common sense was left to less articulate advocates.
General Cunningham said it was as plain as any propo-
sition in Euclid that to give the franchise to Catholics
implied a Catholic Parliament, and that a Catho-
lic Parliament meant a revolution.’ The Catholic
Committee offered pledges on dangerous subjects.
They renounced all claim to the forfeited estates.
They promised that they would not meddle with the
Protestant Establishment. Mr. Ogle, of Wexford,
pointed out that such engagements would bind none
but those who made them. The Catholics must
become supreme in the State by mere weight of num-
bers, and when the power was in their hands it was
idle to suppose that they would not use it in their
own interest. ‘The House had heard much,’ said
Mr. Pery, ‘of the enlightened liberality of the time—
what was it but a wild democratic spirit aiming at
universal impossible equality?’ ?

1 ¢Sir Boyle Roche was the buf-
foon of the Conservative party. He
amused the House with analysing
the signatures to the Catholic peti-
tion. The first name was that of
Mr. Edward Byrne, one of the
largest merchants in Dublin, who
paid 100,000/. a year to the revenue.
Roche described him as “a sugar

baker, seller of wine and other com-
modities.” Keogh, the Committee’s
ambassador to Pitt, he called “a
retailer of poplins in Dame Street.”
In this not eminently wise spirit he
went through the list, and enquired
whether a meeting of turbulent
shopkeepers and shoplifters, a re-
petition of the tarring and feather-

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

The House refused to receive the Catholic petition
by 208 voices to 23, so heavy was the preponderance
of opinion against granting political power to a body
whom the nature of things forbade to be other than
their enemies. Langrishe’s Bill was passed unwillingly
to please the English Cabinet, but the friends of
order in Ireland flattered themselves that they had
heard now the last of concession, and Charles Sheridan
gave a definition of Protestant ascendancy which was
universally accepted, and which the immense majority
of the members declared themselves determined to
uphold. ‘ By Protestant ascendancy he meant a Pro-
testant King, to whom only, being Protestant, they
owed allegiance ; a Protestant House of Peers, com-
posed of Protestant Lords Spiritual in Protestant
succession; of Protestant Lords Temporal with Pro-
testant inheritance; and a Protestant House of Com-
mons elected by Protestant constituents, a Protestant
legislature, a Protestant judiciary, a Protestant ex-
ecutive, in all and each of their varieties, degrees,
and gradations.’

Three days after the Bill had been read the last time,
the House of Commons itself, the building which had
witnessed Grattan’s triumph, and ‘ for beauty had
been the admiration of Europe,’ was burnt to the
ground. The session in consequence came to a pre-
mature end, and closed in the middle of April. Before
the curtain fell there was a mock-heroic passage at
arms with the United Irishmen. Napper Tandy,
“not liking the language in which the society and

ing committee of 1784, was to be land.’-—Jrish Debates, February
taken as a representation of the 1792.
Catholic nobility and gentry of Ire-

53

CHAP,
i

Se
1792.

February.

54

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

spook himself had been spoken of, sent Toler, the Solicitor-

VIII.

General, a challenge. The Irish laws of honour
allowed a gentleman to refuse such invitations from a
tradesman. Toler brought the letter before the
House, and an officer was sent to arrest the offender
and bring him to the bar for breach of privilege.
Napper slipped through a window and escaped. The
society was on its trial. To show the white feather
would be fatal. Tone, who had been watching over
its progress, himself keeping in the background, saw
the moment come when he must act. He consulted
Hamilton Rowan, a young hot-blooded associate who
had become lately a member. They extemporised an
irregular meeting. Rowan took the chair, with Tone
for secretary. They passed a resolution that the
House of Commons had treated them ‘ with insolence,’
printed five thousand copies of it, which they sent
flying through the country, with their names attached,
and they gave notice that if they were again inter-
fered with they would challenge the Speaker. In
other countries such proceedings would have passed
for idle bombast. In Ireland Tone and Rowan be-
came the heroes of the hour. As the session ap-
proached its end Napper, too, appeared to challenge
martyrdom when it would be unattended with incon-
venience. The authority of the House would deter-
mine with the prorogation. On the last day he was
seen strutting through the streets towards College
Green, intending to present himself to the House.
He was encountered by the Sergeant-at-Arms, and
was brought to the bar, Tone and Rowan sitting con-
spicuous in the uniform of the Whig Club in the front
of the gallery. At the motion of the Attorney-

THE UNITED IRISHMEN. 55

General, Napper was committed to Newgate, to cmap.
. . e iy
which he was escorted by an adoring crowd. His —~—

1792.

imprisonment lasted but an hour or two. On his Ror
release he commenced a prosecution against the
Viceroy, by which Dublin was entertained and excited

for the remainder of the year.

56

BOOK
VIil.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VII.

So far the Catholic Committee had trusted to expec-

——— tations held out by England, and had turned a deaf

1792.

ear to the Hianniennene Be Tone. Their petition
had been flung back into their faces. Pitt, if still in
their favour, was unwilling or unable to force his
wishes on the Parliament. Further pressure was
evidently necessary. Their difficulty hitherto had
been from the secession of the moderates. The claim
of the Committee to represent the Catholics of Ireland
had been disallowed; they had been termed in con-
tempt ‘ shopkeepers and shoplifters,’ and Keogh and
Byrne, the principal leaders, resolved on a bold
stroke. The Volunteer Convention of ’83 had failed
because it was a body in arms and illegal. The Con-
oress of 784 could not get itself chosen, for the High
Sheriffs were afraid to hold the elections. If the
Catholic bishops would assist, a Catholic Convention
could be elected to which no valid objection could be
made, and of the right of which to speak for the
general body there could be no uncertainty. There
would be difficulty. The Protestant gentry would
do their utmost in opposition. The Bishops were
timid, accustomed many of them to depend on the
Castle, and unwilling to offend the leading Catholic
nobility. It was unlikely that they could be brought
to act without support from other quarters, and
Keogh now boldly called in Wolfe Tone, and with
Tone the alliance with the United Lodges. Keogh
himself was more or less serious in his religious

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

belief. Tone and his friends were frank in their
admissions that they believed nothing. The Catholic
Committee were not particular. They desired to show
the world that sooner than fail they would fling
themselves on the Revolution. Wolfe Tone was
appointed their special agent. Richard McCormick,
a United Irishman also, became their secretary. The
combination and the intentions of the Convention were
no sooner formed than they were known at the
Castle. Fitzgibbon, who alone was under no illusions,
was for taking measures as prompt and decisive as
those with which he had crushed the Congress in ’84.
If an independent representative assembly was allowed
to meet and debate, he was confident that it would
overset the Parliament. It would be better to act at
once, he said, when the Committee were weak, than
to wait till they had collected money and had gained
the confidence of the people. He proposed to issue a
proclamation against unlawful assemblies, and to in-
timate privately to the principal Catholics that if they
took part in elections they would be prosecuted.
Neither the Chancellor nor Lord Westmoreland had
any doubt of their power to check this new move-
ment, on one condition, that they could be sure of
being backed by the Cabinet. Here was the real
doubt. From some quarter, perhaps from Beacons-
field, Keogh had learnt that he had nothing to fear
in that quarter. The object of the Convention was to
petition the King in the name of the Catholics of Ire-
land; and the Committee asserted in a manifesto,
with the use of the largest capitals, that ‘ they had
the rest AurHority for saying that the application
would have infinite weight.’

Could it be true that notwithstanding their dis-

*

58

BOOK
VIII.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

claimer of Richard Burke, the Cabinet were still

anes secretly encouraging Irish agitation unknown to the
179

legitimate authority to hen they had delegated the
Government? Major Hobart was in Tindal The
Viceroy directed him to see Pitt and Dundas, and as-
certain their real sentiments. Nothing could be more
dangerous, nothing more fatal to the respect which,
in Ireland, beyond all countries in the world, the exe-
cutive administration required to maintain, than the
belief that some other body was the true representa-
tive of the opinion of the advisers of the Crown.
‘ If,’ Westmoreland wrote, ‘ you can plainly ascertain
from them that they will support the existing Esta-
blishment, if they will treat with decided coldness any
ambassador or address from any other body, no mis-
chief can happen. Itis the suspicion of English tolera-
tion that causes the present bustle. J am as sensible
as they can be that it is good policy that the Catholics
should be attached to the English Government, but
we must take care that in the flirtation we do not
lose our power. If the dislike they manifest to
Reform in England extends to Ireland, we may be
confident of their support. No English Reform is so
dangerous as this Catholic National Assembly. En-
deavour to sift what steps Pitt thinks we might
venture. If the Assembly is bond fide elected and
subsists, we must decide whether we will oppose or
submit.’ +

Mr. Pitt, like other sanguine statesmen before and
since, had discovered that Ireland had been trouble-
some for want of.‘ Irish ideas’ in the management of
her. ‘The Protestant gentry had made themselves a

1¢The Earl of Westmoreland to Major Hobart, June 7, 1792.’
5. PB. 0,

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

bye-word. The Protestant Parliament, in the debates
on the Commercial Propositions and on the Regency,
had behaved like an assembly of Bedlamites. The
Belfast Whig Club was in open sympathy with the
Jacobins. In the well-disposed, loyal, and pious Ca-
tholics he was hoping to find a Conservative element
to cool the revolutionary fever. He would have
been less confident of his own judgment could he have
seen the party who, under Keogh’s auspices, were
preparing for a summer campaign to agitate for the
Assembly of the Catholic Convention. They appear
in Tone’s Diary, half-a-dozen of them in all, and each
passing by a nickname. ‘Tone himself passed mo-
destly under the soubriquet of Mr. Hutton ; Keogh,
the moving spirit, was Gog; McCormick, the Com-
mittee’s secretary, was Magog; Whitley Stokes, the
Dean of Trinity, was the Keeper; Napper Tandy was
the Tribune ; ‘ the Hypocrite’ was Dr. MacDonnell,
a distinguished Dissenting leader in Ulster. The
first object being to secure the thorough support of
the Presbyterians, Belfast was chosen for the open-
ing of the operations, where the ground was already
prepared. ‘The Belfast petition for the removal of
the Catholic disabilities having been rejected by Par-
liament, the Republicans had replied by a demonstra-
tion. On the 19th of April there had been a United
dinner there of Catholics and Protestants, where the
toasts had been ‘Tom Paine and the Rights of Man,’
‘Napper Tandy and the Rights of the Subject,’
‘ Wolfe Tone and Reform of Parliament,’ while the
Catholic parish priest had proposed ‘ Religion with-
out Priestcraft.’1 On the 14th of July there was to

1 History of Belfast, April 19, 1792.

59

CHAP.
te

——
1792.

60

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK be a second revolutionary celebration, and the oc-

VIII

Tae casion was taken for Keogh and his friends to appear

J uly,

on the scene.

Let the reader, then, start from Dublin on the 9th,
with Wolfe Tone and Whitley Stokes, and with
Tone’s journal to tell the story. Keogh was himself
in Munster, but was coming up to join them.

‘July 9.—Set out with the Keeper. Breakfast at
the Man of War. Stokes dull. Proposed picquet.
Doubt the Keeper is a black-leg.

‘ July 10.—Sup with Neilson and the old set. Bed
at one o'clock.

‘July 11.—Rise with headache.

‘ July 18.—The Hypocrite made the Keeper drunk
last night. Hear the Tribune is arrived, and say Oh!
to him. The hair of Dr. Haliday’s wig grows grey
from fear of the Catholics. Several comets appear in
the market-place. Good news from Munster. Gog
preaching for three days to six bishops, who are at
last converted. (a ira. The Keeper dines this day
in the country with the Hypocrite. Suppose he will
make a beast of himself again.

‘ July 14.-Anniversary of the taking of the Bas-
tile. Procession of Volunteers, seven hundred strong.
Meeting at the Linen Hall; like the old German
meetings in the woods, the people sitting, the armed
warriors in a ring standing round. ‘The effect of the
unanimous Aye of the assembly when passing the
address... Mr. Hutton? so affected that tears stood in
his eyes. Sentimental and pretty. More and more
satisfied that moderation is stuff and nonsense. Busi-
ness settled at Belfast. Huzza! Dinner at the Donegal

1 For Catholic Emancipation. * Tone himself.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN,

Arms. Everybody as happy as a king. God bless
everybody, Stanislaus Angustus, George Washing-
ton. Who would have thought it this morning? Ge-
nerally drunk. Home, God knows how and when.
God bless everybody again generally. Bed, ‘with
three times three.

‘July 16.—Breakfast at the Grove with Simms." All
the Catholics from Dublin there. Council of war in
the garden. (Gog explains the plan of organizing the
Catholic body. Ifthe Dissenting interest were with
us, all would be done. Simms says the thinking men
are with us ; but if Government attacks the Catholic
Committee under the new system in two months, the
North will not be ready to support them. Dinner.
MacTier in the chair. At the head of the table a
Dissenter anda Catholic. Delightful. The four flags
—America, France, Poland, Ireland, but no England.
Bravo! Huzza! Three times three. God bless
everybody. Go up stairs with a Catholic.

‘July 18.—Leave Belfast. Set off with the Catho-
lics on the way to Dublin. Gog converts a Bishop at
Newry, another at Downpatrick. Gog insufferably
vain, fishing for compliments, of which Mr. Hutton
is sparing. Gog then praises Mr. Hutton, who re-
lents, and lays it on in return pretty thick. Nothing
too gross. A great deal of wine. Bed between one
aud two. Bad! Bad! Bad!

‘July 21.2 Rode out with Gog to Grattan. En-
tertained all the way with stories of Burke, who is
become odious to Gog. Burke scheming with the
Catholics here to raise his value in England with
the Ministers. A puppy or worse! We arrive at

' Another Presbyterian leader. ? Again at Dublin.

62

BOOK

VIII.
—— South. He approves.

. 1792.
August.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Tell him of the state of the North and
Talk of next winter. If the
Committee are firm Mr. Grattan thinks the House
will submit. Say ‘‘Oh!” to him and depart.

‘July 22.—Gog expects Burke at Cork,’ who pre-
tends to have come over on his own private affairs.
Private fiddlesticks! Gog in a rage. Determined
to thwart him and put him down with the Catholics.
Burke is by far the most impudent, opiniative fellow
that ever knew. Gog wants a round-robin not to
invite him to their houses. Does he want another
2,000 guineas? Mad as his father about the French
Revolution.

‘ August 1.—The vintner* hangs back. Old cow-
ardly slave! The Catholic spirit quite broken. They
do not even beat one another! Sad. Sad. Busy all day
folding papers for the Munster Bishops. Damn all
Bishops. Gog not quite right on that point. Thinks
them a good thing. Nonsense! Dine at home with
Neilson and McCracken. Very pleasant. Rights of
man. French Revolution. No Bishops, &c.

‘August 2.—Gog not equal in steadiness to Magog,’
and as vain as the devil. Magog nota grain of a
papist.

‘ August 14.—Walk out and see McCracken’s new
ship the “ Hibernia.” ‘‘ Hibernia” has an English
crown on her shield. We all roarat him. Dine with
Neilson. Generally drunk. Vive la Nation! Damn

Grattan’s.

1 ¢Dundastook credit with West-
moreland for having received Burke
with great coolness on his return
to England. He was coming back
to Jreland, however, still insisting
that he was in the confidence of
the Cabinet.—Major Hobart to

Evan Nepean, October 4,’ 8. P. O.
* Edward Byrne, the great spirit
merchant, and first Catholic in
Dublin.
* McCormick, secretary to the
Catholic Committee.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.
the Emperor of Russia. Generally very drunk. Bed,
God knows how. Huzza! Huz
‘August 15.—Wake drunk.
‘August 16. — Damn the Aristocrats ! Mug a

quantity of mulled wine.

Generally drunk. Union

of Irishmen, with three times three.

‘August 17.—I[ise as sick as a dog.

Breakfast

with Lord Moira, and ask leave to introduce Gog,
which he grants with much civility.’ ’

The vividness of Wolfe Tone’s portraiture is a gua-
rantee of its fidelity. The effect of his and companions’
exertions was, that after some hesitation the election of
delegates went forward. The Government threatened
the Catholic Bishops. The gentry talked of reviving
the Volunteers to counteract the Catholic combina-
tions.” The Burkes protested against the alliance
with the revolutionists. Edmund Burke wrote
affectionate letters to Keogh, and invited his sons to
stay with him at Beaconsfield. Richard tried once
more the effect of his own presence. But they only
made themselves objects of ridicule and coarse sus-
picion.? The Irish prelates cast in their lot with the
Committee, either in earnest or as a menace to the

1 Extracts from the Journal of
Wolfe Tone, summer and autumn
of 1792.

2 ¢ Westmoreland to pondesy
August 13,’

3 ‘September 5. Burke is come,
Gog says as a spy for Dundas. His
impudence is beyond all I have ever
known. Edmund Burke has Gog’s
boys on a visit, and has written
him a letter in their praise. He
wants,to enlist Gog in behalf of his
son, but it won’t do. Gog sees it
clear enough—wants two thousand
more guineas for his son, if he can.

Hidmund isno fool in money matters.
Is this ‘‘ Sublime or Beautiful ? ”
Gog has given Burke his congé.
Burke mad as the devil, but cannot
help himself.” — Tone’s Journal,
September 1792.

‘In the State Paper Office there
is a letter on the subject of Burke
from Kecgh to Doctor Hussey, a
prominent Catholic priest, who was
in the confidence of the Cabinet.
It was to warn Dundas against re-
garding Burke as in any degree
authorised tospeak for the Catholics
of Ireland, and to complain of the

64

BOOK
VIII.
—

1792.

September.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Government, and Catholic representatives were chosen
for every county, to mect in Dublin on the 3rd of the
approaching December.

As the prospects of the Protestant revolutionists
ten years before turned on the fate of the American
war, so now the prospects of their Catholic heirs and
successors hinged on the future of France. The
Jacobin fury was displaying itself in its terror. The
September massacre was filling England and Pro-
testant Ireland with indignation and horror. The
Duke of Brunswick was advancing, and if he reached
Paris Tone’s labour would have been thrown away.
All would be over with the Committee and the
United Irishmen. Two of the new delegates, one of
them a priest, was found in correspondence with
Condorcet. The Government intercepted the letters
and recommended them to the better thoughts of
Dundas.t Relieved of fear on the side of France,
Pitt would trouble himself little about Irish agitation ;
and Tone was so well aware of the fighting value of
the noisy patriots, who talked sedition with so much
fluency, that at one moment he and his companions,
after all the hurrahsand toast-drinkings, were again
contemplating emigration. If Lord Moira would put
himself at the Reed of a rebellion, which he appeared to
think not wholly impossible, fore might still be hope.”
If not, Tone knew a sergeant’s aie would keep the
peace of Ireland for all the fight that was in the mobs
of Dublin and Belfast.2 But the fates were merciful.

confusion which he had caused. pean, October 20. Secret.’ S.P.O.
This letter being among the Secret * Lord Moira may, if hechooses,
Irish Papers, was evidently for- be one of the greatest men in Eu-
warded by Doctor Hussey to Dun-  rope.’—Journal, September 18,
das.’—Irish MSS., October 2, 1792. 5 ‘September 11.—Ride with
1 “Major Hobart to Evan Ne- Warren. Wet to the skin. Pro-

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

In October came the news of Valmy. The Duke of
Brunswick was hurled back, the Revolution was tri-
umphant, and aspiring Ireland breathed again.!. The
Bishop of Killala, a little startled at the tone of
things, suggested that he and his brother prelates
might as well have more influence in the Committee.
‘Damned kind,’ was Tone’s remark. ‘ Gog revolts
like a fury and tells Mr. Hutton he begins to see the
Catholic Bishops are all scoundrels.’ On the Ist of
November the Catholic parts of Dublin were illumi-
nated for Dumourier’s victory. ‘Singular,’ ob-
served Major Hobart, ‘that the same event should
have produced mourning in Beaconsfield and illumi-
nation in Dublin ; but in proportion as Popery de-
clines in France Mr. Burke is determined to make
it flourish in Ireland.’* Tone, Hamilton Rowan,
McCormick, and the rest of the United leaders had a
dinner on the same occasion. ‘The chief talk was of
‘tactics of treason.’ ‘Tone was surprised to see two
glasses before him, and that Hamilton Rowan had
four eyes. He was himself, ‘like the sun in the
centre of the system, perfectly sober when all else
were drunk ;’ but ‘when he attempted to walk across
the room he was unable to move rectilineally, from his
having eaten a sprig of watercresses.’

pose a general emigration to Ame- men—more manly. Our mob very
rica, if our schemes fail. Whitley shabby fellows. Never would have
Stokes to be principal of a college stood as the Parisians did on Au-
to be founded. We get drunk, gust 10. <A sergeant’s guard would
talking of our plans. God bless drive the mob of Dublin.’—Journal,
everybody. September 1792.

‘September 17. The devil to ' “October 11.—Dumourier’s vic-
pay in Paris. Mob broke open tory. Huzza! If the French had
the prisons, and massacred the pri- been beaten it was all over with
soners. An Irish mob would have us. All safe for this campaign.’
plundered, but shed no_ blood. * “Major Hobart to Evan Ne-
Whichisbest ? IleantotheFrench- pean, November 1, 1792.’ S.P.O.

VOL, III. EF

65

CHAP.
‘f
———_

1792.

October.

66

BOOK
VIII.
———
1792.

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

There needed still but a firm word from England
for faction to slink into its den, but the word was not
spoken, and the impression prevailed, which Dundas’s
private letter certainly justified, that Pitt intended to
leave Irish Protestantism toits fate+ A revolution
was now openly talked of, and Tone was applied to
for protection when the rebellion should break out.?
The signal was to be the meeting of the Convention,
and the patriots prepared for action. Arms were
privately imported. Rowan and Tandy, under cover
of the lingering respect for the Volunteers, raised two
battalions of a National Guard, each a thousand
strong, with green uniform, harp buttons, and in the
place of the crown a cap of liberty. Mr. Jackson,
an ironmonger, gave them the use of his forge to cast
cannon.? The Whiteboys in the provinces, or De-
fenders, as they were now generally called, made
haste in the winter nights to disarm the Protestants.*
Donegal was in the hands of a mob of incendiaries. In
Meath a bold attempt was made to carry off a battery
of field artillery. Under these conditions the Con-
vention was about to assemble.

Major Hobart had brought back strict injunctions
from Dundas that the elections were not to be interfered
with. The gentry did not mean to part with their
property without a struggle, and on their side were

should be re-distributed. He re-

1¢Tam persuaded that a steady
plied that Plunket could not have

and declared intention on the part

of the British Ministry to support
the Irish Government against vio-
lence will prevent mischief here ;
but, however strange it may appear
to say so, it must be declared.—
Major Hobart to Evan Nepean,
November 1.’

2 Tone says that Plunket asked
him for Carton, when the land

Carton, because the Duke of Lein-
ster was his friend, but that he
might have Curraghmore.

* Westmoreland to Dundas, De-
cember 5.’ 8. P. O,

* In Louth alone, in this year, a
hundred and eighty houses of Pro-
testants were entered and plundered
of arms.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

arming also. Three weeks before the meeting Lord
Westmoreland made another effort to open Pitt’s eyes,
or at least to obtain from him some definite directions.

‘However opposed to these measures,’ he wrote, ‘ the
threats of the democratic leaders have forced the clergy
into co-operation and the gentry into acquiescence. The
elective franchise is accepted by them all. They mean to
press it as a prelude to the abolition of all distinctions. The
attainment of the franchise they consider decisive of their
future power in the State. They have coalesced with the
United Irishmen and with every turbulent spirit in the
country. . . . The Committee already exercise the func-
tions of Government, levy contributions, issue orders for the
preservation of the peace—-a circumstance perhaps more dan-
gerous than if they could direct the breach of it. Their man-
dates are taken by the lower class of people as laws. Their
communications are rapid, and are carried on, not by the
post, but by secret channels and agents. The lower Catho-
lics connect the franchise with the non-payment of rents,
tithe, and taxes.

‘ As universal as is the Catholic demand for it so is the
determination of the Protestants to resist the claim. There
is no risk they will not run rather than submit to it! In
Down a thousand Protestants are in arms, but to preserve
the peace, and their object is to keep the Catholics down.
They are arming in Monaghan on the same principle, and
Volunteering will become general if Government will not
act. IL have consulted the Chancellor and the other confi-
dential friends of Government. All are unanimous not to
yield anything at present, and all agree that the British
Government must speak out plainly, to quiet the suspicions
of the Protestants. I asked if they were prepared for the
consequences of their language, and what means they could
employ for resistance. On this head I found in no one the
smallest apprehension, provided Government spoke with firm-
ness. They apprehend no immediate convulsion, nor any con-

vulsion, if Great Britain is firm.
F 2

67

CHAP.
iB

———
1792.

November.

68

BOOK
VII.

1792.

November,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘If the hour is not come it may not be distant when you
must decide whether you will incline to the Protestants or
the Catholics ; and if such necessity should arise 1t cannot
be doubted for a moment you must take part with the Pro-
testants. If the Protestants, after being forced into sub-
mission, should,contrary to their expectations, find themselves
secure of their possessions without British protection, they
will run into the present State-making mania abroad in the
world. You must expect resentment from the Protestants,
and gratitude from the Catholics is not to be relied on.
Concession of the franchise will make no difference in the
conduct of the Catholics, nor will the question come before
you in that shape. The question will be, whether England
will permit the existing Government to be forced in Ireland.
Suppose the Ministry to propose a relaxation of the Popery
laws, and be defeated in Parliament. If the Catholics re-
sort to violence the force of the empire must necessarily
be exerted in support of Parliament.’!

The reply of the Cabinet to this important letter
was to inform Westmoreland curtly that ‘ England
required all the force she possessed at home to protect
herself from her foreign and domestic enemies.’ ‘ He
must therefore act on his own responsibility.’ The
‘comfortless communication’ was unattended with so
much as a hint of what the Ministers really desired,
or why ‘the Viceroy was left so completely inde-
pendent.’ To leave him thus, however, was per-

haps better than to have hampered him with ambiguous

utterances. Flung on his own resources, Lord West-
moreland turned to the Chancellor, who knew better
than Pitt what Dublin sedition was made of. The
danger was for the Convention to meet, and to find an
armed force at its disposition. The National Guard
was rapidly organising; other battalions were expected

1 ¢The Earl of Westmoreland to Dundas, November 17,1792. Secret.’
8,20,

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

from Belfast, and notice had been given of a review
which was to be held on the 9th of December.'
Fitzgibbon issued a proclamation against unautho-
rised bodies assembling in arms. The National Guards
would meet at their peril. IJt was an anxious mo-
ment. Rowan, Keogh, and Tandy roared their
loudest ; hired bands of vagabonds roamed about the
streets at night, crying ‘ Liberty, Equality, and no
King!’ ‘ What they are to attempt,’ Major Hobart
wrote to the ministers on the 5th, ‘when the Mar-
seillais arrive from Belfast a short time must de-
velope. You have more at stake in Ireland than you
are aware of. You think it is a mere question be-
tween Catholic and Protestant. I wish it was. It is
of deeper concern to us all, and goes to the complete
overturning of the Constitution.’

The result proved how well Fitzgibbon knew his
countrymen. When the day came for the force to
show itself which was to overthrow the Constitution,
there appeared on the parade-ground Napper Tandy,
Hamilton Rowan, and Carey, the printer. These
three were present in their green uniforms, their
bettons, and their cap of liberty, and no more.

The National Guards, like Falstaff, showed their
valour in its better part. The Convention, having its
teeth drawn, was then allowed to meet without inter-
ference. That such an assembly should exist at all
was a menace to the peace of the country. The
ambiguous language of the Cabinet forbade the Castle
_ to proceed to a direct inhibition of it. The easy

1 Belfast was going fast and far. inverted crown, and the words,
There, too, there was an illumina- ‘May the fate of all tyrants be
tion for Valmy. One of the trans- that of Capet.’
parencies was a gallows, with an

ee sae
1792.

69

CHAP.
A#

ee

December.

70

BOOK

—-—_—”"
1792.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

suppression of the National Guards taught the dele-
gates that the time was not come to carry the Constitu-
tion by escalade. Thus the Back Lane Parliament, as
the new body was called, came together ; the first
Catholic elective assembly which had existed in Ireland
since the Parliament of King James. The occasion
was celebrated with the usual high-flown language.
Kdward Byrne took the chair, ‘the spirit of liberty
running like an electric fire through every link of the
Catholic chain.’ The immediate business was to pre-
pare a petition to the Crown, or rather to revise and
sanction it, for the petition itself had been already
composed by Tone. It was a document like all which
came from the same hand, with the same gaudy
diction and the same regardlessness of truth. It pro-
fessed the most burning loyalty. It asked for the
franchise on the ground that the Catholics had merited
confidence, and that confidence would make their at-
tachment to the throne more secure; while Tone’s
own admitted object was separation from HEngland,
and his central conviction was that every Catholic in
his heart hated England.*

Such as it was, the Catholic representatives adopted
it as their own. It was signed by Dr. Troy the
Catholic Archbishop of Dublin, and by Dr. Moylan
the Bishop of Cork, on behalf of the Catholic prelates
and clergy of Ireland. The delegates signed for
themselves and the laity. The Catholic community
had now unmistakeably declared their wishes, and the
immediate business was concluded. Five of the body
were selected to lay the petition before the throne—
Edward Byrne himself, Keogh, Christopher Bellew,

1 ¢ Petition of the Catholic Convention.’—Plowden, vol. iv. Appendix
95.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

John Devereux, and Sir Thomas French. The thanks

71

CHAP.

: L
of the Convention were given to Tone for his services, ——~—

and they then separated, with the significant reso-
lution that ‘ they would meet again when summoned,
if it was on the other side of the Atlantic.’

The five gentlemen set off for England, taking
Tone along with them. To give éclat to their mission,
they went by Belfast, where the people took their
horses from the carriage and drew them through the
streets to the quay where they embarked. In London
they were received by Lord Moira, who entertained
them in his house, and promised that if the Ministers
refused to present them to the King, he would claim
his privilege as a peer and introduce them himself.
Hobart wrote an ineffectual warning, especially against
Keogh, who, he said truly, was connected with the
worst men and the worst intentions in the country,
but ‘so plausible and subtle that there was danger
in communicating with him.’ The Cabinet had, un-
fortunately, made up their minds, in the face of proof
to the contrary, that Catholics could not be revolution-
ists; that they were rather the necessary and natural
enemies of revolution; and that the delegates there-
fore ought to be received. Dundas presented them ;
they delivered their petition, and it was graciously
accepted. ‘They informed Dundas afterwards, in a
private interview, that the peace of Ireland depended
on concession, and Dundas believed them. ‘They as-
sured him that although their actual demand stopped
at the franchise, yet that nothing would really satisfy
them short of total emancipation. He did not dis-
courage them. He told them that their present
claims should be recommended to Parliament from
the throne; that he looked to them, in return, to

793.

January.

@2

BOOK
VIII.
—_—-~-””

1793.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

support order and authority ; and they left him with
the belief that the Cabinet contemplated the entire
abolition of all religious distinctions at no distant
period.

‘Our opinions are not altered,’ Lord Westmoreland
wrote, when the news of this extraordinary perform-
ance reached him. ‘The Chancellor, the Speaker,
and the Archbishop of Cashel still consider it most
unwise. ‘The alarm at concession is aggravated by the
principle on which it is made. You expect it will
give quiet here. It will not, unless you say em-
phatically that the Irish Parliament, having made
this concession, will then receive the cordial support
of the British Government. The recommendation
from the throne appears as originating from the pe-
tition of the Catholic Convention. At this moment
a daring insurrection prevails among the lower
Catholics in neighbouring counties for the purpose
of disarming the Protestants. This is part of the
intimidatory system of the Catholic Committee. How
is it to end? If year by year it is to be the same
story, gentlemen will prefer the hazard of resistance
now to strengthening those with whom they must
hereafter contend.’!

‘Intimidation,’ said Hobart, ‘is too glaring on the
face of the whole proceeding. Instead of satisfying
the Catholics, the public tranquillity will be in greater
danger from the concessions than if none were made.
Every man of talent we have considers himself sacri-
ficed for England’s convenience. Be assured, unless
England speedily interposes energetically with regard
to Ireland, we shali have a commotion of a very serious

1 ¢The Earl of Westmoreland to Dundas, January 9, 1793.’ S, P.Q.

THE UNITED IRISHMEN.

nature. I see plainly it will not be understood till it
is too late. They are now setting up the King against
the Government, to undermine the Constitution. It
is precisely the French system, and will produce the
same consequences. Believe no one that would per-
suade you that Keogh’s party—and it leads the
Catholics—are not Republicans.’ ?

Westmoreland and Hobart formed their opinions
from knowledge of Ireland. Dundas and Pitt formed
theirs from knowledge of human nature generally,
which they conceived that they could apply to Ire-
land; they stood sulkily to their purpose, and inti-
mated plainly that the concession of the franchise was
not to be the last. ‘ We are perfectly ready,’ Dundas
replied to their letter, ‘to declare our determination
to support the Protestant Establishment of Ireland,
and maintain its form of government; but, unfor-
tunately, we and his Majesty’s servants in Ireland
differ essentially as to the best mode of securing those
objects. We consider the Catholics less likely to
concur in disturbing the existing order of things
when they participate in the franchise, than if totally
excluded from those benefits which must be most
dear to men living in a country where the power of
an Independent Parliament has been recognised.
Had the franchise been granted a year ago it would
have been enough; now it will probably not be
enough. We recommend to your Excellency and
your Irish advisers a candid consideration of the
whole subject, and the danger of leaving behind a
sore part of the question.’ ”

1 ‘Major Hobart to Evan Ne- Westmoreland, January 23, 1793,’
pean, January 9 and 19, 1793.’ Abridged.
2¢Pundas to the Earl of

73

CHAP.
Ay

— -—_—24
1798.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Political disaffection was to be conciliated by conces-

——~ sion of power; internal anarchy was to be healed by a

1793.

January.

homeopathic remedy of a similar kind. Meanwhile
the plunder of arms and the attacks of the peasantry
on the houses of the Protestants in Meath and King’s
County had become so systematic and so daring, that
the gentry had associated for self-defence. Fifty
gentlemen were attacked one night in the beginning
of January by six hundred Irish. The Catholic pea-
santry were not caitiffs ike the Dublin mob. They
fought desperately; and though beaten off at last,
held their ground till six-and-thirty of them were left
dead on the field.!

The comment of the Cabinet was to insist on the
impropriety of continuing an unnecessary and im-
politic disqualification. Since the Catholics had such
a passion for possessing arms, they considered it would
be wiser to place them at once on a level with other
citizens.” |

1 MSS. Ireland, J anuary, 1798. 2 “Dundas to the Karl of West-
SeP..0, moreland, January 23, 1793.’

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS. 15

CHAPTER IL.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

SECTION I.

Dunpas had alleged the recovered independence of cuap.
the Irish Parliament as the explanation of the anxiety £: anes
of the Catholics to obtain admission to it. The veiled 179°.
sarcasm perhaps explains the motives which were
working in the mind of Mr. Pitt. He was told from
Dublin Castle that he had only to be firm for order

to be restored. But had order in Ireland, as under-

stood by the Protestant gentry, been so very beautiful

a thing? Was the power of England to be exerted

to maintain rack-rents and absenteeism?—to main-

tain a Parliament which could be held to its duties

only by systematised corruption? England was again

on the eve of a desperate war. ‘The Protestant
Parliament of Ireland had taken advantage of her
embarrassment, in her last great struggle, to extort

the Constitution of ’82. Nine years had already
passed since a Volunteer Convention, composed ex-
clusively of gentry of the Established Church, and
headed by a bishop, had made an armed demonstra-

tion of rebellion. Annual motions directly hostile to
England had been brought forward by revolutionary
patriots, and had been defeated only by lavish bribery.
Protestant Belfast had declared itself a disciple of

76

BOOK
WALL,

_—_—_,-—"’

RTI.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Tom Paine, and the National Assembly at Paris was
offering muskets and cannon to all oppressed nations
who desired to assert their liberties. What security
had Pitt that, after some French success, the prin-
ciples of the United Irishmen would not be adopted
by Grattan and the Protestant Parliament ?—that a
reform equivalent to a revolution would not be in-
sisted on as the alternative of separation, the Protes-
tant gentry placing themselves at the head of the
Irish nation, like the Geraldines in the sixteenth cen-
tury? The conduct of the Irish Parliament on the
Regency question was a recent proof that no depend-
ence could be placed on them. The Cabinet was
confronted with an immediate practical problem. The
agitation of Reform among the Protestants had encou-
raged the Catholics to demand the suffrage. To
refuse their petition was to throw them at once upon
the Revolution, and give to the French three million
ardent allies in Ireland; while at any moment, in
some wild dream of liberty, the Nationalist leaders
might carry Parliament along with them, as they had
done before, themselves take up the Catholic cause as
against England, and become the champions of Irish
independence.

It is unlikely that either Pitt or Dundas contem-
plated allowing Ireland to fall really under a Catholic
Parliamentary majority. Under the present Constitu-
tion some years would elapse before even complete
emancipation would obtain admission for them in for-
midable numbers. Already Pitt was looking toa union
as the only effectual remedy. To propose a union to a
body of men who had received as an insult the sug-
gestion that they should contribute to the Imperial
navy, would have been to open the bags of olus.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

They might be more reasonable if the Catholics were
admitted amongst them, and their ascendancy and
their estates in danger. The workings of Pitt’s mind
on the Irish subject, obscure even to Grattan after
close and confidential conversation with him, became
partly visible in a letter written in December 1792,
by Lord Westmoreland to Dundas, before the arrival
of the Catholic delegates in London.

After a few words on the desirableness of granting
a peerage to Mr. O’Niel, to detach him from the
levellers, the Viceroy continues :—

‘The situation has very much changed within the last
month, but miraculously almost in the last fortnight. The
Protestants and people of property, from an idea that Eng-
land was indifferent about the Catholic question, and there-
fore about the fate of the Establishment and property, have
fallen into a most miserable state of despondency, which has
worked a spirit of conciliation to the Catholics, on the prin-
ciple of attaching the Catholics to the Constitution, to save
it from the levellers. I don’t yet find either the panic or the
conciliatory inclination much gone to the country; and as
it certainly is panic and not favourable disposition, upon any
appearance of strength the resisting determination will pro-
bably return, even in this town. . . . Nor, if we should find
it expedient to advocate conciliatory measures, am I prepared
to say they could be carried, or that if they were carried
against the opinion of the privileged classes, that English
Government would not be ruined by the concession ; that all
the politicians would not either, from resentment or policy,
look to popularity in Ireland ; and that, by a junction of fac-
tions, every unpleasant Irish question of trade, particularly
the Indian one, and every popular scheme to fetter English
Government, would not be pressed in an inevitable manner?
The conduct of the Catholics renders concession dangerous, for
if given in the moment of intimidation, who can answer for
the limit that may give content? And if Keogh should per-
suade the Catholics that the concessions were owing to the

17

CHAP.
II.

——$ , —_
1793.

January.

78

BOOK
gett.

——,-——
1793.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Convention, the influence of Keogh and a few other dan-
gerous men will be increased to such a degree, that all the
Catholics will follow them.

‘Don’t suppose from what I say that concession can be
carried if it is thought advisable. I only wish to acquaint
you with the state of opinion here. The Chancellor, the
Speaker, Beresford, and Parnell continue unvaried in the
sentiments they have before expressed. ‘The most desir-
able point is to get rid of the Catholic Republican Govern-
ment, in the name of the Committee or the Convention, and
I am at a loss how to effect it. Concession could only give it
additional influence, if concession was supposed to be worked
through them. ... If the Protestants are alienated, the
connection between the countries, in my opinion, is at an
end. If concession is found advisable, and we can manage
the business in a manner not to alienate the Protestants, it
will not be so dangerous, though it will certainly be hazard-
ous ; and at least every step of conciliating the two descrip-
tions of people that inhabit Ireland diminishes the probability
of that object to be wished—a union with England. Before
the present panic it was a good deal in the thoughts of
people as preferable to being overwhelmed by the Catholics,
as the Protestants termed concession, or continuing slaves,
in the Catholic phrase. That conversation, since the Pro-
testants have been persuaded that England could not or
would not help them, has subsided.

‘In the meantime the levellers have burst forth with a
degree of impertinence and noise most astonishing. They
are guided by a sect called the United Irishmen. They
have money. I cannot conceive where it comes from. They
have appeared in every sort of sedition. The soldiers are
attempted in the alehouses. ‘The playhouses and Amphi-
theatre are every night attacked with (a ira. They have
publicly professed a determination of raising several thou-
sand men in a national battalion, with French mottoes, for
the reformation of Parliament. Their end is, destroying Eng-
lish influence in this country. The great Catholic body is
not connected with these people, but the leaders of the
Dublin Committee are ; and Keogh, who is the present mover

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

of the Catholics, is a member of this society, and has been
particularly active in endeavouring to form this national
battalion.

‘The great danger is from the North, where the Volun-
teering spirit has gained ground from dislike of the Catho-
lies; and if that dislike should be done away, or resentment
for concession actuated them, their Republican principles

may lead them to any possible mischief. . . . The minds of

men are in a great ferment, the mob expecting to be re-
lieved from tithes, rents, and taxes by relief from Catholic
laws; the Protestants alarmed and offended, and the level-
lers elated with the success of France.

‘I believe a Big word from England of her determination
to support the Protestant Establishment would set every-
thing quiet, but England must convince the Protestants
that she thinks the connexion of importance. Every
species of mischief is in agitation. They have assassin clubs
—marked individuals—in short, the whole systematic
Jacobin plan. My great object is to strengthen ourselves
as much as possible before the Parliament. ... If con-
cession should seem to you proper, let me entreat you not
to be hasty, but leave it to me. Be assured you shall have
early knowledge what can or cannot be done, and do not let
out your mind in any way to these delegates.”! |

The language in which Westmoreland speaks in
this letter of the Union seems to show that it was
already the object at which the Cabinet was aiming.
If the object most to be feared was the drawing
together of the Catholics and Protestants, the readiest
way for England to prevent it was to force emanci-
pation upon the present Parliament, and to make the
Catholics feel that they owed their relief to the Eng-
lish Ministers. ‘The Union might then be accom-
plished in time to prevent serious mischief. This
interpretation renders conduct explicable which

1 ¢ The Earl of Westmoreland to Dundas, December 12, 1792.’

79

CHAP.
Il.

——_—_—

17938.

January.

80

BOOK
VIII.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

otherwise might have appeared delirious. The Big

——— word was not spoken. The Cabinet did precisely

1793.

January.

what Westmoreland begged that they would not do:
they explained their intentions to the delegates in the
fullest degree, asif the object was to divide the English
Government from the Irish with marked emphasis, to
teach the Catholics that England was their friend, and
to raise, in doing so, deliberately the bitter animosity
which the Protestant gentry were certain to feel.
Never did Viceroy encounter Parliament with a
more stormy outlook, or under harder conditions as
concerned himself, than the Earl of Westmoreland,
when on the 10th of January he opened the session
of 1793. The speech recommended the situation of
the Catholics to the serious attention, the wisdom, and
the liberality of the Legislature. The words implied
as everyone understood that the Irish Parliament was
required to make a concession, to which in the preced-
ing year the House of Commons had declared, by an
overpowering majority, that they would never consent.
The address was moved by Lord Tyrone. The
seconder was the younger son of Lord Mornington,
Major Arthur Wesley, who, on this occasion, made
his first plunge into public life. His speech was
brief but characteristic. He expressed no doubts of
the loyalty of the Catholics. He advised the House
to approach the subject with moderation and dignity ;
but he stepped out of his way to applaud Westmore-
land for his firmness ‘in preventing men calling them-
selves National Guards from appearing in military
array.’ Grattan as usual moved an amendment, sepa-
rating the Castle from the King, and giving the latter
the credit of the intended measure. Tom Conolly de-
clared that he approved of every part of the address
‘save of the paragraph which thanked the King for

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

continuing the Earl of Westmoreland in the Govern-

81

CHAP.

ment. When the address to the Crown was carried, oe

there followed the address to the Viceroy. It was :

the signal for the outpouring of patriotic indignation,
which was hardly appeased by Dennis Browne, who,
though he usually voted with the Patriots, declared
now that he had heard of no act of the Viceroy
injurious to the liberties of his country, and that a
Government deserved support under which public and
private credit, trade, and revenue were all thriving.
This address too was passed. Then followed
notices of motions. William Ponsonby announced
that he intended to introduce a Reform Bill. Grattan
moved for a committee to enquire into the abuses of
the Constitution. George Ponsonby guessing plainly
the aim of England in promoting emancipation, and
believing that he could still baffle Pitt if the Irish
Constitution could first be popularised, supported
Grattan and his brother, insisting that Ireland should
no longer be the plaything of English Ministers. The
rule of the session was to be conciliation wherever
conciliation was possible. Mr. Corry for the Govern-
ment consented to the appointment of a Committee,
to enquire, not into ‘ the abuses’ which presumed
the conclusion, but into ‘the state’ of the repre-
sentation, which might admit alteration. Grattan
agreed to the change, though without pledging him-
self that the subject of abuses should not be revived.
Still more significant was the attitude of Government
on Mr. Forbes’ annual motion to exclude holders of
pensions and State appointments from Parliament.
The Cabinet no longer objected to the introduction of
the Bill, and in consenting to an abrogation of the
time-honoured method by which public business had
VOL, III. G

1793.

82

BOOK
wail,

~—--—’’

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

been so long carried on, appeared to admit that the
Irish Parliament could not continue on its present
footing.

The Government on the other hand called on the
Legislature to sanction measures already begun for
the repression of anarchy. On the 31st of January
the House was invited to thank the Viceroy for having
prohibited the parade of the National Guards. George
Ponsonby gave a grudging assent. Grattan did not
oppose, but warned the Secretary against making the
extravagance of the Republicans a plea for touching
those sacred guardians of liberty, the Volunteers.
One voice only was raised in definite protest. Lord
Edward Fitzgerald, whose light nature boiled at a
lower temperature than that of ordinary Whigs in the
disaffected atmosphere of Leinster House, had been
swept into the revolutionary ferment. He had been
at Paris with the Anglo-Irish deputation which had
congratulated the National Assembly on the events
of the 10th of August. The abolition of hereditary
distinctions had been drunk as a toast at a repub-
lican dinner; and Lord Edward, amidst enthusiastic
cheers, had declared that he renounced his title.
Citizen Fitzgerald in his place in the House of Com-
mons rose and said :—

‘I give my most hearty disapprobation of the
address of thanks, for I think that the Lord- Lieutenant
and the majority of this House are the worst subjects
the King has.’

Cries of ‘ To the bar!’ ‘To the bar!’ ‘Take down his
words,’ brought an explanation which was rejected as
insufficient. The next day the young lord apologised,
and, after a debate of two hours and a division, the
apology was allowed.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

Preliminary movements over, the great questions of
the session now approached. In the first week Major
Hobart had given notice that he would introduce a
Bill for the removal of the Catholic disabilities.
Was the removal to be complete or partial? and if
partial, was the Catholic body prepared to accept it?
On this point the leading members of the Catholic
Committee had been at issue with their allies. Wolfe
Tone had been for rejecting everything short of
total emancipation, desiring to keep the wound open
to feed the spirit of disaffection. Dr. Troy and the
bishops were willing to meet the Government half
way, to take gratefully as much as should be offered,
and to wait till opinion had ripened for the full con-
cession of equality. The ‘ Convention before it sepa-
rated refused to receive a deputation from the United
Irishmen for fear of compromising itself too deeply.’ }

Hamilton Rowan published a fierce address to the |

Volunteers, inviting them to resume their arms, call-
ing on the Irish soldiers in the army to remember
that they were citizens, and that their first duty was
to their country, demanding complete and instant
emancipation, and inviting another meeting at Dun-
gannon to compel it. Keogh had talked bravely to
Tone of his hopes that the Cabinet would refuse to
receive their petition in order ‘to rouse the people.’
Major Hobart’s measures, it was now understood,
extended only to the franchise. The delegates when
they went to London had expected no more. Their
reception and Dundas’s language to them had raised
their aspirations; and as soon as Hobart had given
1¢Keogh begged Hamilton cember12. 8, P.O.

Rowan not to press this, as now it * Publications of the United Irish-
might create divisionsamong them.’ men, December 14, 1792.

—Westmoreland to Dundas, De-
G2

83

CHAP.
II.

——_—————*"

84

BOOK
VIII.
Rei plement

1793.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

notice of his Bill, and the limitations of it were known,
four of the five were deputed by the Catholic Com-
mittee to tell him that they had been promised
seats in Parliament, and that they must have them.
Hobart answered peremptorily that they must take
what he was ready to give or they would have no-
thing. They were cowed and faintly acquiesced.’
The part of the Committee which was under Tone’s
influence stood to their guns. They said ‘the
sneaking spirit of compromise would be fatal.’ They
drew a petition for complete repeal. When Keogh
himself modified it, they made a display of force, and
the Goldsmiths’ corps of Volunteers re-appeared in
arms and paraded in defiance of the proclamation. The
Corps were ordered to disperse instantly under threat
of having their arms taken from them. They thought
of resisting, but they reflected that there were now
2,500 soldiers in Dublin, and obeyed. Dr. Troy and
five other bishops published a Pastoral to be read in
every chapel in the kingdom. ‘ Loyalty and obe-
dience to law had ever peculiarly distinguished the
Roman Catholics of Ireland.’ Those qualities ‘should
be more than ever conspicuous when the beloved
Sovereign, the father of all his people, with unprece-
dented benevolence and condescension, had recom-
mended their claims to the Legislature.’? Wolfe
Tone began to perceive that he and the United
Irishmen had been used by the Catholic Committee
to frighten the Government, and had been flung over

1 Tone comments—‘ Sad! sad! 21, 1793.
I am surprised at Sir Thomas * ¢ Address of the five bishops
French. Merchants, I see, make January 25, 1793,’ — Plowden,
bad revolutionists. So Gog’s puffing vol. iy.
has come to this. —Journal, January

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

when the end was gained. ‘ Will the Catholics be
satisfied ?’ he wrote. ‘I believe they will, and be
damned.’ ?

Dundas was scarcely less alarmed for the opposite
reason. The Cabinet had consented to the limitation,
‘to gratify the prejudices of the Protestants, and
from a belief that larger concessions could not be
carried in the Irish Parliament.’ He was led to
fear ‘that the British Government had been the
dupe of men who were either insincere in their ex-
pressions of apprehension, or had got the better of
them when. it suited their purpose.’* The Catholics,
he was afraid, would reject the Bill, and the national
party in Parliament would outbid the Government,
again appeal to national sentiment, and raise the cry
of a United Ireland.

Amidst these various alarms and distractions, Major
Hobart’s own opinion remained unchanged, that to
yield to Irish intimidation never had and never would
er could come to good. On the 4th of February,
however, he fulfilled the task imposed upon him, and
explained the details of the intended measure. The
Catholics had been for ten years restored to their civil
rights. The Act of ’92 had opened the bar to them.
But on the novel theory that no man was free who was
not a consenting party to the laws by which he was
governed, they were still slaves. Their shackles were
now to be struck off. Their unremitting loyalty for
a hundred years, Major Hobart said, showed the con-
tinuance of these political disabilities to be no longer
necessary. He proposed to admit Catholics to the

1 Journal, February 4, 17983.
2 ‘Dundas to Westmoreland, February 9.’ 8S, P. O.

e

85

CHAP,
II.

— +-
1798.

February,

86

BOOK
VITr.

——

1793.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

franchise, to the magistracy, and the grand juries, on
the same terms as Protestants. An English Act was
about to open the army and navy to them. The Arms
Act was to be repealed so far as affected Catholics
possessing real estate or moderate personal property,
and was to be extended to Protestants who had
none.}

Sir Hercules Langrishe seconded Hobart with
peculiar grace. The Catholics, he said, had come for-
ward on earlier occasions to resist the invasion of a
foreign enemy. ‘They were coming forward now to
resist the invasion of foreign principles more dan-
gerous than armies, more cruel than the sword. The
old dangers from Popery were extinct; new dangers
had arisen against which the Catholics would be the
truest allies.

If this was true, all would be well; but there fol-
lowed Langrishe a speaker to whom it appeared not
to be true, ratt who could give a reason for the faith
that was in him. There had entered the House in
1790, among other new members, a certain Dr.
Duigenan, sprung from the old stock of the O’Dew-
genans, born in a mud cabin, Catholic of the Catholics,
Irish of the Irish. Educated at a hedge school, and
designed for the priesthood, young Duigenan had
caught the eye of a Protestant clergyman, who intro-
duced him into a grammar school. Thence having
changed his religion and modified his name he found
his way to a fellowship at Trinity College, and thence
to distinction at the bar and to Parliament. Coarse
in manners, rough in tongue, exactly informed of his
country’s history, and acquainted with his country-

1 Irish Debates, February 4: compare Irish Statutes, 33 George IIL,
cap. 21.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

men’s character, he was a vulgar edition of Fitzgibbon,
and resembled him as the buzzard resembles the eagle.

This man rose to speak for the first time when
Langrishe ended. He held in his hand the Catholic
petition which he described as uprooting the policy
which had resisted the shock of three general rebel-
lions. He denied the loyalty of the Irish Catholics.
He pointed to the Irish brigade in France. He spoke
of the Irish regiments in the French service who had
fought under La Fayette in America. More justly
he pointed to the Whiteboys and Defenders, and to the
midnight incendiaries who were plundering Protestant
houses of arms—these at least the spontaneous growth
of the Irish soil, who in all that they did ‘ were mani-
festing immortal hatred to the British name and
nation.’ ‘ The Irish Catholics,’ he said,’ ‘ to a man
esteem all Protestants as usurpers of their estates.
To this day they settle those estates on the marriage
of their sons and daughters. They have accurate
maps of them. ‘They have lately published in
Dublin a map of this kingdom cantoned out among
the old proprietors. They abhor all Protestants
and all Englishmen as plunderers and oppressors,
exclusive of their detestation of them as heretics.
If the Parliament of this kingdom can be so in-
fatuated as to put the Irish Catholics on a better
footing than the English Catholics, and if the English
nation shall countenance such a frenzy, either this
kingdom will be for ever severed from the British
Empire, or it must be again conquered by a British
army. ‘The Protestants of Ireland are but the
British garrison in an enemy’s country, and if deserted

1 And if Ireland was to remain was as unanswerable as his facts
a separate kingdom, his argument were authentic.

f

87

CHAP.
II.
—wr~“

1793.
February.

58

BOOK
VIUl.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

by the parent State must surrender at discretion.
English ministers are simply blind. I tell them they
are greatly deceived if they have been induced to
believe that an Irish Catholic is, ever was, or ever
will be, a loyal subject of a British Protestant King
or a Protestant Government.’

Not aman in the House, not Grattan himself, if
put on his oath, could have denied that in this last
sentence Duigenan was speaking more than the bitter
truth; but nothing 1s so unpalatable as truth when it
cannot be acted on. Speaker after speaker rose to
deny what it was inconvenient to admit. Sir Henry
Cavendish said that not another member in the House
agreed in it. One member only, Mr. Ogle, of Wex-
ford, had the courage to say that he did agree.

‘The effect of the measure proposed,’ Mr. Ogle
said, ‘must be either a total separationoraunion. |
have always thought I would rather lay my head on
the block than consent toaunion. But I declare be-
fore the Almighty, I would rather pass an Act of
Union than the Bill before the House.’

Duigenan’s and Ogle’s words, though unsupported
in debate, found an echo in too many hearts to fail
of their effect. Major Hobart sent word to the Ca-
tholic Committee that unless he could tell the House
that they were satisfied, unless they would pledge
themselves to dissolve, and cease to agitate thence-
forward, the Bill would be dropped. The Parliament
would prefer to resist where they stood, rather than
give their opponents additional strength by yielding.!

The Committee received at the same moment a
most significant intimation that whatever the Eng-

1 Tone’s Jounal, February 8.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

lish Cabinet might say or think, the Irish Executive

89

CHAP.

i ; ; Il.
did not mean to be trifled with. A secret committee ~~~

17938

of the House of Lords had sat under Fitzgibbon’s  popruaty.

directions from the first day of the session to enquire
into the causes of the general disorder. They had
reported against Volunteer Corps and pseudo-repre-
sentative conventions as incompatible with tranquillity.
The day after the introduction of Hobart’s Bill the
Attorney-General alarmed the House with the infor-
mation that large quantities of arms were being im-
ported and distributed. A Bill was introduced
and rapidly passed forbidding the importation or
possession of guns or powder without licence, or the
removal of cannon or powder from one part of the
country to another, and giving the magistrates power
to search either ship, dwelling-house, or store where
they had cause to suppose arms were concealed.’
The Act was a sentence’ of death to the revived
Volunteer Corps, which were instantly disarmed and
suppressed. On the 6th of February, Sir John Par-
nell moved for a new and effective Militia Bill, which
would produce a force of 16,000 men, and at the same
time he proposed the increase of the regular army
to 20,000 men. Grattan enquired for what pur-
pose such a force was needed. Hobart declined to
explain. He said merely that the Government had
reasons of their own for asking for it, and if the
House refused consent, on them would rest the respon-

sibility. There was no difficulty in gaining consent. —

The House, in their present panic, would have
voted martial law if they had been asked. So armed,
Major Hobart was able to present his alternative

1 33 George IIL., cap. 2.

90

BOOK
VITl.

—,_—_’
1793.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to the Catholic Committee, and to make them feel
that he intended to adhere to it. They were sore
and savage. These loyal subjects, whose deep and
tried devotion to their Sovereign was to receive its
reward in an extension of confidence, debated long
and bitterly on their answer. Very unwilling were
they to promise to abandon their trade of agitation,
break up their gallant convention, declare themselves
contented and satisfied. But the alternative, as Tone
perceived, lay plainly before them. Were they ready
to fight? Hobart showed no signs of flinching, and
they decided that they were in no condition for
‘tented fields.’ They gave the assurance demanded
of them. They said they did but ask the Irish Parlia-
ment ‘to coincide with the will of the best of kings.’

Hobart was now ready to proceed. The Bill came
on for the first reading on the 18th of February, and
was the occasion of a remarkable speech from Sir
Lawrence Parsons. Parsons was in favour of admit-
ting the Catholics to seats in Parliament, but under
conditions of the franchise which would have excluded
the mob of Catholic peasants from a voice in the elec-
tion, and would have restricted the right of voting to
men of property and substance. In many points he
was an advanced Whig, and the words, therefore, with
which he opened the subject, contrasted as they were
so remarkably with the opinions expressed by Ed-
mund Burke, have peculiar value.

‘The Catholics,’ he said, ‘have been deposed from
power for a century, and I will lift my voice against
any man who defames our Protestant ancestors for
that deposition. I look to the temper of the times.
I look to England and I see the same spirit. I look
to France and I see Louis XIV. revoking the Edict

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

of Nantes. ‘What in France and England was perse-

91

CHAP.

cution, in Ireland was policy.’ ‘The conditions were ——_—~

now altered. Protestants were no longer agreed
in excluding the Catholics from a share in power.
England no longer desired it. On the eve of a
desperate war it was unsafe to maintain any longer
the principles of entire exclusion.’ Major Hobart’s
proposal to extend the franchise generally, however,
to the forty-shilling Catholic freeholders Parsons
considered could only have risen from ignorance of
the condition of the country. The admission of the
Catholics to the right of obtaining freeholds had
already completely revolutionized the southern and
western provinces. The great grazing farms held by
Protestants had been broken up. ‘ Seven or eight
Catholics were now holding the ground which one
Protestant held formerly.’ Poor, ignorant, bigoted,
and now four times the number of the Protestants,
these new constituents would rapidly obtain an entire
control. The present Bill might only concede the
franchise, but the exclusion from Parliament would
not and could not be maintained. ‘ Give the Catholics
the forty-shilling franchise, they would be a majority
of electors. Being a majority of electors they would
return the majority of the House of Commons. The
majority of the House of Commons would control
the supplies, and controlling the supplies would be
masters of the country.’ Parsons declined to make
over the State to the rabble. He would not admit
such a multitude, he said, if they were Protestants
and had been Protestants for twenty generations.
The elections would be a scene of complete riot and
bloodshed. He would propose instead to combine
the two questions which were agitating the country.

793.
February.

92

BOOK
VIll.

—,--—
17938.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

There were three classes of Catholics—the gentry,
who aspired to seats in Parliament; a middle class,
with freeholds of 20/. a year and upwards ; and the
peasantry. The Government Bill excluded the gen-
try and included the mob. His own opinion was that
the gentry should be admitted to the Legislature, and
the franchise be confined to those who had sense
enough to use it properly.

_If such a restriction could have been maintained,
Parsons’ proposal was probably the wiser of the two.
Unhappily it contradicted the rising political creed,
that wisdom lay in the many and the noisy, not in
the few and the intelligent. To be without a vote was
to be a slave. The condition of a 20/. freehold would
disfranchise half the Protestant tenants. Freedom,
absurdly so called, was the idol before which Europe
was learning to bow down, though as yet in fear and
with half averted face. It could not be. The amend-
ment was rejected.

On the second reading, a lower limit was attempted
at 10/., but was again defeated.

Grattan was for complete repeal of all distinctions,
and talked grandly of ideas germinating in the soul
like the child in the womb, and destined, whether
men would or no, to grow to their designed propor-
tions. George Ponsonby described the Bill as a
trick to seduce Catholics into looking to England for
favour. He invited Parliament to throw it out, and
bring in another of their own more comprehensive.

‘There are three parties in the House,’ wrote
Edward Cooke, ‘those who would give nothing, those
who are for everything, those who are for Major
Hobart’s Bill. The first is the largest, and would be
decisive were it not for the influence and wishes of

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

Government. The secondis in reality small, but has

93

CHAP,

been rendered considerable by the desperate opposi- sel

tion of those who act with a view to defeat the Bill,
or, if they cannot succeed, to revenge themselves on
Great Britain by areform in Parliament and the estab-
lishment of an Administration exclusively Irish. These
are the Ponsonbies, Leinsters, Conollies, Grattans,
&e.’1 ‘The Government will carry their Bill, but it
is feared many of those who cannot obtain the limi-
tation of the franchise will, upon defeat, join in
resentment those who are for granting everything.
The ground now taken by the Opposition is most
dangerous. They say they have done enough to
strenethen Government. They will grant no more
power without redress of grievances, and I fear the
effect of inflammatory language in the unsettled state
of men’s minds. The Catholics will be satisfied with
what is proposed, and declare so unanimously. Had
Major Hobart proposed more he would have lost
all, for the Ponsonbies have been lying in watt watch-
ing the turn of the business, and the measure for doing
away all distinctions would have been so revolting that
they might have successfully availed themselves of Pro-
testant feeling.’ ”

The second reading passed with only three dissen-

1 The meaning of George Pon-
sonby’s speech on the second read-
ing was explained by Major Ho-
bart :—

‘George Ponsonby’s point was
to impute the change of sentiment
in the Irish Parliament to what he
termed English influence, and re-
commending the adoption of the Ca-
tholics into the Constitution as a
means of strengthening Ireland and
weakening Great Britain. The prin-
ciple was too true to be without im-

pression. But the force of it was di-
minished by the conviction that no
man in the country was more averse
to the Catholics than the gentleman
who pressed the House to grant
them everything. He will not
easily be forgiven by the Protest-
ants, and he will certainly be de-
spised by the Catholics.’—Major
Hobart to Evan Nepean. Private
and secret. February 26, 1793.

* “To Nepean, February 26,’
bikes. Us

1793.
February.

94

BOOK
Vin,
—-——
1793.
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

tients. In Committee, Mr. Knox proposed the
admission of the Catholics to Parliament. He was
defeated by 163 to 69. Duigenan revived Sir Law-
rence Parsons’ proposal for the restriction of the
franchise. If the Bill passed in its present form there
would, he said, be no refuge but a union; and rather

than be a slave to the Catholics he would himself

propose it. Sir John Parnell, though as a member
of the Government he voted as Pitt required, yet
expressed his belief that instead of conciliating
the Catholics the grant of the franchise would only
re-awaken forgotten animosities. He thought the
time ill-chosen, the example dangerous, the ex-
periment one of which no person could foresee
the results ; but England chose that the measure
should pass, and on England the responsibility must
rest. The Speaker, John Foster, was no less emphatic
in opposition. He was willing to grant the Catholics
the fullest civil toleration. He deprecated giving them
political power. An abstract right of voting as an
inherent condition of liberty he ridiculed as nonsense.
The franchise must be followed by seats in Parliament.
Official situations would follow. The Catholic clergy
would insist on equality with the Protestant clergy.
The Crown alone would remain to save the Protestant
interest from overthrow ; and there would thus be a
direct and constant provocation toward a dissolution
of the connection with Great Britain. He did not
blame the Irish ministry. The measure began in
England, but the raising the question at all had been
an act of extreme folly and indiscretion.

All had been said that could be said, and on the
inherent merits of the question Pitt perhaps would
have agreed with Foster. He could not avow his

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

true motives. He was aiming at a union, and looked
to Catholic emancipation as a means of forcing the
hand of the Protestant Parliamentary patriots. These
gentlemen conjectured his purpose, and were con-
tending to preserve their nationality. Could the
profligate Whig aristocracy have retained their old
monopoly of power they would have never troubled
themselves about the Catholics. In the existing
crisis they were unhampered with convictions, and
were on the watch merely to take advantage of Pitt’s
mistakes. Had the Castle offered a full measure of
emancipation they would have rallied the country on
the Protestant cry against perfidious England. Had
the Catholic petition been rejected in London, they
were ready to open their arms to their oppressed
fellow-citizens, to fall back, as in ’82, on Belfast, Dun-
gannon, and the Volunteers, to force a reorganization
of Parliament by a threat of rebellion, and so reign
themselves, as they fondly believed that they would,
over a united Ireland. |

In the face of an opposition composed of—shall it
be said — political brigands, Pitt had to feel his
way. If his road was crooked, his aim was at least
honest. The Bill passed the Commons, and no more
words need have been spent upon it ; but its pas-
sage through the Upper House was distinguished
by a speech from the one supremely able man whom
Ireland possessed, removed now by his high office
from the sphere in which, as long as he was present,
he had controlled the questionable elements of which
all parties there were more or less composed.

95

CHAP.
Il.
es

1793.
February.

The Peers trod generally the same round of argu- |

ments which had already been exhausted. The novel
feature in the second debate was that Doctor Law,

96

BOOK
VII.

——-—_——
1795.

March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Lord Ellenborough’s brother, a bishop of the Estab-
lishment, delivered himself of an oration in a style
which since has become too familiar. Fitzgibbon,
now Lord Clare, followed.! He said :—

‘I have always felt peculiar reluctance in discuss-
ing the political claims of the Catholics of Ireland,
feeling it impossible not to recur to past injuries,
which it is my most earnest wish to bury in eternal
oblivion. I could wish again to pass them by; but
when the epidemical frenzy of the day has reached
even that grave and reverend bench, and a learned
prelate has thought fit most wantonly to pour forth
a torrent of exaggerated misstatements against the
government of this country for two centuries, I cannot
leave his indiscretion unnoticed and unreprehended.
I should be sorry that anything that may fall from
me should stop the progress of this Bill. After what
has passed in Great Britain and Ireland, it may be
essential to the momentary peace of the country that
your lordships should agree to it, and I do not desire
to be responsible for the consequences of its rejection.
Therefore, I hope it will be understood that, much as
I disapprove the principles of this Bill, whatever [
may say upon the subject is intended to open the eyes
of the people to the real state of the country, in the
hope, if it be possible, to stop the further progress of
innovation.

‘T lament that religious distinctions should pre-
vail among us. I well know they have proved the
source of bitter calamity to the people of Ireland.
Religious bigotry produced Tyrone’s rebellion ; re-
ligious bigotry produced the rebellion of 1641, and
the horrid excesses which attended it; religious

- 1 The speech, which can be given is recommended to the careful stu-
here only in a most abridged form, dent of Irish history,

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

bigotry produced the rebellion of 1688, and the tyran-
nies and proscriptions of James the Second and his
Parliament ; and I am sorry to say that religious
bigotry is at this hour as rank in Ireland as at any
‘period to which I have alluded. A very great ma-
jority of the people are as zealously devoted to the
Popish faith as the people of Spain or Portugal. I
do not state it as a reproach. I[ wish in this par-
ticular the Protestants of the Established Church
would take example from their Catholic brethren;
but when their political claims are discussed in Par-
liament the merits of the men must be dismissed
from consideration. We must look to the principles
of their religion, and to the unerring influence which
those principles have had upon the political govern-
ment of every country in Europe for centuries. From
this point of view there is not a single instance in
which Protestants and Papists have agreed in exer-
cising the political power of the same State; and as
long as the claims of Rome to universal spiritual do-
minion over the Christian world shall be maintained,
it is impossible that any man who admits them can
exercise the legislative power of a Protestant State
with temper and justice.

‘There is not a country in which the Reformed
religion has been established where its progress has
been so slow and inconsiderable as in Ireland; and it
is a strange argument to urge the abhorrence in
which the Protestant religion is held by a majority of
the people as a reason for admitting them to a full
share of power in a Protestant State ; yet this is the
strong ground on which the advocates for emanci-
pation rest their claims. ‘They tell us the expecta-
tion of making Ireland a Protestant country is vain;

VOL. III. i

97

CHAP.
idis
17938.
March.

98

BOOK
VII.
a

1793.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

that the people are unalterably devoted to the Catholic
faith, and that justice forbids their exclusion from the
State. That the people of this country are devoted |
to the Popish faith is too notorious to be disputed. *
When the other nations in Europe were engaged in
religious controversies they were in a state of bar-
barism and ignorance below the reach of curiosity and
speculation. Licentious habits had long engaged
them in resistance to the British Government. The
example of the English settlers would have alone
sufficed to make the Reformation odious to them;
but from the first moment that the Act of Supremacy
was promulgated in this country the habitual aver-
sion of the natives to the English name and nation
became savage and inveterate antipathy.’

Passing in rapid review the Elizabethan wars, the
Ulster settlement, the rebellion of 1641 and the con-
fiscations which ensued upon it, the last desperate
struggle under James the Second, and the final defeat
of the native Catholic party, the Chancellor con-
tinued :—

‘Far be it from me to revive the memory of these
things; but so much upon this subject has been
addressed to the passions, and so little to the judg-
ment, of Parliament, that I hold it the duty of
every honest man to oppose broad and glaring facts
to a loud and impudent clamour. ‘The penal laws
enacted in this country were a code forced on the
Parliament by hard necessity, and to these old Popery
laws, I do not scruple to say, Ireland stands indebted
for her internal tranquillity during the last century.
Let philosophers who exclaim against this code, as
subverting the immutable principles of sentiment and
fraternity, condescend to look to the situation of the
Protestant settlers at the Revolution. They were an

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

English colony in the country of an enemy, reduced
by the sword to sullen and refractory allegiance. In
numbers they were a fourth of the inhabitants. The
experience of a century had shown that the natives of
the country had contracted an incurable aversion to
them. They could not stand their ground except
by disarming the enemies who surrounded them of
political power.

‘These laws in part disabled the native Irish from
renewing hostilities against the English settlers or
embarrassing the British Government; but there is
another cause to which the tranquillity of the past
century is to be attributed. From the Revolution to
1782 the aim of the possessors of power and property
in this nation was to cement the connection between
Great Britain and Ireland, and to cultivate the confi-
dence of the British nation. In 1782 a new scene
was opened. Having advanced claims which were
acceded to in full by Great Britain, the two Houses
plighted the national faith to stand and fall with her;
yet, fatally for our country’s welfare, from 1782 to
this hour the policy of the men who call themselves
friends of the people has been to hold up Great Britain
to the people as their rival and enemy—to concen-
trate the force of Irishmen of all religions against
the English connection. The avowed object at this
day of Irish reformers and Catholic emancipators is
separation from Great Britain; and if they succeed,
separation or war must be the issue.

‘From the moment that this fatal infatuation ap-
peared in the other House of Parliament I stated in
that House that it would lead to the event which I
have now only to lament. In 1785 and 1789 I warned

the nation of the consequences to which the giddy
H 2

100

BOOK
VII.
_——_—"

March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and fantastical speculations which then prevailed must
lead. Till the modern Irish patriots had divided
the Protestants of Ireland into opposite factions, we
never heard of claims for political power advanced
by Papists—nothing at all in the shape of a claim
of right. What they desired was sued for as a
favour; whatever was granted was accepted with
eratitude .

‘TI meddle not with the speculative opinions of any
Catholic. If he choose to subscribe to articles of
faith which my reason and understanding reject, that
is his business, not mine; but I object to all com-
munication with the Court of Rome. Those who
adhere to the Court of Rome are enemies to the realm
of England, and unfit for any trust in a Protestant
country. I wish young gentlemen who have urged
the expediency of a total repeal of the Popery laws,
and have offered to embrace their Catholic brethren
for the wise purpose of resisting English influence,
would take the trouble to look into the laws of the
Roman Catholic Church, where they will find the
principles of fraternity on which their Popish fellow-
subjects are willing to meet them, and the Consti-
tution under which they will be governed, should this
become a Popish country .

‘There is, as I learn from a modern publication of
Doctor Troy, a standing Cabinet of Cardinals at Rome
for the government of Ireland—lI presume the Car-
dinal of York is at the head of it—and the mild
superintending influence of this Cabinet on the Irish
Catholics will have the best effects in cultivating the
hereditary attachment to the British nation .

I do not scruple to say that, in my opinion, it is an
act of insanity in the Parliament of Ireland to open

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

the efficient political power of the State to persons in

communion with the Court of Rome. If they do not ——~_
1793.

make use of them to subvert a Protestant Govern-
ment, they must resist the ruling passions and pro-
pensities of the human mind. . . If we go a step
further in innovation, if we agree to what is called
Reform, this country is lost. I very much fear we
have already made a precipitate and indiscreet ex-
periment. ‘The right reverend prelate says that the
Catholics demand emancipation, that the people of
Great Britain demand it for them, and that Great
Britain will no longer assist the Protestants of Ire-
land in a system of oppression. The crooked folly
of man could not have suggested a more mischievous
observation. Great Britain must maintain her con-
nection with Ireland, and she can only maintain it by
maintaining the descendants of the English settlers,
who, with few exceptions, form the Protestant inte-
rest there; and they in turn, however foolishly some
of them may have acted in the last ten years, must
know they can maintain their own position only by
adhering to Great Britain. :

‘The descendants of the old Irish who constitute
the Catholic interest feel that they can never recover
the situation which their ancestors held in Ireland
but by separation from Great Britain; and therefore
if any man in Great Britain or Ireland is so wild as
to hope that by communicating political power to the
Catholics of Ireland they can be conciliated to British
interests, he will find himself bitterly mistaken. Great
Britain can never conciliate the descendants of the
old Irish to her interests upon any other terms than
by restoring to them the possessions and the religion
of their ancestors in full splendour and dominion.’

101

CHAP.
ae

March.

102

BOOK
VIIl.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Having thus relieved his mind, and having spoken

~~~ what, however English statesmen might please to

1793.
March.

quarrel with it, was, is, and will be the exact truth
upon the subject, the Chancellor concluded with
saying that he would not divide the House against
the Bill; and it was allowed to pass.

No immediately serious consequences were to be
apprehended till the passing of a Reform Bill, and
against a Reform Bill the Cabinet was firm. The
Dungannon Convention met on the 15th of February,
and decided that they must have it. Grattan brought
the question before the House without waiting for the
report of the committee. He electrified his hearers
with the brilliancy of his oratory, but he failed to.
convince them that the Reform and Emancipation
combined did not mean revolution. They admired
the rhetoric; they acted by common sense.

‘We have risks,’ said Dennis Brown, ‘ like other
countries, but risks peculiar to ourselves. Timidity is
not the way of safety. If we are to be directed by
every breath of discontent, there is an end of us;
property, life, and liberty will be buried in anarchy
and confusion.’

The Reform Bill had been called in the debate ‘an
olive-branch of peace.’ ‘ The olive,’ said Bushe, ‘is
like other trees, and will not take root if planted in a
storm. If you must touch the foundation of the build-
ing which has sheltered yourselves and your ancestors,

. let it be when the winds are at peace. You are

choosing the Equinox, when Government and Anarchy
are contending like day and night.’ Grattan himself
would probably not have demanded Reform at such
a moment, had he not known that success was im-
possible. The House understood that after the

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

concessions to the Catholics their hope of safety

they threw out the Reform Bill by a majority which

for the present quenched the agitation.
The strength of Government was concentrated in
resisting Reform, because Reform, among its other
effects, would have been fatal to the Union; on all
else the rule was to give way. After resisting for
sixty years, the Cabinet consented to a limitation
of the Pension List, which was reduced to 80,0001.
a year; the Hereditary Revenue was surrendered
and exchanged for a Civil List ;+ while a further
Act for securing the independence of Parliament
closed a scandalous chapter in the constitutional
history of Ireland; and persons holding pensions
during pleasure, or any salaried office under the
Crown, were declared ineligible to any future Legis-
lature. The present House had still four years to
run. In parting with the power which hitherto had
alone enabled the Viceroys to carry on the Govern-
ment, Pitt, it is likely, had already determined that
the days of an independent Irish Legislature were
numbered.

1 33 George ITI., cap. 34. 2 53 George IIL, cap. 41.

103

CHAP.

104

BOOK
VIII.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

Hap the gains and losses in the game of intrigue

pT Feetcd to the players, their strokes and coun-

1793.
April,

ter-strokes might have been observed with con-
temptuous interest. Behind Ministers and delegates
lay unhappily the Irish people, who were being
driven mad by visionary hopes, and through a thou-
sand channels were taught to look for the day when
Ireland would be once more their own, and the
tyranny of centuries would be over. They were told
that they were emancipated. ‘lo them emancipation
meant that they were to pay no more rents and tithes.
They heard of religious equality. If religious equa-
lity was to be worth having, it implied equality of
property, land at ten shillings an acre or no shillings,
and the sacred soil of ad no pee trampled i
the hoof of the invader.

The determination of Pitt to hae on the Catholic
question had passed like a stream of oxygen over the
half-smothered and smouldering ashes. Savage at the
submission of the Catholic Committee to Major Ho-
bart’s terms, the agitators told the peasantry that they
were betrayed. The Defenders became every hour
more numerous and more audacious. The United
Irishmen of Dublin published A furious attack on the
Secret Committee of the Lords which was almost an
invitation to violence. The Government had little
fear of open rebellion. They had great and well-
grounded fears for the lives pf the Protestant fami-

1 Miscellaneous reports from the Soith and West of Ireland, April
and May, 1793. S. P. O.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

lies who were scattered over the country by secret
assassination.

To chain up the incendiary spirit before the fire

spread further they summoned Simon Butler and
~ Oliver Bond! to the Bar of the Upper House, sent them
for six months to Newgate for breach of privilege, and
fined each of them 500/. The increase of the army
made possible at last more vigorous measures against
the Defenders. Throughout the midland counties the
peasants were now armed, either out of the Volunteer
stores surreptitiously dispersed among them, or by
the plunder of the houses of Protestants. They were
not afraid to meet the troops in the field: ‘in Louth
fifty of them were killed in a single fight in February ;
above a hundred were lodged in gaol; yet the Govern-
ment felt that they were not yet at the bottom of
the plot.’ ”

Undeterred by the suppression of ‘the National
Guard’ in Dublin, the Northern Republicans paraded
in green uniforms at Belfast. General’'Whyte was
sent down in March to enforce submission. The
Liberal journals published blazing stories of dragoons
dashing through the streets with drawn sabres, in-
sulting Patriot tradesmen and behaving like infu-
riated savages, till the heroic Volunteers drew out
and drove them from the town.*® General Whyte tells
what really occurred. He had sent four troops of the
17th Dragoons to disarm the ‘Guard.’ On the even-
ing of the 9th of March a corporal and a private, off
duty, strolled out of the barracks into the city, where
they met a crowd of people round a fiddler, who was

1 The Chairman and Secretary 26, 1793.’
of the Dublin lodge. 5 See Tone’s Memoirs, March,
2 ‘Kd. Cooke to Nepean, Feb. 1793,

105

CHAP.
II.

1795.
April.

106

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book playing (a zra. They told the fiddler to play ‘God

VIII.

Save the King.’ The mob damned the King, with
all his dirty slaves, and threw a shower of stones at
them. The two dragoons, joined by a dozen of their
comrades, drew their sabres and ‘drove the town
before them.’ Patriot Belfast had decorated its shops
with sign-boards representing Republican notables.
The soldiers demolished Dumourier, demolished Mi-
rabeau, demolished ‘the venerable Franklin.’ The
Patriots, so brave in debate, so eloquent in ban-
quet, ran before a dozen Englishmen. A hundred
and fifty Volunteers came out, but retreated into the
Exchange and barricaded themselves. The officers
of the 17th came up before any one had been seriously
hurt, and recalled the men to their quarters. In the
morning General Whyte came in from Carrickfergus,
went to the Volunteer committee room, and said that
unless the gentlemen in the Exchange came out and
instantly dispersed, he would order the regiment under
arms. They obeyed without a word. ‘ Never,’ said
Whyte, ‘was any guard relieved with more satisfaction
to themselves.’* The dragoons received a reprimand,
but not too severe, as the General felt that they had
done more good than harm. On the 11th the So-
vereign of Belfast was informed that the meeting of
unauthorised armed associations was now forbidden
by law; the Volunteers must cease to exist, and if
they again assembled they would be apprehended and
punished. The order was obeyed. ‘The citizen de-
fenders of Ireland’s liberties,’ said the ‘ Northern Star,’
the organ of the United Irishmen, ‘ considered it more

1 McCabe, the owner of one of the words ‘McCabe, an Irish slave.’
these shops, hung up his own por- 2 Report of General Whyte, en-
trait afterwards in the place of the closed in a letter of March 19 from
destroyed friend of liberty, with | Westmoreland to Dundas.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.
‘

magnanimous’ to bow for the present to tyranny.

107

CHAP.

, IL.
‘The time would come, and come shortly, when ~—-~~

Ireland might see the saviours of the country once
more in formidable array.’

To this had sunk the famous Volunteers of Ireland
—the wonder of the world. The time for their re-
appearance did not come, and here was their final
end. Their glory was to have won an independence
which when brought to the test of fact was found
‘a thing of sound and fury, signifying nothing.’
Independence which was to be more than a name had
first to be fought for; and the Volunteers being formed
of materials too worthless even for rebellion, were
at last extinguished with ignominy.

The peasantry, unhappily for themselves, were
made of sterner stuff. They boasted less. They
passed no resolutions about the inalienable rights of
man; but they had in them the ancient inbred hatred
of the Saxon conquerors. Coercion had awed them
into submission, but with the first signs of weakness
in the ruling powers the hereditary animosity re-
vived. The landlords had sown the wind and were
to reap the whirlwind. The Irish nation, as it is
passionate and revengeful, so beyond most others it
is malleable by just authority. The Celtic ‘ earth-
tiller’ will repay his liege lord for kindness and
generosity with romantic fidelity. Two centuries
had been allowed to the Saxon intruders to win the
affection of the native race. The Irish peasants
remained in rags like their ancestors; lodged under
one roof with their pigs and cows, paying rent to
masters who had no care for their bodies; paying tithes
to clergy who cared as little for their souls; main-
taining gallantly, in the midst of their wretchedness,

1793.
March.

108

BOOK
Vill.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

2?

their own hedge-schools and their own priests ;

——_ crooning their own songs and airs, and nursing their

1793.
April.

melancholy history ; every rock and glen peopled
with traditions of some battle with the Saxons, some
daring exploit of hunted rapparees. So it had gone
on till they were told that their chain was broken.
They looked into the justice which was said to
have been done at last, and they found that it meant
no more than the privilege of helping to send one
of their Protestant masters to Parliament. They
heard that if they wanted more they must arm, as
the Volunteers had armed. They must make the
Government afraid of them, and the Government
would then give them their way.

So long as the Catholic Committee was sitting in
Dublin the outbreaks of violence had been local, and
under the influence of the priests the advanced Catholic
patriots had abstained from organised conspiracy. In
that body there was no longer hope. A general meet-
ing of the Committee was called on the 16th of April,
to review the conduct of Keogh and the delegates.
They had accepted Hobart’s terms, and had promised
that the Committee should be dissolved. Half the mem-
bers of it believed that the cause had been betrayed.
The Secretary ought to have been told to take back
his Bill. The delegates ought to have insisted on
the fulfilment of Dundas’s promises. The country
would then have been roused, and complete Emanci-
pation and Parliamentary Reform would have been
carried together. Keogh defended himself, but little
to the satisfaction of his revolutionary friends. He
was suspected of looking coldly on France, and of
doubting whether the Catholic interests would be
promoted by an alliance with the Jacobins. For a
week it hung uncertain whether the Committee would

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

consent to disappear, or whether it would continue as
a ‘National Congress, pledged to the most violent
measures.’ }

The moderate party carried the day at last. The

members promised to work individually for Reform.

As a representative body they decided to cease to
exist. They passed a vote of thanks to the Viceroy
in the name of the Roman Catholics of Ireland. The
acceptance of it gratified their pride.” Not to quar-
rel with their revolutionary supporters, they voted
1,500. to Wolfe Tone for his services, and as much
to Simon Butler and Todd Jones; and the Catholic
Committee and the Catholic Association, which had
now merged into one, then suspended their further
sessions. But they parted in discontent. The mode-
rate Catholics, though successful for the moment, lost
their influence in the country. The United Irishmen
became now the recognised leaders of all who desired
the regeneration of their country, and the Catholic
Defenders, passing rapidly under their orders, became
the recognised army of liberty.

With the avowed purpose of preventing the enrol-
ment of the militia, the peasantry rose simultaneously
in Sligo, Mayo, Roscommon, Leitrim, Limerick, Clare,
and Kerry. The regular army was still far short of
its numbers, and was entirely unequal to the task of
controlling so large a tract of country. Mr. Tennison’s
house at Coalville was burnt, and three soldiers were
killed. Marcray Castle, in Sligo, the house of Mr.

not to receive it. Had he refused he
would have thrown them into the
arms of the United Irishmen. The

1¢Mr, Hamilton to Major Ho-
bart, April 22.’ 8. P.O. Compare
Tone’s Journal, April 16.

2 «Tt was represented to the Vice-
roy that the designation implied
that the Committee was a repre-
sentative body, and that he ought

pail of milk would have beenkicked
down, and all the confusion re-
newed.’ —Mr. Hamilton to Major
Hobart, April 22.

109

CHAP.
II.

1793.
April.

110

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK Cowper, a staunch Protestant member of Parliament,

VIIl.

—— was sacked, the arms carried off, and the cellars

1793.
May.

emptied. Mr. Wilson’s house at Castlecomer was de-
stroyed, and Mr. Wilson murdered. The town of
Carrick was attacked. Some dragoons in the barracks
there charged the mob, shot down thirty or forty, and
took many more. The prisoners were sullen and
savage ; they were heard to mutter that ‘in a month
not a Protestant would be alive in Ireland.’! The
spirit of 1641 was awake again. The insurgents’ oath
in Mayo was to pay neither tithe nor tax, quit-rent or
landlord’s rent.?, A Defender, mortally wounded in a
fight, declared ‘that when the Protestants and Pres-
byterians were disarmed they were all to be mur-
dered in one night.’ Copies of Paine’s ‘ Rights of
Man’ were sown broadcast by the agents of the
United Lodges. As summer approached Queen’s
County, Carlow, Wexford, Kilkenny, caught fire also.
The ery rose that the French were coming to set Ire-
land free. A mob attacked the barracks at Dingle,
meaning when they had destroyed the soldiers to
dispose afterwards of the gentry. They were disap-
pointed. The soldiers received them with a volley ;
fourteen fell dead; the rest fled, and were pursued
and bayoneted. Thirty-six miserable wretches were
killed at a fight in Erris. There was another sanguin-
ary engagement at Enniscorthy, in Wexford. The
village of Bruff, in Limerick, was occupied in force,
the streets were barricaded, the houses loophooled,
and the Defenders were only driven out of it at last
by cannon.

‘The country,’ wrote a correspondent of Mr. Burke

1 ¢ Reports from the West, May * ‘Westmoreland to Dundas,
26, 1708. ek. Ws June 8,’

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

from Limerick, in July, ‘is in a state of complete insur-
rection. We hear of nothing but outrages committed by
armed mobs; and the country people, notwithstanding
the numbers of them that have been already killed in
these engagements with the army, seem to increase
in ferocity and resolution in proportion to their losses.
A few days ago there was an engagement at. Kilfin-
nan, in which the greatest part of the town was de-
stroyed; and the next day at Bruff, in which many
of the poor wretches were killed. They have no fixed
object, but a spirit has been excited of general dis-
content and opposition. Parties of armed people go
about administering oaths, in some places against the
militia, in others to pay no taxes, in others to pay no
tithes. The consequence is, a furious spirit of oppo-
sition to the ruling powers in the lower classes of the
people.’ *

Supported by this bloody outbreak of disaffection,
the United Irelanders opened their agitation for Par-
liamentary Reform, as the only measure which it was
supposed would now quiet the disturbance. They
published an address to the Catholics, inviting them

1 This letter was forwarded by
Richard Burke to Dundas, with
characteristic comments of his own.
‘T know,’ he said, ‘ that an anony-
mous letter will have more weight
with you than the most deliberate
opinion which I or my father can
give. Such is the effect of the ser-
vice which he has rendered your
Government. I also have been of
service to you. If any part of the
empire, or the whole of it, should
be lost by the incurable alienation
and distrust of the present Govern-
ment towards us both, it will be a
great fatality, but one which is

within the bounds of possibility.
I have done my best to prevent it—
if that were the way to prevent it—
by bearing without complaint or
discouragement the worst possible
treatment. What you are to do
with Ireland in the condition to
which those who have the honour
to govern that country, under your
auspices, have reduced it I am sure
I know not; it begins to be above
me. I shall endeavour, however,
to exculpate myself from the effects
of their misgovernment.’ — R.
Burke to Mr. Dundas, from Bea-
consfield, July 30, 1793,

111

CHAP.
ET.

“io hall
1793.

June.

112

BOOK
Wel,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to join in demanding a measure without which they

———~ would find the franchise useless to them.’ They in-

1793.

June.

formed ‘ the people of Ireland’ that in declaring war
against the Revolution, England was declaring war
against liberty. They bade them ‘ Assemble, assemble,
and with the voice of injured millions demand their
rights ;’ and having felt the strength which agitation
gathered from having at its head a representative
Assembly, they invited Ireland to choose another, this
time a true national association, which traitors should
have no power to mislead; and they chose for the
place of meeting, not Dublin, where Fitzgibbon might
have them in his grasp, but Athlone, far away in
the country, in the heart of the faithful Catholic
population.

Parliament was still in session, busy with its Re-
sponsibility Bill and its new Civil List. The Catho-
lic Committee had not been dissolved that its place
might be taken by another and more dangerous
Assembly of a similar kind. The Athlone Parliament
would be composed of the most violent agitators in
Ireland, and if allowed to meet would provide the
anarchists with an organised Directory. On July 8
Fitzgibbon introduced a Bill into the House of Lords
declaring the assemblage of bodies of men calling
themselves representatives under any pretence what-
soever to be thenceforth illegal.? The glamour of
’82 had not yet entirely vanished. Patriotic sensi-
bility was wounded by a measure which reflected on
the great Dungannon meeting. The Duke of Lein-
ster and Lord Charlemont fought against it in one
House. Grattan, in the other, spoke of it as the boldest .
step yet made to introduce military government.

1 Proceedings of the United Irishmen, June 7, 1793.
* 33 George III, cap. 29.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

Patriotic oratory, though it could still enchant, could
no longer wholly make men blind. Tom Conolly,

who was drunk when he rose to speak, said that.

although he must vote with his’ friends, he heartily
approved of the resolution which the Castle was
showing. The Bill was carried, the teller for the
Government in the Commons being Arthur Wellesley ;
and the meeting of a fresh Convention, which in the
distracted state of the country ‘would have been an
engine of mischief almost irresistible,’ was thus pre-
vented.!

With the Convention Bill the session which had
restored the Catholics to the Constitution came to an
end. The concession of the franchise, in itself so
momentous, was accompanied by the surrender of
those irregular methods by which England had
hitherto controlled the independence of Parliament.
The millions to whose ‘unfailing loyalty’ these gra-
cious measures were designed as a reward had re-
ceived them in a manner which anyone who knew
Ireland could have foretold with certainty. The Irish

peasant, like some half-tamed animal, docile under
restraint, and obedient and uncomplaining when go-.
verned with firmness and justice, if let loose and told’

to be his own governor flies with a blind instinct at
the hand which has unlocked his chains. Pitt and

Dundas, partly misled by Burke, deceived partly by-
their own theories, partly feeling their way by a tor-.
tuous road towards a Union, had taken a step which:

made the Union a certainty, but no less certainly
made inevitable, as preliminary to it, a desperate and
bloody insurrection.”
1 ¢Major Hobart to Evan Ne- 2 Major Hobart left Ireland at
pean, July 20,’ the close of this session, to be
VOL. III. I

113

CHAP.
II.

es
17958.

114

liable to inconvenierce.

THE

ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IIT.

THE air was charged with revolution.

Each week

brought news from France which set the patriots’

pulses bounding.

Lord Moira, who was now the hope

of the Irish incendiaries, allowed himself to play

with their expectations.

created Lord Hobart, and to be sent
as Governor to Madras.

Richard Burke was so indig-
nant at an appointment which he
regarded as a sign of the Cabinet’s
approval of Hobart’s conduct in
Treland, that he actually remon-
strated with Dundas, and sent Ho-
bart a copy of what he had said,
‘with a very curious letter :—

‘ Brighton, October 28.

‘My Lord,—On the entrance to a

political and criminatory discussion,

to disclaim motives of personal ani-
mosity is a proceeding that may be
It may
appear like mean affectation, or an
ungenerous desire to extenuate the
hostility which necessarily belongs
to adverse discussions. On the other
hand, not to disclaim those motives
is to forego the satisfaction war-
ranted by the most vulgar example
of doing my part at least to divest
the contests we engage in from
every mixture of private asperity.
The former inconvenience seems to
me to be the least. Ido not, there-
fore, hesitate to assure your lordship
that I act on the present occasion
solely upon public grounds, and
without any resentful recollection
of any occurrence in Ireland less
pleasant which might be attri-
buted to your lordship. I allude

They gave him a dinner in

particularly to the treatment I re-
ceived in the House of Commons
on the day of Sir Hercules Lang-
rishe’s proposition. And if there
is anything in my letter to Mr.
Dundas which may appear pe-
culiarly invidious and offensive to
you, it does not proceed from per-
sonal ill will, but is, as I conceive,
necessitated by the circumstances
which do not allow me to remit
anything of the strength of my
case.

‘In the next place, I have to as-
sure your lordship that the sole
objection I have to your appoint-
ment to the Government of Madras
is. that it operates as a sanction and
ratification to those measures which
I feel myself under an indispensable
obligation to criminate, as the only
means to obviate the ill effects upon
the peace and welfare of Ireland,
upon his Majesty’s Government
there, and upon the unity and
strength of the empire.

‘Mr. Dundas will inform your
lordship that I have never ceased
to represent the measures of your
Government in the same point of
view that I do now, which, if he
has not informed you of, it is not
my fault; and if your lordship will
recollect the conversation I had the
honour of having with you at your

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

Dublin, and an ardent orator spoke allusively of the
great work which might lie before him. Moira, not
disclaiming the. possibility, replied, ‘that when he
appeared it would be as a rainbow to notify to dis-
tant countries that the tempest was over.’? But for
the present the Convention Bill, backed by the mi-
litia, drove in the disaffection. The United Irishmen
confessed themselves bafiled, but ‘vowed revenge.’
Hamilton Rowan was reported as having grown
‘morose, sullen, and determined.’* Thomas Muir,
who was tried afterwards at Edinburgh for treason,
had paid the society a visit in Dublin. The society
in return voted an address to their Scotch brethren,
and Rowan was sent over in charge of it. <A prose-
cution was already hanging over him for a treasonable
address. The Chancellor, finding forbearance thrown
away, sent a warrant after him to Scotland. He was

house in the Phoenix Park, you
will not be surprised that I arraign
your conduct criminally, and par-
ticularly in the capacity of a ser-
vant of the.Crown. Many other
measures have since occurred which
I have the misfortune of consider-
ing in a still more serious point of
view. Your late appointment is
no further the occasion of the step
I am now taking than that it
hastens the execution of a first in-
tention to render these affairs the
subject of public discussion in this
kingdom; and as, by the marked
recognition of the measures of the
Irish Government implied by that
appointment, it induces me to lodge
a series of criminal charges against
that Government in the person of
your lordship. |

‘After what I have said at the
beginning it is almost unnecessary

I2

for me to express that I do not de-
cline any sort of public or private
responsibility which may attach to
the course which I have taken, or
may hereafter take. The charges I
shall pursue by such methods as
shall appear to me most advisable to
give them solemnity and effect.
‘I have the honour to be, &c.,
‘RicHARD BurkKE.

‘Rt. Honble. Lord Hobart.’

Hobart, enclosing the letter to
Nepean, says:—‘ Every circum-
stance induces me to agree with
you in thinking him entirely mad,
and I only regret that the discovery
was not made some time ago.’—
MSS. Ireland. 8. P.O. October
1793.

1 “Major Hobart to Evan Ne-
pean, August 27,1793.’ S. P. O.

* Note, unsigned, from an in-

former. 17938. S, P. O.

116

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book arrested, brought back, tried, and sentenced to two

VIII.

years’ imprisonment, and to pay a fine of 500/.

1794.

' There was now an interval of calm. The conspira-
tors were frightened. The session of 1794 was a blank.
The Opposition in Parliament was disheartened and
divided, all but the most reckless patriots having been
sobered by the bloodshed of the past summer. Wil-
liam Ponsonby tried a Reform Bill again. It was
extinguished by a decisive division of 142 to 44.
The revolutionary peace party was equally unsuccess-
ful. Grattan had promised Parnell that if the Place
and Pension Bills were conceded, he would make
no further ‘ vexatious opposition.’1 He redeemed his
word by speaking in favour of the war and by re-
peating what he had said in 1782, that in a foreign
contest Ireland was bound to stand or fall with Great
Britain. The authority of Grattan was decisive with
all who were not consciously disloyal. The supplies
were voted. All necessary business was hurried over,
and in the general desire to leave the Executive un-
trammelled, Parliament was prorogued on March 25.

The Executive had need to be free. Driven from
the open field, the United Irishmen were now pre-
paring for rebellion. The eye of the Castle was on
them. From the very first, traitors among themselves
carried their most secret whispers to the Secretary. —
Every step on which they ventured was known, but
so known only that it could be watched, not interfered
with. Informers’ evidence was not producible in a
court of justice. Occasionally the conspirators were

1 ¢K, Cooke to Evan Nepean, Curran, Egan, and the lawyers in
February 7, 1794.’ 5. P. O. opposition, when Grattan declared

2 ‘T never saw greater marks of his resolution to support the war.’—

chagrin painted on countenances bid.
than on those of Geo. Ponsonby,

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

startled at their work by some public proclamation
which proved that they were betrayed. The informers
in such cases were removed from Ireland, and settled
with a pension in another country.’ Sometimes the
information came from England. A week after Parlia-
ment rose the Viceroy was warned to be on the look-
out for a dangerous visitor. The French Directory
were anxious to discover the resources of the advo-
cates of liberty in England and Ireland. They had
employed a Protestant clergyman named Jackson, a
friend of the famous Duchess of Kingston, and an
ardent disciple of the new doctrines, to feel the pulse
of the two countries and ascertain what kind of recep-
tion might be expected by an invading force. Jack-
son came from Paris to London in February, and
there renewed his acquaintance with the Duchess of
Kingston’s attorney, a man named Cockayne. He
was indiscreet enough to reveal the nature of his mis-
sion. Cockayne carried the information to Pitt, and
at Pitt’s suggestion he volunteered to accompany
Jackson to Ireland, and communicate his movements
to the Castle.

The pair arrived in Dublin on the Ist of April.
Jackson called at once on a second old acquaintance,
MacNally, a popular barrister. MacNally invited
him and Cockayne to dinner, where they met
Simon Butler, Ed. Lewines, another United Irishman,
and several more. The conversation was free and

? Mr, Collins, a silk mercer, of | moreland. After Rowan’s imprison-
Dublin, was one of the first of these ment, his further residence in Ire-
useful betrayers of the secrets of land was unsafe. 200/. a year was
the United Irishmen. He was a __ settled upon him, and he was recom-
member of the Dublin lodge; and, mended for a situation in the West
from the day of his election, wasin Indies.—‘ Cooke to Nepean. Se-
communication with Lord West-  cret. May 26, 1794.

118

BOOK
VIII.
——_. —”

1794.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

treasonable. Jackson asked to be introduced to Hamil-
ton Rowan, who was then in Newgate. ‘The prison
rules were construed lightly in favour of gentlemen of
fortune. Rowan was allowed to entertain his friends
in his private room, and having learnt Jackson’s object
in coming to Ireland, received him and Cockayne at
breakfast, Wolfe Tone making a fourth, as a fit person
to negotiate with France. Tone had already sketched
a paper to be laid before the Directory, describing the
state of Irish parties, the numerical weakness of the
gentry, the hatred felt for them by Catholics and
Dissenters, and the certainty that if France would
assist, the Government could be easily overthrown.!
It was suggested that Tone himself should go to
France and concert measures with the chiefs of the
Revolution. Tone hesitated, remembered that he
had a wife and children, and for the first time in his
life showed prudence. towan copied out the paper,
and gave the copy to Jackson, who folded and
sealed it, addressed it to a correspondent at Ham-
burgh, and gave it to Cockayne to put in. the post.
Cockayne, who had already set the police on the alert,
allowed himself to be taken with the paper on his
person. Jackson was arrested. A friend warned
Rowan of his danger; and he knowing that if his
handwriting could be proved he would be hanged,
persuaded the gaoler to let him go that night to
his own house to see his wife. The gaoler went
with him, to ensure his safe return to Newgate, but
not to intrude upon his prisoner’s privacy, waited

‘during the interview in the passage. Rowan slipped

through a back window, mounted a horse, and escaped

1 This paper is printed in the Life of Wolfe Tone, vol. i. p. 277.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

to a friend’s house at Howth, where he lay concealed
till a smuggler could be found who would convey
a gentleman in difficulties to France. <A couple of
adventurous men were ready with their services. A
day’s delay was necessary to prepare their vessel,
and meanwhile a proclamation was out with an offer
of a reward of 2,000/. for Rowan’s apprehension.
The smugglers guessed who their charge must be ;
but in such circumstances a genuine Irishman would
rather be torn by horses than betray a life trusted to
him. They swore to land Rowan safe, and three days
after he was in Brittany.’

Rowan was beyond the reach of the Government,
but Tone remained ;.and there was Dr. Drennan, also
an energetic incendiary, with whom Jackson had com-
municated, who had long been an object of anxiety.
Dundas, to whom the Viceroy wrote for advice, re-
commended that Jackson should be admitted as an
approver. With Jackson and Cockayne for witnesses,
Tone and Drennan could be tried and hanged. The
Viceroy was obliged to answer that no Irish jury
would convict on such evidence. The attempt would
end in disgrace.” Jackson himself could be con-
victed ; but about this, too, there was difficulty, for
Cockayne had disappeared. Knowing that his life
would not be safe in Dublin for an hour, he had
stolen away on the instant that the mine was ex-

ploded, and was again in London.

1 Hamilton Rowan here disap-
pears from the story. He went to
America, and was condemned in his
absence for treason. Fitzgibbon,
however, interfered to save his large
estates for his family, and in 1799,
when the rebellion was over, pro-
mised to procure his pardon. F'itz-

He was found

gibbon died before the promise
could be redeemed, but he left it in
charge to Castlereagh’s care. In
1805 the pardon was made out, and
Rowan returned to Ireland, where
he lived quietly the rest of his life.

* ‘Westmoreland to Dundas,
May 12.’

119

CHAP.
Il.

Se
1794.

120

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

—~—— terror, and could not be moved. At length, but
4,

not till after a year’s delay, he was carried over and
kept under guard, and in April 1795 Jackson was
brought to the bar. His trial was the first of the
list in which Curran was to earn immortality as
the advocate of misguided patriots. Curran, George
Ponsonby, MacNally, T. Emmett, Guinness, all the
strength which Irish Liberalism could command, was
enlisted in the prisoner’s service. Curran’s skill in
torturing informers was as striking as his eloquence.
He stretched Cockayne as painfully as ever the
rackmaster of the Tower stretched a Jesuit. He
made him confess that he had been employed by
Pitt. He showed that if Jackson was a traitor to the
State, Cockayne was a far blacker traitor to the
friend who trusted him. Lord Clonmel, who pre-
sided, explained to the jury that if they disbelieved
Cockayne the case must fall. But Jackson’s guilt
was too patent to leave excuse for doubt. The trial
lasted till four in the morning, but the jury required
but half-an-hour to consider their verdict. A remand
was ordered for four days, at the end of which the
prisoner was to be brought again to the bar to receive
sentence. Irish history is full of melodrama, but
never was stranger scene witnessed in a court of jus-
tice than when Jackson appeared again. It was April
30, 1795. On his passage through the streets in a
carriage he was observed to be deadly pale; once he
hung his head out of the window and was sick. The
crowd thought he was afraid. At the bar he could
scarcely stand; and Lord Clonmel seeing his wretched
state, would have hurried through his melancholy
office. The prisoner was told to raise his hand. He

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

lifted it feebly and let it fall. He was called on to

121

CHAP.

IL.
say why sentence should not be passed against him, ——-~—

He could not speak. Clonmel was pr Beceding! when
first Curran and then Ponsonby reac with
points of form. As Ponsonby was speaking Jackson
fell forward over the bar. The windows were thrown
open. It was thought that he had fainted. The
attendants caught him, and he sank back into a chair
insensible.

‘If the prisoner cannot hear me,’ Clonmel said, ‘ I
cannot pass judgment. He must be taken away.
The Court must adjourn.’ ‘My Lord,’ said the
Sheriff, ‘the prisoner is dead.’ ‘To escape the dis-
grace of execution he had taken arsenic in his tea at
his breakfast, and chose to leave the world in this
theatric ition

In a note which he had left in his room he had
bequeathed his family to the French Directory, but
philosophy had not entirely stifled the sad voice of
the creed of his earlier age. In his pocket was found
a paper, on which was written in his own hand:
‘Turn thou unto me and have mercy upon me, for I
ain desolate and in misery. ‘The troubles of my heart
are enlarged. Oh bring thou me out of my afiliction.
Look on my affliction and my pain and forgive me
all my sins.’

1794.

122

Vill

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

BOOK Brrore the appearance of Jackson in Ireland a French

—_—_’
1794.

invasion had been contemplated as a too likely possi-
bility.’ There was no longer a doubt that a cam-
paign in Ireland was deliberately contemplated, and
if attempted would cause immediate insurrection. A
powerful party, of whom Burke was the principal,
were for ever clamouring to Pitt that the renewed
disturbances were only due to the imperfect confi-
dence which had been placed in the Catholics, and to
the exasperation created by the repressive measures
of Lord Westmoreland. The Cabinet was modified
in the summer of 1794 by the accession of the mo-
derate Whigs. Portland, Spenser, and Fitzwilliam
became members of Pitt’s Administration. Portland,
who had had experience of Ireland, was less sanguine
than his friends on the good effects to be expected
from conciliation. Spenser and Fitzwilliam were as
confident as Dundas that if the Catholic gentry and
prelates could be introduced into the Government,
the body of the people would immediately return to
their duty. In August leading Irishmen of different
shades of opinion were invited to London. The two
Ponsonbies, Grattan, Sir John Parnell, and others

1 ¢The French will not act with of England to repress. The people of

the desperate ability which they
have manifested on other occasions
if they do not make some attempt
on Ireland.
here, in however small numbers,
they might raise a convulsion that
would require the whole exertions

If once established.

property are well-disposed, but the
lower orders would rejoice in every
opportunity of plundering them, and
revenging what they would call
the cause of their ancestors,’—
‘Westmoreland to Dundas, Janu-
ary 14,’

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

saw Pitt collectively and separately. They found him
cold and reserved, rather looking for their views than
offering his own. They spoke of drawing together
the Protestant and Catholic gentry. ‘ But whose,’ he
asked sharply, remembering the Commercial Proposi-
tions, ‘ whose will they be when they are reconciled?’
‘What did Ireland want?’ he said to Grattan. Her
taxes, in proportion to her wealth, were lighter than
the English; the East Indian monopoly had been
relaxed in her favour. Not a single commercial
privilege which England possessed was withheld from
her. What more would she have? Grattan said she
required the admission of the Catholics to Parliament,
and Pitt let him go away with the impression that
although it would not be made a Government measure
it would not be opposed.

To give political power to men already in a state
of incipient rebellion as a bribe to quiet them has
never, except in Ireland, been considered a hopeful
policy, nor in Ireland has it been found’ to succeed
better than elsewhere. Pitt was thinking of a
Union; and could he have been sure that the Union
could be secured, the venture, though a hazardous
one, might still have been risked without extreme
imprudence: but the companion measure of Eman-
cipation would be almost necessarily Reform; and
Pitt’s ignorance of the country must have been extra-
ordinary, even in an English Prime Minister, if he
could dream that Catholic Ireland, in constitutional
possession of the power which the majority of numbers
would confer on the Catholic party, would then be
persuaded to part with her ascendancy. No one
now can tell what Pitt precisely thought. Certain
only it is that he resolved at last, and that he

123

CHAP.
ae

———
1794.

124

BOOK
WLLL,
—_—

1794.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

brought the King to consent, to recall Lord Westmore-
land, and to appoint in his place Grattan’s intimate
friend, and a most ardent supporter of Catholic
Emancipation, Lord Fitzwilliam. It is certain also
that the appointment of Lord Fitzwilliam was to
imply a change of measures, an attempt of some
kind to conciliate, and the admission into the Council
of the leading members of the Irish Opposition.
There had been hesitation and more than one change
of purpose. In August Fitzwilliam told Grattan
that all was settled, that he was going over, as
the Duke of Portland had gone in ’82, with power
to act as circumstances might require. Two months
passed. Pitt was still undecided, and Grattan had
learnt that if Fitzwilliam went at all it would be with
precise instructions, which he would not be at liberty
to set aside.”

The difficulty may have arisen with the King.
George the Third knew his own mind about Ire-
land, and could he have been listened to, would
have made crooked things straight there thirty
years before without Catholic Emancipation. The
resolution, however, was taken at last. Fitzwilliam
was to go, and took the oaths in the King’s presence
on December 10, Grattan being present at the cere-
mony. It was to be presumed from the selection
of a person whose opinions were so well known that
in some degree he was to be ailowed to act on
them. But in detail his hands were tied. He had
desired to dismiss the whole body of the Irish advisers
of Lord Westmoreland as personally hateful to the
people. He was forbidden to dismiss any of them

1 ¢ Fitzwilliam to Grattan, Au- ? “Grattan to McCan, October
gust 23.’—Grattan’s Life, vol. iv. 27.’—Ibid.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

without special permission from England. With
regard to the Catholic question, ‘Lord Fitzwilliam
was to endeavour to prevent it from being agitated
at all. If he failed, he was to use his diligence in
collecting the opinions and sentiments of all descrip-
tions of persons and transmit them for the information
of his Majesty.’ *

The limitation was unsatisfactory to Grattan, whose
dream was to force Emancipation, and by Emanci-
pation realise at last his passionately hoped-for Irish
nationality. It should not fail, at all events, for want
of agitation. Instantly, on the completion of the
ceremony, he hurried back to Ireland. With less
than his usual truthfulness, he made free use of Fitz-
william’s name. He told the Catholics that they had
only to ask loud enough for all their demands to be
conceded, and a committee was organised, on which
were the names of Dr. Macneven and Richard McCor-
mick,” to address Fitzwilliam on his arrival in the
name of the Catholic body. |

Fitzwilliam had misconceived his directions, or
imagined that he had, after all, discretionary power.
Fitzgibbon was too high game to be struck at with-
out preparation; but the first act of the Viceroy on
arriving at the Castle, notwithstanding positive com-
mands to the contrary, was to shake off such servants
of the Crown as had been especially in Lord West-
moreland’s confidence. John Beresford, the Chief

1 ¢This is the account which was Magog, whose religious opinions the
given by the Cabinet in the follow- reader will remember. Macneven,

ing March to LordCamden.’— MSS, | when examined afterwards before
Ireland. Secret. March 26,1795. the secret committee of the House

S.P.0. . . Itmay be taken as of Lords, acknowledged that Ca-
conclusive on this much-disputed tholic Emancipation was never
point. more than a pretence to help for-

2 McCormick was Tone’s friend ward a revolution.

125

CHAP.
II.

a
1795.

January.

126

BOOK
VIlIl.
——

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Commissioner of the Customs, received his dismissal ;
Edward Cooke received his dismissal. The Attorney

_ and Solicitor Generalship were required for George

Ponsonby and Curran; and Wolfe and Toler received
an intimation that as soon as formal consent could be
obtained from England their services would no longer
be required.’ Personally convinced of the necessity
of giving way on the Catholic question, Fitzwilliam
naturally found the agitation irresistible which Grat-
tan had excited. Society was disorganised, respect
for law destroyed, life and property totally without
protection. The country would be uninhabitable
without the instant enrolment of a constabulary and
ayeomanry cavalry; but then a local force must neces-
sarily be composed of Catholics, and Fitzwilliam had
discovered that they could not be trusted with arms
till the last of their political disabilities had been re-
moved.

The first argument for admitting the Catholics to
the Constitution had been their approved loyalty.
Now the argument was their disloyalty, which no
other remedy would remove. Yet so satisfied was
Fitzwilliam with the force of his reasons, that he
forgot or set aside his instructions. Instead of col-
lecting opinions from persons of different views, and
forwarding them for consideration of the Cabinet, he
informed Portland, within a few days of his arrival,
that delay was impossible, and that unless he was
positively forbidden he should act on his own judg-
ment.

‘I distinctly for myself say,’ he wrote, ‘that not
to grant cheerfully on the part of Government all

1 < Wolfe was to be pacified by —‘ Fitzwilliam to the Duke of
the grant of a peerage to his wife.’ Portland, January 8.’ S. P. O.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

127

the Catholics wish, will not only be exceedingly cuap.
impolitic, but perhaps dangerous. The disaffection ee

among the lower orders is universal. Though the ,

violences now committing are not from political
causes, but the outrages of banditti, they are fostered
by that cause. The higher orders are firmly to be
relied on ; the wealthy of the second class hardly less
so, because they are fearful for their property; yet
the latter at least have shown no forwardness to
check these outrages, and this can only arise from
there being something left which rankles in their
bosoms . . . Don’t delay to speak with Pitt on the
subject. If I receive no peremptory directions to the
contrary, I shall acquiesce with a good grace, to
avoid the appearance of hesitation. Even the appear-
ance will produce incalculable mischief—the loss of
confidence of the Catholics, and the giving rise to a
Protestant cabal. . . We know it must come sooner
or later. Delay will only make ue Catholics useless
in the interval, if not dangerous.’

Fitzwilliam had landed on the 4th of January. Ten
days had sufficed to work so strong a conviction, that
even the Cabinet was not to be allowed time for
reflection. The Catholics were to be admitted into
an Irish Parliament under conditions which must
almost immediately give them an enormous prepon-
derance, because they would no longer be loyal sub-
jects of the Crown under other conditions. ‘To such
an attitude had concession brought the three million
loyal hearts and hands who in the American war,
when the penal laws were at their height, had laid
themselves at the feet of the best of kings.

1 ¢ Fitzwilliam to Portland, January 8 and 15.’ Abridged.

1795.

anuary.

1795.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Parliament opened on the 22nd. Fitzwilliam did
not venture to fly so directly in the face of his orders
as to recommend the Catholic claims from the throne.
The speech was long, pompous, and flatulent, but
was silent on the great subject. Grattan, however,
in the quasi position of a minister of the Crown, loaded
the table with petitions industriously procured by his
agents, and announced that on an early occasion he
would himself introduce a bill for the complete
abolition of all religious distinctions. Fitzwilliam
informed the Chancellor that ‘now that the question
was in agitation, he should give Grattan his full
support.’ Fitzgibbon replied ‘fully and earnestly,
stating his alarms and the grounds of them;’ but
he concluded that the Viceroy must be acting by in-
structions, and that Pitt had decided finally in carry-
ing out the policy which he knew to have been for
several years in contemplation ; he said that if Eng-
land chose to have it so, the Irish Parliament could,
no doubt, be forced into acquiescence.

Fitzwilliam implied as little uncertainty in his report
to the Cabinet that he would meet with the fullest
approbation of Pitt. He informed Portland on the
28th that everything would run smoothly.

‘Treland,’ he said—writing, of course, what Grattan
told him—‘ will go even beyond my wishes. We
propose to have forty thousand men in arms, raising
the militia to twenty thousand, and the regulars to
as many. We will send men to England ; you must
send others here, and I earnestly beg that we may
have them... Besides these I look to a yeomanry
cavalry ; but it must not, as I saad, precede the Roman
Catholic business. It will be prudent not to hurry the
yeomanry question; for should the Catholic question fail

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

we must think twice before we put arms into the hands
of men newly irritated, *

The misgiving implied in the last words referred
evidently to the Irish Parliament, and not to any
anticipated difficulty on the part of England. Mean-
while the Cabinet remained silent. One significant
indication Pitt did give that he was not satisfied.
He intimated his disapproval of the changes at the
Castle. Beresford, who had gone to England to see
him, returned to resume his place at the Revenue
Board. He brought back with him an intimation
that the resignations of Wolfe and Toler would not
be accepted. But on the Catholic question the Viceroy
received no directions at all. He had concealed
nothing. He had spoken as plainly as possible of
his own intention to support Grattan, yet week passed
after week, and he heard nothing. Without fuller
knowledge of what had passed privately between
himself and Pitt before he left England, he cannot be
acquitted of culpable precipitancy. As ‘little is it
possible to acquit the Cabinet of extraordinary negli-
gence in allowing Fitzwilliam to commit himself so
deeply if they were themselves still undecided ; still
less can they be acquitted for having kept in complete
ignorance of the contents of Fitzwilliam’s despatches
a person whose consent was indispensable to any in-
tended change.

Grattan’s motion was fixed for the 12th of February.
Perplexed rather than alarmed at finding his letters
unanswered, Fitzwilliam begged him to postpone it,
and again appealed to Portland.

‘T trust,’ he said, ‘you and your colleagues will recom-

1 ¢ Fitzwilliam to Portland, January 28,1795.’ S. P. O.
VOU, III. K

129

CHAP.
II.

———-,-_—
1795.

January.

150

BOOK
VIII.

—_————_"
1795.
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

mend his majesty to permit the matter to be brought to a
point. Equality is already granted in the Act of 793. It
remains to be considered whether the symbol of it shall be
granted or withheld. The peace, tranquillity, and harmony
of the country may now be sealed and secured for ever.
We cannot depend on the affection and attachment of the
lower orders. The whole united strength of the higher may
be necessary to control the lower in allegiance. In the face
of what is going on abroad we must unite all the higher
orders in a common cause. ... Mr. Grattan’s plan is a
short and simple one. First, a general repeal of all restric-
tive ahd qualifying laws; that done, to alter the oaths, that
the people may be made one Christian people, binding them-
selves by one civil oath in a common cause. You will ask
do I mean to carry the principle to the full extent of a gene-
ral capacity for every office? I certainly do, for all not regal
or ecclesiastical. These I reserve, and these only. I would
not reserve the highest office in the State—not the Seals
nor the Bench. To make a reservation would be to leave a
splinter in the wound. Should an enemy land, the safety
of the kingdom depends on the unanimity of the higher or-
ders, and that only—such is the insubordination of the lower,
such their disaffection. These are my sentiments. Lay them
before his majesty, and impress his majesty with the extent
of the mischief that may probably arise by any attempt on
my part, so acting in his Government, to oppose or circum-
scribe the measure of favour to the Catholics,”!

The worship of a formula by modern politicians is
the exact equivalent of ancient idolatry, and is equally
proof against the plainest evidence of sense. A Reform
Bill would be the necessary consequence of emanci-
pation. The peasantry already enfranchised would
then be in possession of the entire power of the State,
and their inveterate insubordination and disaffection
was alleged as the reason for bestowing it upon them.
Unfortunately, it was not only the alleged reason—it

1 < Fitzwilliam to the Duke of Portland, February 10, Secret and
confidential.’ S. P.O. Abridged.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS. 131

/was the real reason. The Viceroy, and to a large CHAP.
extent at least the Cabinet behind him, was possessed tes 0
with the ‘ Irish idea’ that fire could be extinguished A
by pouring oil upon it; and Grattan, who understood
the situation, took care that the agitation should not
slacken. Instead of emancipation, he moved on the
11th of February, as a means of restoring order, for
the repeal of Fitzgibbon’s Police. Bill. On the 12th,
unexpectedly, since it was understood that he was to
apply for a postponement, he brought in his Catholic
Bill, and Fitzwilliam on the 14th wrote once more
with the most earnest emphasis to Pitt to tell him
that the country was on the edge of rebellion, and
that nothing but the Relief Bill could save it.

There are times in the highest affairs of State, as
well as in matters of ordinary personal conduct, when
the weak things of this world are chosen to confound
the wise—when instinct is blind, and simplicity and
honesty have their eyes open. If political ability con-
sists in pursuing honourable aims, and in choosing
means by which those aims can be effectually obtained,
the ablest directions for the conduct of Ireland had
been those which were drawn by George the Third in
the year after his accession. Now at this critical mo-
ment, when the advisers of the Crown were walking
in a dream, and would if left to themselves have
doubtless gone where Grattan pleased to lead them,
the King, whose advice had been neglected before,
chose this time to be obeyed.

Up to the 5th of February, when the Cabinet had
been themselves for three weeks at least aware of
what Fitzwilliam was doing, the King had been kept
in ignorance that any immediate step in favour of

the Catholics was in contemplation. On that day he
K 2

132

BOOK
VITl.

a eee
1795.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

was informed, ‘ to his greatest astonishment,’ that the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland had proposed a total and
immediate change in the principles of government
there, and that on the very next day the question was
gravely to be laid before the Cabinet. With a sim-
plicity equivalent to the keenest satire he informed
Pitt that he could not reconcile himself in such hasty
fashion to reversing the entire policy of the past
century. To be told that former indulgences availed
nothing without consenting further to a revolution,
‘was the strongest justification of the old servants
of the Crown in Ireland’ who had objected to those
indulgences. The course now entered upon must
tend sooner or later to a separation of the kingdoms.
It was contrary to the principles on which the House
of Hanover was invited to the crown. In fact, and
in short, he would not permit the Cabinet to encou-
rage the Lord Lieutenant to go further ‘until the
leading men of every order in the State’ had been
consulted.*

Ten days followed of pain, uncertainty, and, it is
to be hoped, humiliation ; for under any and every
hypothesis the conduct of the Cabinet had been in-
excusable. Private notice, probably, was sent to
Grattan, and led him to the precipitate introduction
of his Bill. It was not, however, till the 16th that
the result of the deliberations was made known for-
mally to Fitzwilliam. On that day two despatches
were addressed to him by the Duke of Portland.
The first, which was intended to be shown to the
Irish Council, was a repetition of the instructions
which Fitzwilliam had carried with him to collect

1 ‘Letter from the King to Pitt, February 6, 1795.’—Life of Pitt,
vol. ii. Appendix, p. 23.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

133

opinions on the probable effects of concession, and CHAP.
to send them over. From the tone of this letter no —~—~

795.

ade , L
decisive inference could be drawn. ‘The second and Febpiiry.

private letter was totally different. The Duke indi-
cated a disagreement from Fitzwilliam on his own
part so total, that the misunderstanding is explicable
only on the supposition that Portland, who knew
Ireland, had been overruled all along by Pitt and
Dundas, who knew nothing of it.

To yield to the clamours of the Irish Catholics,
he said, was the way to make them irresistible and
ungovernable ; must change the constitution of the
House of Commons, and with it overthrow the Church
Establishment. The House of Commons was com-
posed largely of members for small boroughs erected
purposely to maintain the Protestant ascendancy.
Common sense and human nature forbade that these
boroughs could survive the change now intended.
A Reform Bill would follow, and all the declarations
and assurances which might now be given could
not prevent a consequent revolution in Church and
State. }

Fitzwilliam did not yet realise that the Cabinet had
come to an unfavourable conclusion. He continued
to argue as if the question was still open.

‘ You are thinking,’ he replied, ‘ of a union between
the two kingdoms, as a good to be expected from
deferring the concession. Depend on the hope of
that, and it will be the union of Ireland, not with
Great Britain, but with France. You calculate on
confusion arising from which the union will be wel-
comed as an escape. Church and State are safe as

1 ¢Two letters from the Duke of Portland to Lord Fitzwilliam, Feb-
ruary 16” Abridged. S. P. O.

134

BOOK
VII.
SS —._--_—_—"

1795.
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

long as the laws stand. Conciliate the higher Ca-
tholics by concessions, and if the laws are threatened
and a union is necessary to save property, they will
cry for it as loudly as the Protestants.’ *

The uncertainty might have been protracted through
further correspondence had not Grattan ended it by
the introduction of his Bill. He, and perhaps Fitz-
william with him, believed that the Cabinet would be
not ill-pleased to find themselves committed by an
irretrievable step. They had heard probably from
other quarters that the King had interposed, and they
wished to make retreat impossible. They had mis-
calculated the King’s resolution. The step which
they had ventured was unknown when Portland wrote
on the 16th; on the 17th the news arrived in London
that the Irish Government had openly committed itself,
and that ‘the outlines of the intended Bill had been
laid before the House with the consent of the Viceroy,
before an opportunity had been allowed to the Cabinet
of expressing an opinion upon it.’ The Duke wrote
at once, kindly indeed but emphatically, to tell Fitz-
william that there was not a difference of opinion in
the Cabinet on the extreme impropriety of his conduct. ~
He ‘could not repress his astonishment’ that Grattan
should have been allowed to introduce his Bill. He
directed Fitzwilliam ‘ in the plainest and most direct
terms to take the most effectual means in his power
to prevent any further proceedings with it until his
majesty’s further pleasure should be signified to him.’ ”

Five days later he wrote again, ‘ by the King’s com-
mand,’ that as circumstances might arise to satisfy
Lord Fitzwilliam of the undesirableness of his

1¢To the Duke of Portland, 2 ¢Portland to Fitzwilliam, Feb-
February 21.’ Abridged. S. P.O. ruary 18” S. P.O.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

remaining in the Administration, he was ‘ authorised
to resign ’—‘ the manner was left to his discretion.’
Fitzgibbon and the Speaker, the two most vigorous
opponents of Emancipation, were named with the Pri-
mate ‘ Lords Justices.’*

All was now confusion. The most confident ex-
pectations had been excited. The political patriots
and the priests had each regarded Ireland as
their own. The United Irishmen had counted the
one step gained to which the next was to be separa-
tion from England. The peasantry believed that they
had paid their last sheaf of tithes and their last shilling
of rent. At once the cup was dashed from their lips.
Many a mad exploit had been achieved in Ireland by
the negligence or folly of Ministers, but this last was
above and beyond them all. The Catholic Committee
reassembled in haste in Dublin. They again reviewed
their forces and found themselves unequal for the
present to an unassisted insurrection. They deter-
mined to organise. They debated the propriety of
applying for help to France.” Meanwhile Keogh
and Byrne and McCormick were sent to London with
a petition to the King that the Viceroy might remain
with them. ‘The Committee itself passed a vote of
thanks to the Belfast Republicans for their early and

steady support of Emancipation.

1 ¢ Portland to Fitzwilliam. Most
secret and confidential. February
PE ah Sb SAF

**T am informed, through a
channel which has been much re-
lied on in former administrations,
that the Catholic Committee are
forming a select and secret com-
mittee of a few, who in future are
to be trusted with larger powers.
They are to take an oath of secrecy

To Grattan they

and perseverance. It is said that,
on a close investigation of their
strength and influence on the recall
of Lord Fitzwilliam, -they despair
of anything effectual without the
assistance of the French, and it is
seriously in contemplation to send
an embassy to Paris, if the Catholic
question should be lost in the Irish
Parliament.’—‘ Pelham to the Duke
of Portland, March 30,’ S. P. O.

135

CHAP.
I.

——_———”
1795.

February.

136

BOOK
VIII.
ee |
1795.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

voted an address, in which they declared that ‘ Pro-
testants and Catholics were united to resist the out-
rage which had been offered to Irish pride,’ and that
if Fitzwilliam was taken from them, his successor
should be received by the hisses of a betrayed and
irritated nation. Grattan answered that Emancipation
would still pass. It might be the death of one
Viceroy, but it would be the peace offering of another.
He declared that he would himself proceed with his
own Bill, and carry it he would, immediately or here-
after. In recalling Fitzwilliam, Britain had planted a
dagger in Jreland’s heart.!

Parliament, which had supposed itself deliberately
abandoned, was at first at a loss to conceive what had
happened. The Duke of Leinster carried a resolution
in the Lords that Fitzwilliam deserved their confidence.
Sir Lawrence Parsons carried an address to him in
the Commons not to abandon the country. Gradu-
ally it began to be understood that there had been
some extraordinary mistake, but where or how was
unexplained. ‘If,’ said Parsons, on the 2nd of
March, ‘the Irish Administration has encouraged
the Catholics in their expectations without the coun-
tenance of the British Cabinet, they have much to
answer for. If the British Cabinet has assented and
afterwards retracted, the demon of darkness could
not have done more mischief had he come from hell
to throw a firebrand among the people. Let the
ministry persevere, and the army must be increased
to myriads, and five or six dragoons must be quar-
tered in every home in the kingdom.’

1+ Address of the Catholics to Grattan, with Grattan’s answer, Feb.
27, 1795.’—Plowden, vol. iv.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

The opponents of Emancipation made their advan-

137

CHAP.

pe : IL.
tage of the confusion. ‘ May no one, then,’ enquired —-~—~

Sir John Blaquiere, ‘have an opinion of his own on
the Catholic question, without a guard of soldiers to
protect him?’

‘ Are we to listen to such words as these?’ said
Ogle, ‘and are the Roman Catholics to gain credit for
loyalty?’

The temper of men was so excited on all sides,
that the transfer of authority to the Lords Justices
was held too dangerous to be ventured, and the
Chancellor and the Speaker themselves begged the
Viceroy to remain till a successor arrived. Fitzwilliam
was careful to explain that he continued in Dublin
only in consequence of their request. ‘ Apprised as
he was of the sentiments of H.M.’s confidential
servants that nothing short of the annihilation of
H1.M.’s Government was impending by his remain-
ing in office,’ he yielded ‘reluctantly to the en-
treaties of the respectable persons whom’ H.M. had
pointed out for Lords Justices,’ and undertook not to
abandon the Government before the end of the month.

On all grounds the interval of uncertainty was
made as brief as possible. To replace Fitzwilliam
the choice of the Government fell on Lord Camden,
the son of the Chancellor, who was already favourably
known in Ireland, and whose sister was the mother
of Lord Castlereagh. Mr. Pelham, who had been
already for a short time Secretary under Lord North-
ington, was prevailed on to resume duties which had
already made him acquainted with the leaders of the
Irish Parliament. The line to be followed by the

1 ¢¥Fitzwilliam to the Duke of Portland, March 7.’ 8. P. O.

1795.
March.

138

BOOK
VII.

———
1795.

March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

new Government was indicated in the following in-
structions :—

‘The circumstances are so peculiar,’ the Duke of Port-
land wrote to Camden, ‘ that I must inform you of the rea-
sons why Lord Fitzwilliam was appointed, and why you are
to succeed him. As to the Catholic question, it was under-
stood that Lord Fitzwilliam was to prevent it being agi-
tated at all. If he failed he was to use his diligence in
collecting the opinions and sentiments of all descriptions of
persons, and transmit them for the information of his majesty.
Things are no longer in the same state, but our general
directions to you are the same. You cannot prevent the discus-:
sion, nor should I advise you, even if you have the power,
to negative the first reading of Mr. Grattan’s Bill. The
most desirable means by which it can be stopped are those
which will be most likely to convince the better and more
reasonable part of the inhabitants of Ireland that in the
present state of the country the measure only gives them
the choice of evils. Either the proposed concession will
create in the Catholics a power and influence which will
place them above control, or if, as the friends of the mea-
sure contend, it will prove incapable of affecting the civil
and ecclesiastical establishments, it will leave the Catholics
in the state which makes the groundwork of their present
complaints.

‘ You will find great firmness necessary to rally the friends
of the Protestant interest, and give them courage to meet
the question fairly. The divisions among themselves, the
opinions which cannot but have prevailed too generally of
the favourable disposition of Government to the Catholic
pretensions, must all have tended to dispirit and enervate the
Protestants in general. You must, therefore, hold a firm
and decided language from the first moment of your landing
in Ireland, and take upon yourself to give the tone in which
this business shall be talked of by the supporters of Govern- °
ment. Unless it shall be made evident by your Lordship
that there is no difference whatever between you and the
King’s servants on this occasion, and that it is your joint

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

and deliberate opinion that a stand should be made if pos-
sible against the further claims of the Catholics, it will be
in vain for us to look for any exertion, or even for a fair,
unbiassed, and impartial opinion from any individual Protes-
tant. . . . When you have distinctly explained to such gen-
tlemen as you may send to for that purpose the designs and
wishes of the Government, you may then require their sen-
timents on the subject of resistance, and you may state to
them that the further steps to be taken must depend upon them ;
that resistance will be ineffectual unless carried on by
the hearty co-operation of the Protestants; that it is for
their interests you are contending; that provided the great
body of the Protestants will exert themselves in the contest,
you are authorised to give them the most decided and unre-
served support, and make every exertion they can desire
to prevent the admission of the Catholics to seats in the
Legislature.

‘At the same time you will satisfy the Catholics of the
liberal and conciliatory disposition entertained towards them,
to give them the benefit of the concessions of ’93, so far as
their conduct shall render it practicable. You will do this
in the best way you can. Of measures likely to improve
the condition and satisfy the minds of the Catholics, without
endangering the Protestant Establishment, I submit the fol-
lowing, which were the subjects of conversation with Lord
Fitzwilliam before he went to Ireland :—The establishment
of seminaries for the education of Catholic priests; the making
some provision for the Catholic parochial clergy. If any
mode should occur to you for facilitating the education of
the lower ranks of Catholics, to put them on a par with
Protestants, you may be sure of the countenance and sup-
port of the English Government. . . . I recommend these
measures. . . . Should, however, your endeavours prove un-
successful, and should you become convinced that resistance
would be dangerous or ineffectual, even in that case you will
not suffer the measure to proceed till you have represented
to us the state of the country and the disposition of men’s
minds, and till you receive further instructions from home.

‘As Lord Fitzwilliam’s retirement may be attributed in

139

CHAP.
II.

—— —_—’
1795.

March.

140

BOOK
VITl.
—

1795.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

part to the distribution of official situations, I must not pass
over that subject in silence. We wished to unite all parties
in support of Lord Fitzwilliam; we wish to do the same in
support of yourself. But I mean to be understood. The
supporters of Government must do what they profess, and
not be suffered to avail themselves of their supposed connec-
tion with Government to bring forward measures which have
not the avowed sanction of your Lordship.

‘One caution more. You will need all your prudence.
Those who fancied they were about to be sacrificed will as-
sume airs of exultation and triumph little suited to conciliate
those who have been stopped in the career which they had
just entered; and the disappointment of the latter may be
productive of great ill-humour and some violence. Mode-
rate, soothe, conciliate these jarring spirits. We have great
confidence in your judgment, firmness, and discretion.” !

1 ¢Tnstructions to Lord Camden, March 10, 1795.’ S. P. O.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

SECTION V.

PretHam was despatched first to prepare the way for
Camden. At Holyhead he met Lord Milton, who
refused to see him. From gentlemen who had
crossed in the same packet he learnt that Fitzwilliam
‘was unwell and much agitated,’ and that public
opinion in Dublin, though not in favour of the
Catholics, was ‘ against the Beresfords.’ In the ob-
jection to the replacement of John Beresford at the
head of the Board of Revenue, Pelham himself sym-
pathised.*

On landing in Dublin he sent a polite note to
Fitzwilliam, who declined, however, all communica-
tion with him, and sailed the next day. The people
drew the carriage of the departing Viceroy through the
streets to the water-side. The shops were-closed. The
houses were hung with mourning. Before his depar-
ture Fitzwilliam published his own defence in the
shape of two letters to Lord Carlisle, in which he
described himself as a sacrifice to a change of policy

1 He explained his reasons in
a note written from Holyhead to
the Duke of Portland :—

‘Tf it should take that turn, and
sacrifices are necessary, Pitt must
submit to Beresford’s removal. I
am sorry to say it, but I must, on
such a critical occasion, express my
feeling that Pitt seems more ani-
mated about men on this occasion
than he ought to be. I was by no
means satisfied with his conduct
about Beresford when I met him
at his house with Lord Camden. I

cannot boldly defend a job, even in
Ireland. The peace of Ireland is
too great a stake to set against the
interest of any clique. If once the
notion of a trick is entertained, our
task will be a difficult one, for
nothing so excites discontent, and
so soon drives the common people
into acts of violence and despair,
as the notion of having been im-
posed upon.’—‘ Pelham to the
Duke of Portland, March 22, 1795,’
S. B. O,

141

CHAP.
Il.
——,

1795.
March.

142

BOOK
VIII.

ee”
1795.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

in the Cabinet, whom he accused of manceuvring for
a Union, and quoted as proof a passage from a secret
despatch of the Duke of Portland.’
_ Fitzgibbon asked Pelham plainly if he was to
understand that the suspicion was well-founded.
Pelham for himself denied it. He had the strongest
objection to a Union, he said, on account of the effect
which the Irish members might produce on the British
Parliament. If that was so, Fitzgibbon said, Lord
Camden would do well to remove public anxiety by
an explicit declaration on meeting Parliament.
Pelham had, of course, much to hear. He learnt
how artificially the Emancipation question had been
forced forward by Grattan’s agitation. The Catholics,
‘if they had not been invited to come forward, were
very willing to have remained quiet.’ He was shown
an inflammatory letter from Burke declaring that the
Catholics must have Emancipation, that Parliament
would be disgraced by postponing it, and that Eng-
land some day would gain popularity at the Protes-
tants’ expense by promoting it. |
‘The evil of all this,’ said Pelham, ‘is the general
mistrust of English Government, and the advantage
given to the disaffected, who represent the connection
with Great Britain as the source of all the evils that

attend the country . .

1 ¢The letters were distributed
among Lord Fitzwilliam’s friends,
and are now in general circulation.
One passage is much talked of here.
It is a quotation from a confidential
despatch from your Grace, in which
you say that deferring this question
would be the means of doing a
greater service to the British em-
pire than it has been capable of re-
ceiving since the Revolution. The

The people have been

construction put on these words by
many people (though falsely, in my
opinion) is that the intention of
ministers was to keep the Catholic
question alive, and in suspense, till

peace, and then employ it as a

means of forming a union between
the two countries.’—-‘ Pelham to the
Duke of Portland, March 80. Se-
cret.’ 93,9),

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS,

brought forward so often as the instrument of inti-
midation, and the Government has yielded so readily,
that they naturally think that they have an adverse
interest, and that they have the means of carrying
anything.’ *

Lord Camden followed in a week. He landed at
Blackrock on the 31st of March. The streets were
quiet as he entered Dublin. At the Castle he was
sworn in as usual by the Lords Justices. His arrival
became known during the ceremony, and as the
Lords Justices drove away when it was over they
were received at the gates by a dense and angry
crowd. Stones were thrown at the Primate’s car-
riage. Fitzgibbon, who was an object of far more
serious hatred, was attacked by a knot of well-
dressed, dangerous-looking men, who evidently meant
mischief. The coachman lashed his horses and broke
through them. They made for his house in Ely
Place by a short cut, and were there before him.
As he drove up heavy paving-stones were flung
through the carriage window, one of which struck the
Chancellor on the forehead. Passers-by, or the police,
whom Grattan had not yet extinguished, gathered
round and protected him from further mischief.
The mob surged off and attacked the Speaker’s
house and the Custom House. They were at last fired
on by the troops. ‘Two were killed, and the rest sul-
lenly dispersed. It was an ominous reception. The
revolutionary politicians, disappointed in their hope
of obtaining their object through the imbecility of the
English Government, evidently intended to show that
if not conceded they meant to take it.

1 ¢Pelham to the Duke of Portland, April 6.’ 8. P. O.

144

BOOK

‘VII.
og,’

1795.
April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Keogh and Byrne returned from London to report
that they had gone on a bootless errand. Keogh,
finding that plausibility and smooth speeches would
serve his turn no longer, rose to the height which
Wolfe Tone desired, and declared in the Catholic
Committee that Ireland must now be roused to assert
her rights. The Protestant peers and country gentle-
men, on the other hand, gave Camden the assurance
which Portland instructed him to demand of them, and
promised their cordial co-operation in resisting further
encroachments.

The ground being thus cleared, and the first effects
of the shock having passed off, the suspended session
recommenced. Lord Camden was not allowed to give
the assurance which Fitzgibbon desired. The Union,
in fact, was and long had been Pitt’s object ; the
Cabinet agreed with him; and Camden, if not Pelham,
was in the secret.}

Grattan, as the father of the independence of the
Irish Parliament, came again to the front. The vic-
tory had been snatched from him at the moment when
he believed it won. He saw his country again about
to relapse under a regimen like Lord Westmoreland’s.
He rose on the 21st of April to move for a committee
to enquire into the state of the nation, and to depre-
cate the return of ‘the pernicious and _ profligate

1¢The arguments in Mr. Pel-
ham’s letter,’ Portland wrote to
the Viceroy, ‘ biassed the opinions
of the Cabinet against his making
any speech at all.’ The Duke said
he was prepared for the construction
which would be placed upon his
words. The Secretary must neither
avow nor disavow it. The private
correspondence between men in

public employment ought to be
kept religiously secret, and Mr.
Pelham was not to allow himself
to be betrayed into explanations.
He was rather ‘to enter his solemn
protest, once for all, against any
reference to information of so deli-
cate and sacred a nature.’—‘ Port-
land to Camden, April 13. Private
and secret.’ 8S. P. O.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

system’ which had made Ireland a disgrace before the
world. He had been reproached with the violence of
his language in replying to the address of the Catholic
Committee. He protested that he had said nothing ‘ so
blasted as the horrid declaration, worthy of the cor-
rupt lips of a herald of profligacy, that certain parlia-
mentary provisions were defensible or expedient to
purchase the members of the House.’ He reasserted
that the recall of Fitzwilliam was a dagger planted
in the Irish heart. He stood in his place to meet
inquiry and confront his enemies.

The mob in the galleries shouted applause, but the
House, relieved from fear of Pitt, had regained its
courage. Mervyn Archdall said calmly that Lord
Westmoreland had done more for Ireland than all
the Viceroys from Strafford to Fitzwilliam. With
robust sense he denounced the word Emancipation as
applicable to the Catholics. ‘ Emancipation meant
that a slave was set free. The Catholics were not
slaves. Nothing more absurd had ever been said
since language had been abused for the delusion of
mankind.’

Forcing a division, Mr. Grattan found himself in
a minority of more than a hundred. On the 24th
Pelham introduced a proposal for the establishment
of a Catholic college. It was opposed by the
Patriots, partly because it might allay the sense of
disappointment which they desired to exasperate—
partly as tending to divide the Catholics and Pro-
testants, whom they wished to combine in the interest
of a common nationality... The Government carried

1 ‘Grattan presented a petitionin He set forth “ the inexpedience of
opposition “from his majesty’s Ro- _ establishing an educational institu-
man Catholic subjects of Ireland.” _ tion from which Protestants should

VOL, III. L

145

CHAP,

—$
1795.
April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

their point without difficulty, and an Act was passed
for the foundation and endowment of a Catholic
academy, which has since become known as May-
nooth." atcha
The battle had still to be fought over the Emanci-
pation Bill. Grattan had announced that he should
persist with it. It had been read a first time on the
24th of April without opposition, as the Cabinet had
directed. On the 4th of May it came on a second
time. The debate lasted through a long May day,
through the night, and till ten o’clock the following
morning. The arguments of the advocates and the
opponents, with the light on them of eighty years’
experience, can still be read without fatigue.
‘History,’ said the Solicitor-General (Toler), in
rising to move the rejection of the Bill, ‘ shows that
we cannot allow an imperium in imperio or that rival
and sovereign authority which the Roman Catholic

be excluded, inasmuch as it tended
to perpetuate the line of religious
separation.”

Strongly advocating mixed edu-
cation, the petitioners said, that
‘when the youth of both religions
were instructed together in the
branches of education which were
common to all, their peculiar tenets
would afterwards be no hindrance
to a friendly intercourse in life.”
The Catholics, having been already
admitted to Trinity College, ‘saw
with deep concern the principles of
separation and exclusion revived
and re-enacted.” ’— Parliamentary
Debates, April 29, 1795,

This petition has been sometimes
referred to as an evidence of the pre-
sence of large-minded and liberal
sentiment ina part of the Catholics
of Ireland at the end of the last

century. The Catholic spirit.is no
doubt more modest and tolerant
when held in subjection, and be-
comes arrogant and encroaching
when indulged. But this petition,
and Grattan’s connection with it,
had nothing to do with liberal sen-
timent.

The hope of the party of revolu-
tion was the union of Catholics and
Protestants. The aim of England
was to prevent the union from being
accomplished. The motion for the
establishment of the college, on one
side, and for the opposition to it,.
on the other, were both exclusively
political.

1 35 George III., cap. 21. The
original design was for the educa-
tion of lay students as well as
priests.

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

Church claims, and wherever it has power will assert.

147

CHAP.

It has cost us dear to shake off that power. I will ~~?

not open the door for its return. The better sort of
Catholics have not lent themselves to this agitation.
Others, not they, have raised an outcry which has
produced outrage in the remotest corners of Ireland;
and has inflamed the peasantry, who have been taught
to think that Emancipation means the lowering of the
price of land. The United Irishmen are the managers
of the Catholic cause. Their publications are bound
up with those of the Catholic Committee. They ap-
peared armed with the insignia of rebellion, parading
the streets of Dublin. Nothing less than rebellion
was hatching, and their plan has ended in the fate of
that man who was buried yesterday! with all the
honours of high treason, attended by the leaders of
that society. I trust the gentlemen of Ireland will
prove that they are not affected by lies and clamour,
and that when the Constitution is attacked they
will say with the bold Barons, “* Nolumus leges Anglie
mutart.” ’

Mr. Grattan had spoken brilliantly as usual, but
with more than usual gesticulation and violence, fore-
telling the ruin of all things if the Bill was rejected.
Dr. Duigenan, in replying, drew a valuable picture of
Grattan’s person and manner in debate.

‘When,’ he said, ‘I see a gentleman equal as an
actor to Garrick, Barry, or Sheridan get up in this
House, horror and dismay in his countenance, his hair
standing on end, and hear him conjuring up all the
hideous spirits of battle, murder, and sudden death as
the consequences of rejection—in solemn tones, from

1 Mr. Jackson was kept in prison for a year, and had but just been

tried,
L2

1795.
May.

148

BOOK
Vill.
Neen

1795.
May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the lowest key of his voice, as if he was enclosed in a
hogshead and was speaking through the bung-hole—
though I admire his ability in acting, yet am I in
no way ace by the unsubstantial goblins he has
conjured up.’

‘Admit the Catholics, said Pelham, ‘and you can-
not stop. Jor myself, I am free to say if Parliament
becomes Catholic, the Church Establishment ought to
be of the same persuasion. The Bill, if carried, must
weaken the connection between England and this
country; and if it have that tendency—I am not
speaking for Protestants, but for mankind—to whom
is Europe to look for liberty at the present crisis but
to the protection and power of Great Britain?’

Mr. Cuffe enquired what benefit had been derived
from the concessions made already. The Bill of 92
was followed by the alliance of the Catholics and Re-
publicans. Those who formerly came to them as
suppliants came now as swaggering bullies.

Sir Edward Newenham said, like Sir Robert Peel
after him, that ‘religious equality in Ireland was im-
possible. There must be either a Popish ascendency
or a Protestant ascendency. As little could the
Ethiopian be washed white as the Church of Rome
taught to endure an equal in power.’

Sir Hercules Langrishe, on the other hand, main-
tained, in modern style, ‘that the days of restraint
were passed.’ ‘ Reason, persuasion, benevolence, ex-
tinction of prejudices, were the weapons which should
now be relied on. ‘The Pope was an inoffensive, un-
aspiring prince, defending himself feebly against
French infidelity. That the British connection would
be endangered by the admission of the Catholics to
the Constitution was a dream.’

‘Adopt the measure,’ argued Sir George Knox,

_THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

‘and we shall liberalise the Catholic gentry. They
will see that their property, their liberty, their
lives, depend on the connection with Great Britain.
The Catholic gentleman is not so silly or so light as
to sacrifice the Constitution to a few ignorant priests.
Rather taking in view the spirit of the times, the
Catholic gentlemen, already more than half Protes-
tants, will bring up their children to a conformity
which opens to them the profits of the Church.’

‘ Where is the Papal power ?’ asked Mr. Osborne?
‘Does a shadow of it exist to give hope to the greatest
bigot of the Popish persuasion, or alarm to the greatest
bigot of ours ?’

George Ponsonby accused the Protestant speakers
of charging the Catholics with opinions which no man
in his senses could entertain. The Catholics did not
think Protestants would be damned for not belonging
to the Church. Dr. Troy! didn’t think so. Dr. Troy
knew well he would as soon be damned for riding on
horseback. ‘The Pope! Were they afraid of the
Pope? ‘The Pope was the only man in Europe of
whom no one was afraid, and who was afraid of
everybody.’

Narrow-minded Protestant prejudice was keener-
sighted than modern enlightenment. Grattan, too,
was as far astray as Ponsonby; not, indeed, blinded,
like his friend, by the flatulent conceit of liberalism,
but by the instinctive and indelible longing of an
Irish patriot for the humiliation of Great Britain.

‘The English Ministers,’ he said scornfully, ‘ op-
pose this Bill.’ ‘Will they, after losing Holland,
losing Brabant, losing a great part of Germany, losing
the terrors of the British name—will they reject the

1 The Catholic Archbishop of Dublin.

149

CHAP,
II.

— —-
1795.

May.

150

THE. ENGLISH IN. IRELAND.

Book Catholics of Ireland? Will they, after losing America,

VIII.

——— with an increase of debt of two hundred millions,

1795.
May.’

with a new Republican empire rising upon them—
dreadful from its principles, its power, and its vic-
tories — will they reject the Catholics of Ireland ?
Have they left themselves room for internal proscrip-
tion, for eternal persecution, for tyranny under the
mask of religion? Have they left enough of terri-
tories to proscribe three-fourths of this island, and a
fourth of their empire? ‘To what allies have the
Ministry resorted, that they would exclude the Irish
Catholics? Are not their armies mostly Catholic? Is
not your militia mostly Catholic? Is not a good por-
tion of their seamen Catholic? Are not the confe-
derate princes Catholic?’

The debate excited little interest out of doors. The
agitators knew that the Bill would be lost, and with
a spirit which revealed the value of their protests of
loyalty, were already busy with other and darker me-
thods.! The usual crowd was absent from the galleries.
No angry mob thronged the doors of the Parliament
House. Still speaker followed speaker, as if every
member desired to relieve himself of the burden of
his emotions. Curran rose at six in the morning,
with the May sun shining through the windows on
the weary assembly. Sir John Blaquiere spoke at
ten. The Attorney-General wound up the discussion
with a few vigorous words, and the question of Ca-
tholic Emancipation was dismissed from the Ivish
Parliament, to be raised again as opportunity offered
for purposes of faction, but never more with serious
prospect of acceptance, as long as Ireland had a
separate constitution. :

1 ‘Camden to Portland, May 5.’

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS. ‘bd

SECTION VI.

REBELLION was now a question of time, and under cHAP.
one condition might become seriously formidable. ee
The Northern Presbyterians had not revenged them- i
selves on extortionate landlords and insolent church-

men by house burning and midnight murder. They

had none the less resented the distrust which had
deprived them of their civil rights, and the rapacity

which had stolen the profits of their industry. They

had been American in the war of Independence. They

had made the strength of the Volunteers, and at the

outset the same instinct had led them to sympathise

with the French Revolution. Could Wolfe Tone make

his alliance a reality, could the artisans and farmers

of Antrim, and Down, and Londonderry be induced

as a body to combine in earnest with the disaffected
Catholics, the tenure of the administration at the
Castle might be precarious indeed. At one time the

union appeared to have been completed, but the phe-
nomena of 1641 were repeating themselves. The
Ulster Puritans had then combined with the Papal

Irish against Strafford and the Bishops. In 1792

they were inclining to protect themselves by a similar
alliance against Lord Donegal and his imitators. From

the first, however, there had been a counter move-

ment, which gained strength as the Catholics became

more violent. Protestant Ireland had not yet for-
gotten the scenes in which the agitation of 1641
concluded. ‘The Scotch-Irish of Ulster traced their

blood to the defenders of Derry. Bitter as they might

152

BOOK
Vill.
Set

1795.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

be against landlord oppression, they had a more
immediate quarrel with the Catholic tenants who
had been intruded into the Antrim farms over the
heads of so many of themselves. The spread of De-
fenderism and the fierce eagerness of the Catholics to
obtain arms aggravated their suspicions, and the
devilish outbreak of ferocity in the mutilators of the
Barclay family had already determined the best of
them to shut their ears to the United Irishmen, and
refuse to help forward an insurrection which was too
likely to turn, like its predecessors, into universal mas-
sacre. The effects of the recall of Fitzwilliam in the
Catholic provinces were still more alarming. The
Defenders, who were all Catholics, fell back into an
attitude of open defiance. Defender lodges were
formed in every county in the island, and the Catho-
lic peasantry were universally sworn in. The black-
smiths went to work to hammer pikes. Private
houses were again entered in search of guns and
muskets. ‘Two thousand stand of arms were taken in
Roscommon alone. In Longford in eight months
there were one hundred and fifty-seven robberies and
murders. Stray parties of militia were set upon and
plundered. A revenue officer and nine men were
waylaid and killed, and the bodies were horribly mu-
tilated.' A deadly and determined spirit was silently
spreading, to which even the well-affected did not
dare to refuse obedience. Servants left their places
with tears in their eyes, telling their employers they
were afraid to remain with them.

These symptoms were frightfully suggestive. The

1 ¢ Pelham to the Duke of Port- warded by Lord Camden, May
land, April 27.’ ‘Account of the 1795,’ S. P.O.
insurrection in Roscommon, for-

THE FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

153

massacre of 1641 had not yet been resolved into a cwap.
legend by steady lying and sentimental credulity. —“"_

It remained in the memory of every Irish Protestant
a definite and dreadful fact, which might recur if
opportunity served; in Armagh’ and Antrim es-
pecially the small Protestant farmers combined, in
fear and exasperation, to disarm in time the Catholics
settled among themselves; and at last, when nothing
else would serve, to expel them out of Ulster and
force them to return into the South. The friends of
liberty made the air ring with eloquent shrieks. Pro-
testant girls might be ravished. Protestant farmers
and gentry might be murdered. No matter. It was
but punishment overtaking tyranny. When a Catholic
was injured by a Protestant, the very heart of huma-
nity was invited to bleed. To such persons it did not
occur to enquire why the Catholics, who were forbid-
den to possess arms, were in such haste to obtain
them. But the question occurred very strongly to
the Protestants, in the midst of whom these persons
were living. When they found and felt that they
were in the midst of a conspiracy which was enve-
loping the island, they resolved naturally that they
would not be caught sleeping a second time. If they
were rough, violent, and unscrupulous, the blame
lay most with those who had brought Ireland into
incipient insurrection.

Such a temper was a formidable obstacle to Wolfe
Tone and his friends. They could carry with them
the city mob at Belfast, but Jacobin clerks and
shopboys were poor creatures beside the rugged and
determined countrymen. Many an effort had been
made to compose the feud between the two wings
of the intended army of insurrection. After two

1795.

154

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK years of exertion, Tone believed that he had accom-
——— plished his object. On the 18th of September a peace

1795.

was formally signed at Portadown between the Peep-
of-day Boys and the Defenders, and the hatchet was
apparently buried. But the incongruous elements
were drawn together only for a more violent recoil.
The very same day, Mr. Atkinson, one of the Protes-
tant subscribers, was shot at. The day following a
party of Protestants were waylaid and beaten. On
the 21st both parties collected in force, and at a vil-
lage in Tyrone, from which the event took the name
by which it is known, was fought the battle of the
Diamond.. The Protestants won the day, though far
outnumbered. Hight-and-forty Defenders were left
dead on the field, and the same evening was estab-
lished the first lodge of an institution which was to
gather into it in succeeding years all that was best
and noblest in Ireland. The name of Orangemen
had long existed. It had been used by loyal Protes-
tants to designate those of themselves who adhered
most faithfully to the principles of 1688. Threatened
now with a general Catholic insurrection, with the
Executive authority powerless, and determined, at all
events, not to offer the throats of themselves and
their families to the Catholic knife, they organized
themselves into a volunteer police to prevent murder,
to see the law put in force which forbade the Catholics
to be armed, and to awe into submission the roving
bands of assassins who were scaring sleep from the
bedside of every Protestant household. They be-
came the abhorrence of traitors, whose designs they
thwarted. The Government looked askance at a
body of men who interfered with the time-honoured

policy of overcoming sedition by tenderness and soft-

THE. FITZWILLIAM CRISIS.

ness of speech.! But the lodges grew and multiplied.
Honest men ofall ranks sought admission to them as
into spontaneous vigilance committees to supply the
place of the constabulary which ought to have been,
but was not, established; and if they did their work
with some roughness and irregularity, the work never-
theless was done. By the spring of 1797, they could
place twenty thousand men at the disposition of the
authorities. In 1798 they filled the ranks of the
yeomanry, and beyond all other influences the Orange
organization counteracted and thwarted the progress
of the United Irishmen in Ulster, and when the mo-
ment of danger arrived had broken the right arm of
insurrection.

1 Lord Camden took the most

unfavourable view of the Orange-
men :— ,

the exertions of Government, the
disturbances neither have ceased
nor diminished. This has been

‘A spirit of another kind,’ he
said, ‘has manifested itself in Ar-
magh. The Protestants in that
county, finding themselves the most
numerous, have been induced to
commit acts of the greatest outrage
and barbarity against their Catholic
neighbours; and, notwithstanding

owing to the magistrates in that
county having imbibed the preju-
dices which belong to it. I have
sent Colonel Cradock there, for
the suppression of outrage and dis-
order, from whatever quarter it
may arise.—To Portland, ‘January
22, 1796.’ 8. P. O.

156

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND

BOOK 7s;

CHAPTER I.
THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

SECTION I.

BOOK ‘THERE are persons who believe that if the King had

rE
1795.

not interfered with Lord Fitzwilliam, the Irish Ca-
tholics would have accepted gratefully the religious
equality which he was prepared to offer them, and
would have remained thenceforward for all time
contented citizens of the British Empire. There are
those also who say that if Fitzwilliam had not been
sent to give them encouragement, they would not have
entertained the hopes the disappointment of which
drove them into rebellion. To the careful student
of Irish history these positions are alike incredible.
The Catholic cannot be content with equality when
he can command ascendency. The Irish patriot sets
his heart on separation from England, and values
political concessions only as advancing his parallels
nearer to the citadel which he means to storm; and
though Fitzwilliam may have precipitated the crisis,
a convulsion became inevitable from the moment that
England allowed the Catholics of Ireland to see that
she was afraid of them. Humble and even abject so
long as she dared assert her strength, they pressed

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

157

on her, when they saw that she was flinching, with cmap.
menace and intimidation ; and as no English states- ——

man could allow himself to contemplate an Ireland
really independent as a possibility, the alternative
was either to postpone the collision by successive
retreats, till the Catholics held the powers of the State,
with a Parliament of their own to represent them in
the final struggle, or to resist at once while the au-
thority was still in Protestant hands, and the Pro-
testant party in the country remained unbroken.
The Cabinet, with a European war upon their hands,
and themselves embarrassed with the new theories of
constitutional liberty, preferred the first. The King,
governed by what are called prejudices, adhered to
conclusions formed by intelligent statesmen of past
generations, and based on the experience of centuries,
too late to prevent a rebellion, not too late, however,
to prevent it from assuming the dimensions of 1641
or 1690.

Had the Catholic Committee been wise in their
generation, they would have concealed the hollowness
of those professions of loyalty on which they had
demanded admission to the constitution. They made
haste, as if on purpose, to show how correctly George
the Third had estimated their character. The Catholic
bishops and peers retired from the front, affecting to
deprecate consequences which they could no longer
avert. The revolutionary part of the Committee gave
their hands finally to Wolfe Tone and his Jacobin
confederates; the two armies, the Catholic Defenders
and ‘ the National Guards’ of Belfast and Dublin,
were amalgamated into a common force, and the
cause of Catholic Ireland became the cause of France
and liberty.

1795

158

BOOK,

ee eae
1795.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The Catholic Committee met'for the last time to
hear the report of its delegates from England. In the
speeches on that occasion, which were published in the
Catholic newspapers,? the war of England against
France was described as an impious conspiracy against
freedom, and the Irish soldiers and sailors in the
Crown service were invited to desert their colours.
The victories of England were described as public
calamities at which Irishmen should rather weep than
rejoice. Keogh informed the committee that it would
meet no more as a separate body. The Catholics
were identified thenceforward with the Protestants
of Belfast, and their common action would be guided
by a common directory.

The first essential was to inform France that Ire-
land was at her service. Jackson, the French emis-
sary, was buried with public honours. Wolfe Tone,
the genius of Irish revolution, came again out of
obscurity to the front. After the apparent satisfaction
with which the Catholics had accepted the concessions
of 793, Wolfe Tone had despaired of them and de-
spaired of his country. He had been cautious of
committing himself with Jackson, whom he suspected
to be an emissary of Pitt. On Rowan’s flight he
went to Beresford, told him what he knew, and de-
clared with ingenious plausibility, that though as an
Irishman he considered that he had a right to desire
the emancipation of his country, he regarded English-
men who took their part as traitors, and would have
nothing to do with them. ‘Talk of this kind would
not have served his purpose could the Government
have made a case to prosecute him. But they found

1 See the speech of Dr, Duigenan, May 4, 1795,—Irish Debates,

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

that even if they admitted Jackson, as an approver,
they could not. make sure of convicting Tone. The
Attorney-General, Wolfe, who was perhaps his kins-
man, befriended him; and as he had confessedly taken
up with rebellion out of resentment. for personal
neglect, there was a thought at one time ‘ of giving
him some employment in the East Indies out of reach
of European politics.’ Like all Irish patriots, he
would have accepted greedily any tolerable appoint-
ment from the Government which he had been exe-
crating. But they changed their minds. They allowed
him, as he said, ‘ to withdraw his head, like the crane
in the fable, from the jaws of the wolf.’ They spared
him prosecution, and they accepted an easy promise
from him to go to America at his early convenience.
He lingered on to see the issue of Jackson’s trial. Had
Fitzwilliam remained in office, his connection with
Jackson would have. been forgotten, and he would
perhaps have been taken into employment at home.'
On Fitzwilliam’s fall, prudence called on him to de-
part, and as events were turning out, his journey
could be made supremely opportune. He had bound
himself to go to America. He had not undertaken
to remain there. He proposed to his friends, Keogh
and McCormick, that from America he should return
at once to Paris, and invite the Directory to send a
force for their deliverance.

‘T received, as I expected,’ he said, ‘ the most cor-

1 He says that overtures were
made to him, but that he declined
to connect himself with a party
whom he mistrusted. ‘The Whigs,’
he adds, ‘ were angry at his refusal,
and might have been inclined to
win credit for their moderation by

making a victim of a Republican
leader.’ George Ponsonby, who ex-
pected to succeed Wolfe, said,
‘Perhaps Mr. Tone will not find
the next Attorney-General so ac-
commodating as the last,’

160

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK dial approbation. They both laid the most positive
———— injunctions upon me to leave nothing unattempted on

1795.

my part to force my way to France ‘and lay our situ-
ation before the Government, observing that if I suc-
ceeded there was nothing in the power of my country
to bestow to which I might not fairly pretend.’ ?

Empowered to speak as he conceived in the name
of Catholics, Dissenters, and Defenders, he undertook
his memorable mission. Before his departure he spent
a month with his United friends at Belfast—Russell,
Neilson, the two Simms’s, and other enthusiasts now
radiant with hope. Each day in the bright May
weather they had some féte or banquet in anticipa-
tion of approaching deliverance. Finally, at MacArts
Fort, on Cave Hill, the whole party swore an oath
together never to desist from their efforts till they
had subverted the authority of England, and had
made their country independent.

1 Memoirs of Wolfe Tone, by Himself.

~

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

SECTION II.

MeanwuitE the word. had gone out among the
Defenders to resume work and secure the arms of the
Protestant gentry. first in Connaught, and then
gradually in all parts of Ireland, bodies of men, who
seemed to have started out of the earth, were out at
night on the prowl like wild beasts. Houses were
burnt, cattle houghed with the peculiar ferocity which
characterises the Irish peasants when roused to vio-
lence ; the udders of the cows belonging to Protestants
were sliced off. When arms were demanded and were
not delivered death was the punishment. Barracks
were surprised in the darkness. Parties of militia
were attacked even in open day with desperate courage.
And by whom these deeds were done remained for
the most part a mystery. In every cabin the grown
men were sworn to secrecy, and to be true to their
country and to France, and instant and dreadful
justice overtook any miserable wretch suspected of
having broken his oath.

Notwithstanding this precaution the veil was in
places lifted. General Luttrell, now Lord Carhamp-
ton, went down and took command in Connaught.
Informers offered their services, provided their pre-
sence was not required in the witness-box. A priest
named Phillips ‘ caused himself to be made a De-
fender with a view of giving information.’! Others
came ‘ whose names the Viceroy dared not place on

1 ‘Camden to Portland, July 29, 1795,’
VOL. III. M

161

162

BOOK
on.
———__

1795.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

paper.’ With the help of these men Carhampton
was able to arrest many of the Connaught leaders;
and legal trials being from the nature of the case
impossible, he trusted to Parliament for an Act of
Indemnity, and sent them by scores to serve in the
fleet.- Thus, amidst the shrieks of patriots and
threats of prosecution, he succeeded in restoring some
outward show of order.?

The spirit, however, was repressed in-one district
only to break out in others under the auspices of the
new organisation in which Defenders and United Irish-
men were now combining. The Committee of Public
Welfare, which had undertaken the direction of Irish
disaffection, consisted of five members continually
changing, whose names were known only to themselves,
and to those through whom their orders were immedi-
ately transmitted. They had no fixed place of meeting.
They assembled once a month, sometimes at Belfast,
sometimes at Dublin, to hear reports, draw resolutions,
and issue commands. Below the General Committee
were the County Committees. Below the County
Committees were Baronial Committees. Below the
Baronial Committees were the Elementary Societies,

1 ¢ Amongthe secret informations
are several curious accounts of the
organisation of the Defenders. Their
central lodge was at Armagh, with
lodges affiliated through the four
provinces. They were all Catholics,
yet all Jacobins or Fifth Monarchy
men, believing that “ all men were
equal, and that there was no King
but the Almighty.” The immediate
object was a union between Ireland
and France. The “Cavan Cate-
chism” ran :—

‘The French Defenders will up-

hold the cause ;

The Irish Defenders will pull
down the British laws.”
‘Another catechism was found
on a man who was hanged at Car-
rick:—“ Are you concerned ?—I
am. To what?—To the National
Convention. What do you design
by that cause?—To quell all na-
tions, dethrone ‘all kings, and plant
the true religion that was lost at
the Reformation. Who sent you?
—Simon Peter, the Head of the
Church.” ’ — Irish MSS. 17985.
Se ey OF

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

163

each containing eighteen members and’ no more, one rie

or more of whoth were to be found in every town in
Ireland, and at last in every village. Each eighteen had
its four officers, changed every fortnight, and elected
by lot: Each single member contributed a shilling
a month or more according to’ his means. They
appeared under the most innocent disguises, as book
clubs, parochial charity clubs, or .trading societies;
and so rapidly the infection spread through the
poisoned atmosphere, that before the end of the sum-
mer of 1795 Lord Camden was informed that more
than a million members were‘ already sworn.! The
militia were now everywhere enrolled to overawe
them; but the militia being themselves chiefly Ca-
tholics, were objects of assiduous and generally suc-
cessful seduction. ‘The weavers and tradesmen of
Dublin ‘were indefatigable’ in their attempts on the
loyalty of the Irish in the regiments of the line ; and
so energetic was the propagandism, that in August
the more sanguine leaders believed that they were
ready for revolt, and a plot was laid which resembled
singularly the precedent of 1641. The day selected
was the ominous 24th of August. Dublin Castle was
to be surprised. The two regiments on duty there,
the 104th and 111th, were gained over. The signal
was to be an attack on the guard on Essex Bridge and
the seizure of the colours. Camden was to be killed by
the first means that came to hand. Fitzgibbon was
to be hanged in state in St. Stephen’s Green; the
Protestants, according to the ambitious instincts of

1 This must have been an enor-
mous exaggeration. The popula-

number, however, did at last
reach half a million, and included

tion of Ireland at this time was
estimated at 4,100,000, of whom
three millions were Catholics. The

mM 2

almost every able-bodied Catholic
in Ireland,

32
1795.

164

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK the Catholics, who were already outrunning the guid-
—— ance of the Union leaders, were to be driven out of

1795

the island or destroyed. The purpose was betrayed
by secret informers, who were never wanting in Ire-
land. Half-a-dozen of the conspirators were arrested,
one of them a private in the Guards. The incriminated
regiments mutinied. The most guilty deserted, dis-
appeared in the city lanes, and were heard of no more.
Similar disaffection showed itself in a regiment at
Cork, but was promptly quelled. In September Lord
Camden made a progress in force through the South,
to overawe the rising rebellion by a display of power
and justice.

One of the O’Connors had been convicted of ad-
ministering the United oath to a soldier in the garrison
at Naas. O’Connor was hanged while Camden was in
the town; and to produce an effect his head was
struck off and set up on a pole over the door of the
gaol.?

It availed nothing. Insurrection did not gather to
a head, but the elements of it were everywhere.
Magistrates were waylaid, witnesses were murdered,
constables who had been too busy beaten, piked, or
brained. The militia could not be trusted. The
regular army was scarcely in a better condition; and
though its numbers were increased on paper, was so
feeble as to tempt rebellion. The best troops had
been sent abroad. Their places had been supplied by
invalids and Fencible regiments, and even of these,
instead of the 20,000 voted by Parliament, there were
but 10,000 in all Ireland. The country gentlemen,
so forward ten years back in volunteering to over-

1 ‘Camden to the Duke of Portland, September 9, 1795,’

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY. 165

awe the English, were hanging back and ‘ hedging’ CHAP.
against the day of evil. ‘ Since the Roman Catholics —~—
were allowed to vote,’ Camden bitterly said, ‘ the a
gentry canvass for their support at the expense of

the tranquillity of the kingdom.’ ‘ Feudal notions

were passing away. The rights of man were grow-

ing up instead of them ; and the people having seen
England more than once yield to intimidation, were
encouraged to persevere in agitation by experience of

its success.’ }

At the end of September there was a second

alarm. The Castle was warned that an order had
gone out for every Defender and United Irishman to
rise on a specified night under pain of instant death.
Often, doubtless, such stories were invented to mislead
and harass. The present informer was telling nothing
but the truth. Tone’s friend, Russell, excited, per-
haps, by the oath at MacArt’s fort, had urged a
universal insurrection immediately after harvest. He
had been hardly restrained by his more prudent
companions,” and Keogh wrote to America to Tone to
hasten his movements.?

The Cabinet, when post after post brought in these
eloomy reports, regretted, it is likely, the King’s
obstinacy, which had brought the trouble in their
day, which but for him they might have passed on
to their successors. Portland confessed inability to
suggest a method by which the spirit which had been
let loose could be re-chained.

‘Were the country gentlemen,’ he wrote, ‘or rather

' ¢Camden to Portland, Septem- Tone’s Memoirs.

ber 25, 1795.’ S. P.O. ° “Keogh to Wolfe Tone, Sep-
2¢____ to Wolfe Tone, Sep- tember 3.’—Jbid,

tember 21, 1795.” — Printed in

166

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK were the great landed proprietors—an event. impos-
IX.
ae sible to take place—to reside on their estates, were

the parochial clergy more numerous or more generally
resident, were the gentlemen more active, the pro-
vincial magistracy: better filled, the dibos of it
discharged with impartiality, and the. police estab-
lishment made general through Ireland ; were the
wages of the labourers better regulated and paid in
specie ; were the lands so occupied as to give the
landlord an influence over the farmer, and the farmer
an interest in the goodwill of the proprietor of the
estate, then much might be done for the improve-
ment of the kingdom and the happiness of its
inhabitants.’ ?

Admirable Duke of Portland, sitting in his. chair
with his hands folded and mourning over what he
called impossibilities, never remembering, even in his
dreams, that it was the business of him and the
other Ministers of the Crown to make these ‘ impos-
sibilities’ into facts, that the secret of all Ireland’s
disorders was the shameful and scandalous forget-
fulness of duty on the part of every person in the
empire connected with the management of it, from
the sovereigns who had quartered their mistresses on
the Irish revenue to the lowest customs’ officer, who
contrived to be sick in his bed when the Kerry
smuggler landed his cargo.

1 “Portland to Camden, October 13.’ 8S. P. O,

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

SECTION III.

Tres were changed since the Viceroys looked with
dread to the meeting of Parliament, uneasily counted
their resources and compared them with the expec-
tant pack whose voracity they must satisfy or look
for a Short Supply Bill. Tamed out of their
patriotism by the unpleasant outcome of it, which
now threatened their estates and even their lives, the
Irish Members assembled at the beginning of 1796
with but one desire, to strengthen the hands of the
Executive. Lord Camden, in opening the session,
dwelt naturally on the treasonable organisation
which was overspreading the island. Grattan at-
tempted, as usual, an amendment on the Address, but
he was listened to with impatience, and voted down
with emphasis. The House was eager to learn how
Government proposed to deal with the United
Irishmen.

The Attorney-General announced that he should
ask for a Bill of Indemnity for Carhampton and
the Connaught magistrates, to stop impending pro-
secutions.t Further, he intended to introduce a
Bill to repress conspiracy to murder. ‘ Assassina-
tion,’ he said, ‘had become as familiar as fowling.’

1 «Whereas, in the year 1795
several parts of the kingdom were
disturbed by treasonable insurrec-
tion, and the lives and properties of
many peaceable and faithful sub-
jects destroyed. And whereas, to
preserve the public peace, magis-
trates and other officers have appre-

hended and sent suspected persons
out of the kingdom, have seized
arms and entered houses, and done
divers acts not justifiable according
to law, all suits for things done to
preserve the public peace since
January 1, 1795, shall be void,’
&c.—36 George III. cap. 6,

167

CHAP.
a

——
1796.

168 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK Magistrates were murdered. Police were murdered.
———— Witnesses were murdered to prevent their appear-
1°. ance in court, or were murdered after they had ap-
peared, to deter others from doing the same. He
proposed to give the magistrates summary power
to deal with vagrants. He should invite Parliament
to make the administering treasonable oaths a capital
offence ; and, a more considerable and most import-
ant innovation, to make the written deposition of a
witness who might be murdered after he had given
it, evidence to lay before a jury. Asa preliminary
the Attorney-General proposed a resolution that the
present power of magistrates was inadequate to the
emergency. To this one voice only was raised in
opposition. Lord Edward Fitzgerald, with his French
wife,’ were rapidly verging towards treason. As yet
within the limits of the Constitution and in his place
in Parliament, Lord Edward protested against coer-
cion, and insisted that if grievances were removed the

people would return to their allegiance.

More prudent, more plausible than Fitzgerald, Mr.
Grattan made a counter-attack upon the Orangemen.
‘Much,’ he exclaimed, ‘had been said of the Defenders,
nothing of the new version of the Lord George Gor-
don riots, of the bigotry of the Protestant banditti,
who, being of the religion of the State, had with the
oreater audacity committed the most horrid murders,
massacreing in the name of God, exercising despotic
powers in the name of liberty.’ Curran followed,
with the patriot phalanx in his rear, clamouring that
1,400 Catholic families had been forcibly expelled
from their homes in Armagh.

ri
.
|

1 Pamela, daughter of Madame de Genlis and, as was supposed, the
Duke of Orleans.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY. 169

The Government was silent. The Orangemen, ocnap.
however, were not undefended. :

Mr. Verner, a gentleman of the incriminated county,
rose to say that half the stories to which he had lis-
tened were monstrous fictions. ‘ The Orangemen were
members of the Established Church, loyal to the
King, and well-affected to the Constitution. If they
had come in collision with the Catholics in Armagh,
the Catholics were themselves the cause. They had
been robbing Protestants of their arms; they had
been assembling, in their own language, ‘‘ to destroy
man, woman, and child of them.’’ Under a pretence
of making peace they had fallen on the Protestants
without notice. They had been beaten, and had
been beaten ever since, as often as they had tried
the experiment. Of those who had left the country
many had been concerned in outrages, and were
afraid of arrest. Others had sold their interest in
their farms and had emigrated to get cheap land in
Connaught. The Orangemen had been accused of many
crimes. They had not threatened the lives of magis-
trates, or destroyed cattle, or burnt the houses of those
who attempted to enforce the laws. In some instances
they had acted improperly, but not till they had been

‘\ goaded beyond the forbearance of human nature.’ !

In a country on the edge of a dangerous rebellion
a society which had formed itself spontaneously in
defence of the existing Constitution might naturally
have expected encouragement. ‘The Orangemen had
shown no antipathy to the Catholics till the Catholics
had begun to arm themselves in the face of the law.
Experience had taught the Protestants too well the

Sa atininast
1796.

1 Irish Debates, 1796.

170

BOOK

—_——_———]

1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

probable meaning of the universal eagerness for
muskets and powder among those who were forbid-
den to possess such things. If they had taken on
themselves to enforce the law it was because the Go-
vernment was apathetic or incapable, and the Govern-
ment had but to adopt the strength of the Orange
Lodges lying at its feet to convert it into the most
powerful instrument for the repression of disorder
of all kinds. The militia were corrupt, the army
feeble. Of these the United Irishmen had no fear.
The Orangemen they made no secret of their fearing
most deeply. Samuel Neilson, the most determined
and dangerous of the United leaders, told a supposed
confederate, who was a spy of the Castle, that ‘he
was in far greater dread of the Orangemen than of
the soldiers.’ ‘They were very powerful and very
desperate.’' Had Camden bravely made the Orange-
men his allies, treason would have crept back into its
den and been heard of no more. Unhappily, under
constitutional governments spontaneous loyalty is the
last virtue which obtains recognition. The friend who
is a friend on principle can be relied on as a forlorn
hope, however coldly looked upon. The supposed
business of constitutional governments is not to
encourage the good, but to conciliate the bad if neces-
sary by the sacrifice of the deserving. Lord Camden,
yielding to the cant of Liberalism, affected deeper
indignation at the disorders of the Orangemen than
the outrages of the Catholic assassins. He admitted
to Portland that if France interfered he believed Ire-
land to be lost. He had 19,000 militia, but he could
not trust them. He knew that rebellion was in-

1 “Secret Information, July 30, 1796.’ S. P. O.—Irish MSS.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

tended. He knew the leaders, yet he could not act
upon his evidence. He doubted whether any force
which he could raise in the kingdom could be de-
pended on, yet in the very same despatch he took
credit to himself for the zeal with which he was acting
‘against the party of Dissenters named Orangemen.’
‘Though not aimed against the Government,’ he
regarded the Orange combination ‘as more dangerous
than direct conspiracy.’ They ‘justly irritated: the
Catholics,’ he said, ‘and gave a pretence to the dis-
affected.’ }

The Orange disturbances were pleaded skilfully as
one reason, among others, for the powers which the
Attorney-General demanded. The Indemnity Bill
was then passed without difficulty, the Assassination
Bill,? and a third Act of still graver consequence for
the better suppression of insurrections,’? which, if an
Act of Parliament was all that was needed, would
‘have sufficed to restore peace. But, as Mr. Brown, of
the College, observed, the thing needed was not so

1 ¢To Portland, August 6, 1796,’
S. P.O. The nervous anxiety of
Camden to avoid offending the
Catholics was shown curiously in
another instance during the session.
Lord Athlone, the descendant and
representative of Ginkel, had fallen
into penury in Holland. George
III. recommended him for a pen-
sion on the Irish Establishment,
and Camden displeased the King
by declining to propose Lord Ath-
lone’s name. He thus defends him-
self to Portland :— .

‘T will not conceal from your
Grace that political considerations
influenced my opinion. The very
nature of the grant, and the reason
for it, are so connected with the

Protestant cause in this kingdom,
that, although I personally wished
to: show, not only every attention,
but every liberality, towards those
who supported it then, as much as
I do every encouragement to those
who support it now, I yet thought
that in a session where so much
useful unanimity has been*shown,
when the Catholic question ap-
peared to be asleep, it was not wise
to bring forward'a measure which
might have the appearance of a
degree of triumph on the subject,’
— ‘To Portland, March 8, 1796.’
8. P.O.

2 36 George III. 27.

$ Ibid., cap. 20.

172

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK much new statutes as the enforcement of the laws
ee already existing.

1796.

The Act Half was not, indeed, more severe than
others which have since been found equally necessary
to preserve peace in Ireland. The most singular cir-
cumstance connected with it was the surprise of the
Cabinet that such a measure should be required, and
the ignorance which they thus unconsciously dis-
played of the condition into which their weak and
wavering policy had brought the unhappy country.’ |
Pelham replied, with not unjust irritation, ‘ that the
need of the measure could be doubted by no one who
had read the accounts of the machinations of the
United Irishmen, the Catholic Committee, and the
other disturbers of the peace, which had been trans-
mitted by the Viceroy.’ ‘It is the ‘universal opinion
in Ireland,’ he said, ‘that if this Bill does not restore
peace and give the laws and the Constitution the ne-
cessary strength, we must have recourse to the sword.’?

The Act shared the fate of most other Acts in Ire-
land, and remained ‘an absolute dead letter.’? The
magistrates had received ample authority, but they
had not received, for the most part, either the courage
or the will to make use of it. The Parliament sepa-
rated when it had done its work in passing the statute.
The effect of the session was only to define more
clearly the position of parties and individuals, and to
show everyone that to the sword the appeal must be

1¢Of your Insurrection Act
I will only say, that although the
necessity of such a measure is but
too well established by the facility
of its passage through Parliament,
my astonishment at the existence
of such a necessity in a country en-
joying the same form of govern,

ment as this is not abated by the
event.’ —‘ Portland to Camden,
March 24,’ S. P.O.

4 “Pelham to Bp March
317 1S82P20;

3 Report of the secret committee
of the House of Commons, 1798.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

1738

made. The executive council of the United Irishmen cxap,
retorted with a published defiance. Since Parliament Se

had been pleased to threaten with death those who
combined for ‘ the virtuous and honourable purpose of
- liberating theircountry,’ they held themselves absolved
from their allegiance. The revolutionists of 1688
had called in the aid of a foreign Republic to liberate
them from their oppressors. ‘ A more mighty republic
had now arisen, to be the universal friend of struggling
and suffering nations, and to this they would appeal.’ !
Lord Edward Fitzgerald and Arthur O’Connor took
the United Irishmen’s oath, passed at once to the
front rank of the society, and independent of Tone,
of whose mission they knew nothing, they assumed
for themselves the office of ambassadors, and under-
took to open an immediate negociation with the
Directory. O’Connor had been Sheriff of Cork in
1791. He was nephew and heir-expectant of Lord
Longueville, and had been personally intimate with
Erskine, Grey, Sheridan, the Duke of Norfolk, Lord
John Russell, and Fox. The brother of the Duke
of Leinster, and the friend of the great English
Whigs, were persons to whom credence would be
given, and who might be assumed to speak with
authority. Lord Edward had a house at Hamburgh,
where Pamela usually resided. Through Pamela he
corresponded with the many friends which he pos-
sessed in Paris. There was nothing to excite sus-
picion in his going over to join his wife, or in his
taking his friend with him. [From Hamburgh they
went privately to Switzerland, where Hoche met them
by appointment; and the negociation being already

1 ¢ Resolution of the executive council of United Irishmen. Summer
of 1796—Plowden, vol. iv.

174

BOOK
Ix;
——~

1796.

THE. ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

in train, as will be presently seen, through Wolfe
Tone, Hoche held out hopes to them that France
would take up Ireland’s cause—that, in fact, he would
himself at no distant time attempt a landing there.'. .

This secret was well kept. Serious ground as they
had for suspecting both Lord Edward and O’Connor,
the visit. to Switzerland was unknown till the autumn
of the ensuing year. ‘The Government, however,
knew more than enough to show them the problem
with which they were confronted, while they were
utterly at a loss how to deal with it. They had an
army of informers, whose universal stipulation was
that their names should be concealed, and that they
should not be called on to. give open. evidence.
One of these especially, whose name is still a mystery,
was in the closest confidence of the Belfast leaders.
He had been among the most enthusiastic of the
original members of Tone’s society, but he had fallen
into debt to others of the confederates and had been
expelled. In revenge he sold himself to the Govern-
ment, satisfied his creditors with money which he re-
ceived from Pelham, and was at once taken back into
confidence.? Among others he became an intimate asso-
ciate of William Orr, a Belfast tradesman, afterwards
executed for treason, who at this time was a member
of the Head Northern Committee. Orr told him
that everything was ready. Dublin, Cork, and Lime-
rick were waiting only for orders to rise; and when
the word was given the movement was to be universal
and simultaneous. They had 200,000 men already

1 Report of the secret committee saved theirs they treated me with
of the House of Lords, 1798, - insolence and contempt. Now they

4 ‘Strange infatuation!’he wrote hail me as their friend. The money

to his employer; ‘when I would wrought miracles in my favour,.’—
have laid down my life to have ‘——toPelham,1796,’ S.P.0O, MSS,

THE FRENCH AT: BANTRY.

officered in regiments, they had pikes and muskets for
150,000, and more were on the way. The militia were
almost to aman United Irishmen; and in fact, accord-
ing to Orr, they would have.risen in the preceding
autumn but for some differences among themselves.

For himself, the informer thought that: nothing
would be attempted till the arrival: of the French.
The Belfast men, Neilson, Orr, the two Simms’s, the
party who had taken the oath with Wolfe Tone on
Cave Hill, he described ‘as wealthy, wily, avaricious,
tenacious of their property, distrustful of one another,
and if afraid of nothing else, desperately afraid of the
Orangemen, who were. five times. stronger than people
an general believed.’ ‘They had authentic news that
Hoche might be expected in the fall of the year, and
then undoubtedly an effort would be made. If Hoche
came, they were perfectly confident that Ireland would
be a republic before Christmas. The instant that
the signal was given the whole Orange party were
to be assassinated; and the hope and belief of the
Central Committee was that nothing could save the
Government but treachery among themselves, or
twenty or thirty thousand Scotch, English, or Ger-
man soldiers.} |

‘It is my fixed opinion,’ said the informer, sum-

soldier of the 26th Militia. They
McMurdoch had the best

1 The informer, in his letter to

Pelham, mentioned a curious story.
‘To show you,’ he says, ‘ that they
tell me their secrets, here is the
account told me of the death of
Mr. McMurdoch, of Lurgan. Don’t
name it. If it get out, they will
know whence it came, and my life
will be the certain forfeit. McMur-
doch was an Orangeman. On July
12 he and others were parading the
street, and he quarrelled with a

fought.
of the battle. . The soldier shouted
for help. McMurdoch, seeing some
people coming, fled. Delaney, an-
other soldier, came up, and seeing
hiscomradedown, whispered a word,
changed coats, pursued McMurdoch,
murdered him, and escaped on the
trial from a confusion in the evi-
dence.’

175

CHAP,
I.

1796.

176

BOOK

—_——

1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

ming up his general conclusion, ‘ that unless Govern-
ment disarms the militia or lands a large army of
foreigners, the Royal authority will be overthrown.
Were the militia done away with and the Orange
party embodied, they, with their friends, might avert
the blow. As it is now, the Government would be
as safe with a republican army of Frenchmen in the
island as they are with the militia. J asked Simms
what they would do for specie when they had made
their revolution. Send to the Jew brokers in
Spain, said he, and mortgage the estates of the
aristocrats, whose property would devolve to those
from whom it was wrested. Be assured that what
I have told you is true. The original agitators have
been kept concealed even from the knowledge of the
common people. The medium of dissemination has
been the priests, and they have concealed from their
congregations, on whom they have so effectively
wrought, the names of those who have set them on,
merely saying that there were men of influence, for-
tune, and power ready to come forward. The motive
of the original agitators—and I mean by them the
members of the Catholic Committee that sat in Dublin
and many of the Convention that were not on the
Committee—was tocarry the Catholic Billthrough Par-
liament by the influence of terrorism. I do not believe
that they intended what was certainly an object of
the Defenders—plunder and massacre—yet I am well
convinced that at this day, in consequence of the re-
jection of the Bill, there are many who would risk
the consequence of an invasion; and to a man their
grand object is separation from Great Britain. On
this there is no difference of sentiment.’ ?

1 ‘Secret information enclosed by Lord Camden to the Duke of
Portland, August 6, 1796,’

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

That this and similar information which came in to

177

CHAP.

them from a hundred quarters contained the exact a.
1

truth the Irish Council were painfully aware. They
were in the extraordinary position of an executive
administration in possession of the inmost secrets of
an intended and already organised insurrection.
They had the names in their hands of most, if not
all, of the leaders. They had evidence which, if they
could have produced it, would have enabled them at
once, and almost without effort, to have trampled out
the danger ; yet they could not publish what they
knew, and appeal for permission to suspend the
Constitution, for the Whigs in England would have
clamoured that they were seeking excuses for intro-
ducing arbitrary power. Every witness that they
possessed would have forsworn himself if dragged
forward into a court, and thus they were condemned
to sit still, as if enchanted, to watch the approach of
-a convulsion which, had they been free to act, they
could have checked with the touch of a finger ; and to
bear the reproach in later times of having wickedly
encouraged the rebellion, that they might ask after-
wards for a renewal of the lease of tyranny.

To Lord Camden the prospect became daily more.
gloomy. A tree of liberty was planted in Antrim;
passengers on the road were made to stop and touch
their hats to itf and shout for France and freedom.
The militia camp at Limerick ‘ was so infected with
disloyalty’ that General Dalrymple recommended the
dispersion of the division stationed there. A soldier
suspected of giving information to his officers was
murdered. A sergeant of a Fencible regiment was
shot at and mortally wounded for the same reason.
Lord Carhampton had secreted two informers in his

VOL. III. N

796.

178

BOOK
IX.

1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

own park at Luttrell’s Town. It did not save them.
They were tracked out and found dead. So pro-
found and so well-founded was the distrust of the
militia that the country gentlemen applied for per-
mission to raise companies of Yeomanry out of
persons on whom they knew that they could depend.
It was the Volunteer movement once more, but
entered on by men who were now ‘clothed and in
their right minds.’ The Government was reluctant.
Lord Camden shivered at the thought that ‘ he would
be charged with arming Protestants against Papists.’
But ‘in a moment of danger there was no remedy.”!
Permission was given. Loyal Protestant Ireland
drew its breath at last, and flew to arms in town
and country.

The Orangemen, disowned in their special corporate

existence, entered by hundreds into the Ulster regi-

ments. The Corporation of Dublin raised four
regiments of infantry, and four troops of horse. The
Dublin Bar raised a corps. Lord Ormond brought into
the field two troops of light cavalry at his own ex-
pense.” The national press screamed its loudest.
Keogh and his friends applied for leave to raise
Catholic corps beside the Protestant. Pelham con-
eratulated them on their anxiety to defend their
country, and told them that ‘their services would be
most welcome if they pleased to enter the regiments
of their Protestant fellow-subjects ; the Crown knew
no differences of religion.’ The Catholics turned off
in pretended resentment. The movement went for-
ward the more earnestly. In a few weeks more than
30,000 men were enrolled, and with the help of the

1 ‘Camden to Portland, August * ¢Camden to Portland, Septem-
24, 28, September 3. Portland to ber’ 8S. P.O.
Camden, August 29.’ 8. P.O.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

Government stores most of them were armed. The
militia were no longer masters of the situation ;
and with renewed confidence at the spirit which had
shown itself Camden ventured a blow at the insurgent
leaders. Napper Tandy, scenting danger, had fled,
but Keogh was arrested in Dublin; and on the sam
day Downshire and Castlereagh stooped down on
Belfast with a regiment of dependable troops, seized
Neilson, Orr, Russell, the two Simms’s, and five
other gentlemen, and brought them as prisoners to
the Castle. Struck thus on the brain at a critical
moment, and overawed by the rapidly-forming Y eo-
manry, the rebel organisation was embarrassed by its
own completeness, and for many months—months, it
will be seen, in which Ireland’s fortunes were hanging
in the balance—they were unable to rally from the
blow. The Viceroy called Parliament together to
legalise the Yeomanry and to justify these prompt
measures by suspending the Habeas Corpus Act.

The autumn session was made as brief as possible,
for the country gentlemen were needed at their
homes. But though brief 16 was stormy. The
Opposition, who had counted on the agitation to
terrify the Government into conceding the Catholic
claims, were furious at the success of measures which
threatened the reassertion of Protestant ascendency.
They professed to abhor rebellion: that the country
should be kept upon the brink of it was vital to
their hopes, and within the limits of the Constitu-
tion they played upon Irish passion with as much zeal
as the Belfast Committee.1

t <The Opposition are endeavour- _ legal, so it is the most dangerous
ing to inflame the minds of the mode of infusing that poison.’—
people; and as the channel of the ‘Camden to Portland, October 13.’

House of Commons is the most
N2

179

CHAP.
I,

——_-—
1796.

IX.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

An amendment to the Address was moved again

—-— by Grattan, who inveighed, as in the spring, on the

1796.

impunity of the Orange outrages. He insisted that
England should capitulate, as he called it, recall Fitz-
william, and restore peace by abolishing distinctions
of religion. To everyone who desired that Ireland
should remain connected with Great Britain it was
by this time certain that distinctions of religion could
not be abolished there so long as a separate Parlia-
ment sat in Dublin. To propose the admission of
the Catholics under a menace of invasion and insur-
rection was to presume on the presence in the House
of a degree of folly and cowardice which even Grattan
could not believe to exist there. His aim was not to
convince the House, but to inflame the people out of
doors. Pelham told him calmly that his speech might
have come more fitly from a member of the French
Convention, and that the exclusion of the Catholics
from Parliament was necessary for the maintenance
of the empire.

‘Will the Catholics,’ shrieked Grattan in reply,
‘will the Irishmen suffer a stranger to tell us on
‘what proud terms the English Government will con-
sent to rule in Ireland?—to dictate the incapacity of
the nation as the term of their dominion, and the base
condition of our connection and allegiance?’

To this question, ina house of a hundred and sixty-
one members, a hundred and forty-nine were found
to answer yes, for twelve only followed Grattan to a
division.

Undaunted by his friend’s defeat, George Ponsonby
opposed the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act.
‘ The Irish Ministers,’ he said, ‘ were men of vindictive
spirit, and he would not sacrifice the liberty of the
subject to the lovers of vengeance.’

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

The times were too serious for folly. Ponsonby was
defeated more heavily than Grattan, by a hundred and
thirty-seven to seven.

- But the object was the publication of the speeches
in the Dublin journals. Again Grattan brought up
Emancipation, and let loose upon it the torrent of his
eloquence. His motion was that the admission of
the Catholics to Parliament was consistent with the
security of the empire; his argument, the so-called
Liberal assertion that the demands of the majority of
a nation ought to be and must be conceded.

‘It has come to this,’ said Mervyn Archdall; ‘in
1793 the Catholics were to be eternally grateful for
admission to the franchise ; they say now, Admit us
to Parliament, and we will not thank you—refuse,
and we will rebel.’

‘ Mr. Grattan tells us,’ said Dr. Duigenan, ‘ that
if his motion is not complied with, three million Ca-
tholics will rise in rebellion and join the Gallic mur-
derers in an invasion. The agitators in Dublin are
to a man republicans and democrats. The enemy
which we have to confront is hatred to England and
to the principles of the Revolution of 1688. Mr.
Grattan speaks of the people of Ireland as if there
were none but Catholics. Are we nothing, then! we
Protestants? I said that the admission of the Ca-
tholics to Parliament had been the cause of all the
trouble in Ireland from the time of Elizabeth to the
Revolution, and I was called a prejudiced fool. Then
were Burghley, Walsingham, Hampden, Russell,
Somers, Hardwicke, all prejudiced fools, for the
reason which influenced them in England exists at
this moment in Ireland in all its forms?’

Grattan was of course defeated almost by as large
a majority as before. Hven among those who agreed

181

CHAP.
bi
——

1796.

182 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK with him in principle the sense was that his motion

——~— was ill-timed. ‘ The effect of the debates,’ wrote

°- Camden, ‘ was that the question had lost its weight.

The Pay supporters felt the subject languid. The Go-

vernment was on stronger ground than before. The

small minority was to the full as advantageous as
unanimity.’ ?

1 ‘Camden to Portland, October 18, 1796.’ S. P. O.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

SECTION IV.

ArruoucH the Government had collected sufficient
courage to allow the Protestants to arm, they were
still nervously anxious to avoid appearing to distrust
the Catholics as such. Whatever their inward thought,
they chose to appear to believe that the conspiracy
was unconnected with religion, and that the agi-
tation, although the Catholics had been tempted to
join in it, was essentially revolutionary. Keogh was
the only prominent Catholic who had been arrested.
The gentlemen taken at Belfast were Jacobins or
atheists. Lord Camden’s amiable hope was that he
might still detach the great body of the people, or if
not the people, the militia and the soldiers of the line,
from their dangerous leaders, and he became ner-
vously anxious to re-establish ‘ private communications
with the principal Catholic clergy and laity.’ There
was, in fact, but one condition under which the
Catholic clergy and laity would ever really be usefu:
to a British Government. As soon as they had been
made thoroughly to understand that they were sub-
jects of the British Crown, that England was strong
enough to compel them to remain in their allegiance,
and that she would exert that strength to the very
utmost if they chose to play with rebellion, then there
would be no longer reason to distrust them. No
sincere Irish Catholic could ever, as Lord Clare said,
be voluntarily loyal to a Protestant sovereign ; but
he would understand the duty of submission, and the
duty of enforcing submission upon his countrymen,

183

CHAP.
If

—
1796.

184 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK when he was made to see without disguise or cir-

—— cumlocution the nature of the alternative. Neither
Pitt nor Camden could recognise so unpalatable a
truth. The educated Catholic clergy came about
them, soft and smooth-spoken, deprecating distrust,
deploring the prejudices on both sides which em-
bittered every question, and made a mutual under-
standing so difficult. An experience too uniform had
shown that at critical moments these gentlemen had
never practically succeeded in controlling the violence
of their people; it was uncertain whether they had
tried to control it. Yet the Government still listened
to them, and still clung to the belief that they might
be persuaded into lending genuine assistance in re-
establishing order.

Lord Camden was looking earnestly among the
Catholic priests for some one to assist him. He be-
lieved that he had found the person that he wanted
in a certain Dr. Hussey, the friend and corre-
.spondent of Burke, and titular Bishop of Waterford.
Dr. Hussey, in the eyes of Liberal politicians, was
the model Catholic of his time—an enlightened eccle-
siastic, who rose superior to the bigotry of his creed,
and combined the spirit of genuine Christianity with
the cultivated intelligence of a man of the world. He
had been for some time in communication with the
Cabinet on the condition of the Irish militia. He had
affected to deplore the spread of disaffection in the
ranks. He was in England during the autumn ses-
sion, impressing upon Portland and Pitt his convic-
tion that if the Catholic clergy were trusted they
could restore a better spirit among them. He had
offered his own services. So great, indeed, was his
zeal and his anxiety, that he sued for and obtained

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

some commission from the Pope in connexion with
the Catholic soldiers; and in a conversation with
Portland he intimated that his influence would be
more beneficial if it could be combined with a recog-
nition from the British Government, and ‘a commis-
sion as Chaplain-General.’’ Portland enquired what
his Papal commission consisted in. Dr. Hussey said
it was a power to confer on the Cathclic chaplains of
the Irish regiments the faculties necessary for their
functions ; and on this understanding Portland gave
him his commission from the Crown. Thus armed
the ingenious gentleman passed over to Ireland. He
announced that the Pope had appointed him ‘ Vicar
Apostolic over all the Catholic military in Ireland.’ ?
His English commission saved him from risk of in-
terference from the Castle, and suggested the impres-
sion which the revolutionary party especially desired
to create, in order to weaken the Executive Govern-
ment, that England was on the Catholic side, and
disapproved of the coercive policy. His first official
act was to throw an unjust and false stigma on the
Castle authorities, and create a grievance which had no
existence. He pretended to have discovered? that the
Catholic soldiers in the militia were taken to Protes-
tant churches, and were forbidden to attend services of

1 <The anxiety he expressed to
obtain the appointment of Chaplain-
General was stated by him to rise
out of the necessity or advantage
of his being placed in such a posi-
tion by the Government as would
qualify him to dispense or distri-
bute the powers he had received
from Rome to those for whom they
were destined; meaning, as I un-
derstood, the chaplains. Had I the
least suspicion that he would have

made an improper use of these
powers he never would have been
entrusted with either.’—*‘ Portland
to Pelham, November 1, 1796,
opi aay

* Pelham to the Duke of Port-
land, October 26.’ S. P.O.

* On enquiry it proved to be
false. He was totally mistaken.’—
‘Pelbam to Portland, October 26,’
ee Ht Os ;

185

CHAP.
I.

——_, ——”
1796.

186

BOOK
Nee
—-—

1796

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

their own. Had Dr. Hussey really desired to quiet —
the mutinous spirit which he came over, as he said,
to combat, he would have remembered, even if the
charge had been true, that in Spain, as in the Papal
dominions, a soldier who had refused to accompany
his regiment to mass under plea of being a Protes-
tant, would have been instantly shot for mutiny; and
he would have remonstrated quietly and privately with
the Viceroy or the Commander-in-Chief. But the
supreme object of Irish incendiaries, from highest to
lowest, was at that moment to stimulate disaffection
in the army, and hatred against the Irish Adminis-
tration. This enlightened and virtuous prelate, re-
presenting himself as speaking with the combined
authority of the Pope and the English Cabinet, first
invented an untrue charge, and then by letter in-
structed a priest in the camp outside Dublin ‘to
warn the artillerymen against the sin of attending
the Protestant service, and directing them to resist
by force.’ ‘He then,’ Pelham informed Portland,
‘wrote a long exhortation to the Catholic soldiers in
Ireland generally.” It is the most inflammatory and
dangerous production that bigotry could suggest.
He addresses the soldiers in a character which he says
your Grace obtained for him from the Pope. He says
he received his authority from the Pope, and that
the Duke of Portland applied for it.’

Finally, in his character of peace-maker, Dr. Hussey
published a pastoral to the clergy of his diocese,
bidding them refuse the sacraments to parents who

1 Pelham’s secretary saw this better of his prudence, and that
letter. letter I have in my possession.’—

2 «As it was certainly written «Pelham to Portland, October 26,’
with ability, his vanity got the

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

allowed their children to attend the Charter Schools;

re-asserting that Catholic soldiers had been forced to
attend Protestant places of worship, and bidding the
priests instruct them that under such circumstances
they were bound to disobey their officers."

Lord Camden had brought into Ireland, as he
supposed, a serpent of healing. Dr. Hussey had
proved a reptile of a more common type, and had
turned on him and stung him. Under any circum-
stances the eve of a rebellion was not the moment to
invite soldiers to mutiny. His official recognition
by the Cabinet was an additional obligation to for-
bearance. With ingenious wickedness Dr. Hussey
took advantage of the opportunity which the Govern-
ment had allowed him to aggravate to the very
utmost the danger which he had undertaken to
counteract, and exhibited in a remarkable instance
the value of the support which the English Cabinet
was so eager to conciliate.

In the Yeomanry the Castle possessed a force un-
assailable by the arts of priests. Coarser methods
were therefore adopted to embarrass and weaken it.
Countrymen who dared to enlist received warnings
to withdraw, and refusing to obey, were assassinated.
On the 1st of November the Government arsenal at
Belfast was broken into and plundered. Informers
stated that an organised system of murder was set on
foot to terrify the Protestant clergy and magistrates
into inactivity ;* and whatever may have been their
defects when contending in the open field, Irish
1 ¢Pastoral Letter by R.R. Dr. meant to assassinate all persons and
Hussey.’—Plowden, vol. iv. Ap- magistrates who actively oppose
pendix, 109. them.’—‘ Information forwarded by

2 <The principle of the United Lord Camden to the Duke of Port-
Irishmen is to cure, by which is land, November 13.’ S. P.O.

187

CHAP.
i

———
1796.

188

BOOK
TX.

——
1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

conspirators have always been signally successful with
the midnight pike and pistol. The state of Ulster
became so alarming, owing to the compelled inaction
of the Orangemen, that Carhampton went to Antrim,
in November, to apply the methods which had been
successful in Connaught.! But the Cabinet were ner-

_ vous and frightened; Portland expressed a hope that

he would restore order without being driven to acts
of severity.2 Lord Camden said that the Cabinet’s
wishes, coupled with their remarks on the Insurrec-
tion Act, made him most unwilling to resort to its
powers ; but how without severity he was to deal
with murders, threats of murder, plundering and
sacking houses, waylaying and wounding soldiers, he
was for his part at a loss to comprehend.*

In spite of cruisers and coastguard officers mus-
kets and powder continued to pour in, In December
an American brig was seized on the coast of Antrim
with 20,000 stand of arms on board, and a train of
artillery. In significant defiance the confederate
peasants assembled in thousands to dig the potatoes
and cut and carry the corn of the arrested leaders,
and gave their field-work the ostentatious appearance

of military display.’

1 ‘Camden to Portland, Novem-
ber 1.’

2 ¢ Portland to Camden, Novem-
ber 6.’

8 ¢Camden to Portland, Novem-
pee. . Fe U:

4 Sir George Hill describes one
of these singular scenes, in a letter
to Secretary Cooke. Having notice
of an intended assembly for potato-
digging, he took sixty soldiers with
him and repaired to the spot, with
the Sheriff and Lord Henry Murray.

‘ About eleven,’ he writes, ‘we
saw an immense crowd coming
along the hills, from the mountains
which separate the Maghera side
from the Newtown side of the
county of Derry. About a thousand
came to the river which was be-
tween us. Five hundred forded it
immediately; and as they came di-
rectly up to us, we imagined it
might turn out a troublesome affair
to them. We left the military at
a distance, rode up, and ordered

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

Throughout the island, or the greater part of the
island, the people were ready with arms concealed to
rise and fall into the ranks assigned to them under

local leaders already chosen.

Happily for the peace

of Ireland, they had been deprived at that particular
moment of the central authority on which they re-
lied for general direction of the men through whom
was passing the correspondence with France, by the
arrest of those on whom devolved the duty of giving
the signal when the invaders were to be looked for.

them not to proceed. The Sheriff
read the proclamation. I spoke to
them. They remonstrated with all
imaginable cunning professions of
peace and humility. Would we
impede them in the charitable work
of digging a forlorn woman’s pota-
toes, whose husband was in gaol ?
If we persisted to order it they
would disperse; at the same time
begged to be informed if they were
at liberty to dig their own potatoes
on their respective farms. I an-
swered, and they dispersed. We
withdrew a quarter of a mile with
the soldiers. Then they galloped
up again, their numbers being by
this time trebled. We brought up
the soldiers a second time, and gave

them ten minutes to disperse, which
they did. There was no shouting,
no imprecations, no seditious lan-
guage, uttered by any of them.
About half had spades. What
alarmed me most was to observe
the calmness observed by people as-
sembled in such multitudes, and
yet acting with one system, evi-
dently under the control of invi-
sible guidance, no leader or heads
appearing. Every man held his
spade like a musket, and seemed,
notwithstanding the humble cant,
to show you, by the manner he ba-
lanced it, and his erect gait, that
he could manage the other as well.’
‘Sir G. Hill to Mr. Cooke, Novem-
ber 14.’ 8S, P.O.

190

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

HO Tue story returns to Wolfe Tone, who was left em-
—— barking at Belfast for America, after devoting himself

1796

anew to the cause of his country at MacArt’s fort.
His companions on that remarkable occasion were
now at Dublin, in Newgate. He himself, after a
successful voyage across the Atlantic, arrived with his
family at Philadelphia at the end of the summer of
1795. Here he found his friends Rowan and Napper
Tandy. Here, too, he made acquaintance with M.
Adet, the Minister of the French Republic; and
whether it was from the aspect of a new country, the

advice of Rowan, who had forsworn Irish politics, or

the coolness of Adet, when he communicated to him
his hopes and purposes, certain it was that Tone began
to think that life might have better objects than
making revolutions, and was making up his mind to
a quiet residence in America. He bought a farm at
Princeton, in New Jersey, where he settled his wife
and children. He was accustoming his hand to axe
and plough, and was sinking into useful industry, when
he was roused by letters from Keogh and Neilson,
which told him how fast Ireland was ripening, and
pressed to lose not a moment in bringing France to
their help. Tone’s nature was easily set on fire. The
Simms’s sent him money. Taking his letters to Adet,
and receiving in return introductions in cypher to M.
de la Croix, the Minister for Foreign Affairs at Paris,
he once more committed himself to the ocean, sailed
for Havre, and landed there on the 2nd of February,

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

191

1796. Thence, in high spirits, lively, and jaunty as cHap.
I.

ever, he proceeded to Paris.

Of all the United Irishmen, of all Irish rebels of
whom the history of that country retains a record,
Wolfe Tone is the least offensive. He tells no lies
about himself. He never deals in inflated sentiment,
unless when he confesses to have been drunk, or when
drawing a programme for his society, at which per-
haps he laughed in his sleeve. He hated England
because he considered that England had shghted him,
but he never conceals that he would have accepted
oladly the most common-place employment if Pitt
would have condescended to bestcw it upon him. His
frankness disarms indignation, for he paints himself
as he really was, light, rollicking, ignorant, unread in
everything except in Shakespeare, with a talent for
ornamental writing, which he valued at no more than
its worth, hating humbug and pretence, and plunging
along the career of revolution with a careless impe-
tuosity, more as if he was riding with the Kilkenny
foxhounds than concerned in any serious purpose.

On the 12th of February he was in Paris, the
paradise of republican imagination. Fresh from the
expenses of Philadelphia, he found himself in luxury
which cost him next to nothing. He breakfasts and
dines in the Maison Hgalité, claret and Burgundy
flowing like water; and the enjoyments once the pri-
vilege of the few, now, under the blessed auspices of
the Revolution, being within reach of the humblest. He
saunters in the Champs Elysées, and his eyes glisten
in sympathy with the laughing crowds. At the
theatre the band plays the ‘ Marseillaise.’ The entire
audience is on its feet to join in the Litany of
Freedom. At the words ‘Aux armes, Citoyens!’ the

en eee
1796.

192

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

National Guards deploy upon the stage. The spectacle

rn, e e °
—~-~ transforms itself into a superb revolutionary pageant;

1796.

every heart beats, and with sublime emotion every
youth pants for an opportunity of pouring out his life-
blood for his country. No wonder that Tone, to whom
France had for five years been a land of promise, was
delighted with what he saw, and none the less, when the
papers began to fill with accounts of the doings in Italy
of the young Napoleon. Who could say but Napoleon
might be liberator of Ireland, or if not Napoleon then
Hoche, the hero of Quiberon? He waited on de la
Croix, and presented Adet’s letter. The Foreign Mi-
nister was civil. The Directory had long known that
Ireland was England’s vulnerable side. Their difficulty
had been to understand so singular a people, who in
faith were ardent Catholics, yet in politics were said
to be eager for insurrection. ‘Tone was ready with
abundant explanation. None could speak with more
authority than he. He could say with truth that he
had been agent of the Catholic Committee, that he
was the founder of the United Irishmen, and was in
the confidence of the chiefs of the Defenders. With
less truth, but not without foundation, he assured the
Directory that the whole of Ireland was ripe for re-
volt, except the lords and gentlemen and clergy of
the Established Church. Nor was Ireland all; for
more than half the seamen in the British fleet were
Trish ; half the British army were Irish—the Yeo-
manry not being yet enrolled. England, he could
say correctly, had but a handful of troops in the
island on which she could rely, for the militia was
heart and soul with the nation; and on the first sight
of the green flag every Irish soldier and sailor in the
service would turn upon his officers.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

The Directory, when so flattering a report was

193

CHAP.

brought to them, enquired naturally why, if this was ———

the true account of the situation, Ireland was doing
nothing for herself? The brighter the colouring SF
Tone’s picture the more inexplicable the apathy.

The true answer would have been, not that Tone
had given an inaccurate account of the disposition of
his countrymen, but that while no people talked more
passionately of their nationality, no people also had
so few of the virtues on which national life depends.
The Irish had no coherence, no fortitude, no power of
self-sacrifice. The patriotism of which they boasted
was from the lips outwards. Even Tone himself would
at that moment have become a faithful subject of
King George if Pitt had offered him a writership in
India.

To the French Government he could but insist that
the fact was as he described it. If France would send
help, the Irish would rise effectually. If left to
themselves, their local and partial insurrections would
be easily and savagely repressed. The chain would
only be drawn tighter, and the common enemy of
Ireland and France would be stronger than ever.

De la Croix enquired if it would not be sufficient to
supply arms. Tone said it would not. Would two
thousand men be sufficient? Tone told him he might
as well send twenty. ‘Two thousand men would be
overwhelmed before the people could join them, and
there would be a second Quiberon. This, too, seemed
strange, if the twenty thousand militia were prepared
to mutiny. ‘The negociation hung fire. It had been
conducted so far through subordinates. Tone con-
sulted Monroe, the American Minister. Monroe
advised him to go straight to head-quarters, and

VOL. III. O

1796.

194

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book demand an audience with Carnot. He tells the story

IX.

———"_._ of the interview with characteristic natveteé.

1796.

‘Feb. 24, 1796.—To the Luxembourg. I am a
pretty fellow to go to the Directoire Exécutif! In
a fright—conning speeches in execrable French all
the way. What shall I say to Carnot? Whatso-
ever the Lord putteth in my mouth that surely
shall I utter. Pluck up my spirits. Mount the
stairs like a lion. Request to see Carnot. Clerk
stares, but sends me up. Admitted. Carnot in white
satin with crimson robe. In horrid French I said I
was an Irishman, secretary and agent to three mil-
lion Catholics in that country, representative also of
nine hundred thousand Dissenters of that kingdom,
all eager to throw off the yoke of England. He
doubted my numbers. I reasserted them. The po-
pulation of Ireland was near about four millions and
a half. Of these three million nine hundred thou-
sand were for France and against England. He
asked what we wanted. An armed force, I answered,
as a point @appue to begin with, with arms and a
little money. He put many questions which showed
that he had been thinking the subject over. I am to
see him again. Perhaps my abhorrence and detesta-
tion of the name of England makes me too sanguine.
What will Fitzgibbon say now? He used to call me
a viper in the bosom of Ireland. He lies. Iam a
better Irishman than he and his whole gang of
rascals. Jam as vain as the Devil. Allons, Enfans
de la patrie.’*

M. de la Croix now sent for Tone again. The
British navy, he said, was France’s difficulty. But

1 Memoirs of Wolfe Tone, by a February 1796, First
interview with Carnot. Abridged.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

for the British navy sixty thousand men could be
landed in Kent, march on London, and settle Eng-
land and Ireland together. Could not the Irish
seamen, if they were as numerous as Tone said, bring
about a convenient mutiny ?

There was much to be done in that way, as was
found two years later at Portsmouth and at the
Nore, but Tone did not respond. He did not like
circuitous methods. Let Home Rule be first estab-
lished in Dublin, and every Irishman in the British
Empire would then have a centre of allegiance there.
He was impatient to be on the way. Moments were
precious. In a few weeks the Channel fleet would be
at sea. He heard that military camps were forming
in Ireland. A German contingent might be sent.
The British army might be reinforced. A thousand
things might happen if France was long in making
up its mind. He consoled himself by his old
methods. |

‘I finish my choice bottle of Burgundy every day.
Too much. I resolve every morning to drink but
half, and every day break my resolution. I wish I
had P. P. here,’ and then perhaps I should live more
soberly. Oh, Lord! Soberly! Yes, we should be
a sober pair of patriots. It is squires’ custom every
afternoon as soon as he is drunk. Huzza! I hope
to see a battle yet before I die. The French have an
abominable custom of adulterating their Burgundy
with water.’

By-and-bye Carnot bade him draw up some plan,
that he might judge of it. He offered two. The
first, which he thought certain to succeed, would be

1 His friend Russell.
02

195

CHAP.
I,

———”
1796.

196

BOOK
IX.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to land twenty thousand men close to Dublin. The

—_-*_ capital must fall, and the Catholic Committee and the

1796.

United Irish leaders would be on the spot to form a
new Government. If twenty thousand men could
not be spared, five thousand might be thrown on
shore somewhere near Belfast. They could seize
the line of the Few mountains, and the country would
have time to organise before they could be dislodged.

Carnot, with all Europe on his hands, had no lei-
sure to discuss details. He turned Tone over to
General Clarke, an Irishman of the ‘ Old Brigade.’
Clarke, who was a gentleman, and had inherited old-
fashioned traditions, had no objection to an orderly
conquest, but doubted the propriety of letting loose the
ferocious Irish Catholic peasantry. Infinite horrors
he thought would follow unless the mob could be held
in order.

Tone admitted that many shocking things were
likely and even certain to happen, but a massacre on
the most extensive scale would be no more than
retributive justice. No men on earth had been more
oppressive and tyrannical than the gentry of Ireland,
and they and their families would be the principal
sufferers.

Wretched gentry of Ireland! It was for this, then,
that they had armed the Volunteers of ’82, and de-
manded a Constitution at the bayonet’s point, with
Grattan at their head. Like the companions of
Ulysses they had let loose the winds with their own
foolish hands, and were now likely to perish in the
tempest. .

To the apostle of the new creed General Clarke
appeared ‘thirty years behind his age ;’ unequal

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

altogether to the era of the Guillotine and the Rights
of Man.

Amidst these discussions the project of invasion was
-mistily taking shape. Bonaparte’s campaign in Italy
made the Directory sanguine. In April they began to
contemplate seriously sending a fleet to the Irish coast,
and landing arms and cannon. But while the grass
grew the steed was starving. News came of Gun-
powder Acts and Insurrection Acts, and sharp mea-
sures in Connaught, and then of the arrest of Keogh,’
the penitent Gog, just when he had abjured his errors
and was on the right track.

‘That infernal Government of Ireland!’ was
Tone’s comment ; ‘if I cannot prevent his fall I will
revenge it. The Irish aristocracy shall take the con-
sequences. They show no mercy, and they deserve
none. If ever I have the power | will most heartily
concur in making them a dreadful example. Oh,
France! France! what do you not deserve if you
suffer this crisis to escape you?’

There was no lack of will in France; but the
‘Organiser of victory’ had not conquered Holland and
Italy, and driven the Germans over the Rhine, by
blindly rushing on in the dark. Ireland, with its
priests and its patriots, its blazing promises and in-
effectual performances, was a questionable problem,
to be well scanned before it was meddled with.
Again Tone sought Carnot. Carnot told him that
they wanted more information.

Three more entries in the journal record his dreams
and his impatience.

‘May 2.—The Luxembourg. They will send a

1 Keogh was arrested in the spring of 1796.

198

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

trusted agent to Ireland, and will be guided by his

‘koe report. Nothing definite. I begin to fear it will be

179¢

>
).

the backwoods of America again. Delay! delay!

‘June 20.—My birthday. Thirty-three years old.
At that age Alexander had conquered the world,
and Wolfe had expired in the arms of Victory.. The
British fleet is in the Channel, so nothing will be done
before the winter.

‘June 28.—Oh, if the British were once chased
from Ireland, as the Austrians from Milan! Who
knows? But this fleet torments me. Damn them!
Sink them ! with God knows how many admirals!’

No foreign power had ever meddled with Ireland
without repenting it. ‘Twice the Popes had sent help
to their afflicted children. Gregory the Thirteenth
had sent a legate and a few hundred Italians. The
legate perished in a bog; the bodies of the Italians
were buried in the sands at Smerwick. When the
massacre of 1641 restored Ireland for a brief interval -
to the native race, Innocent the Tenth despatched the
Cardinal Rinuccini to restore and reinvigorate the
Church. The Irish themselves made the country in-
tolerable to him. He struggled in vain to coerce
them with spiritual thunder, and abandoned his task
as impossible. Philip the Second sent an army to
assist In completing the destruction of the British
power there, which was described to him as all but
annihilated. The British power proved strong enough
to defeat the Irish, to take the Spaniards prisoners, and
send them home wiser than they had come. Louis the
Fourteenth had taken up the cause with the fairest
prospects of all, yet Louis had prospered no better,
and wearied of his allies after a brief taste of their
quality. The Directory, it is likely, after carefully

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

considering matters, would have decided unfavour-
ably but for the unexpected support which the cause
suddenly received in communications from Lord
Edward Fitzgerald and Arthur O’Connor. General
Hoche, who had been already consulted on Tone’s
schemes, was deputed to meet them, and substan-
tially, as far as concerned the prospects of an Irish
rising, they confirmed what Tone had said. Here
was something substantial. The brother of the Duke
of Leinster, and the heir of an Irish peerage, carried
an authority even among republicans which could
not be allowed to an adventurer like Tone. Their
adherence, at any rate, seemed a security that the in-
tended rebellion would not be a simple rising of a
savage peasantry against the wealthy and the educated,
but a respectable revolt against a foreign oppressor.
The interview was a profound secret, but Hoche
returned from it with his mind made up. One day
in the middle of July, when Tone was sitting de-
spondent in his room, he was summoned to the
Luxembourg. He found himself in the presence of a
distinguished-looking officer, who told him that he
was General Hoche, and proceeded to question him
on a number of points—how an army could be fed in
Ireland, what was the disposition of the priests, the
humour of the militia, the condition and numbers of
the British force. He then alluded, as if incidentally,
to Arthur O’Connor, and asked if he was not in Par-
liament. ‘There is a lord too in your country who is
a patriot, the son of a duke, is there not ?’ he added.
Tone spoke applaudingly of both Lord Edward and his
friend, without guessing the motive of the question.
He praised the Duke of Leinster, who, he said,
would be neutral if not favourable. The rest of the

199

CHAP,
Li

——
1796.

200

BOOK
IX,
———y ee

1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

aristocracy he apprehended would be massacred
through the just indignation of the people, whom
they had so cruelly oppressed.

The reply to this was a sharp and unexpected ex-
pression of disgust. Hoche, however, said little, and
the ambitious genius of the Young Irelander was
somewhat overawed. ‘Hoche,’ writes Tone, with
creditable candour, ‘ told Clarke he had got me by
heart. Was that a compliment? I fear he does spy
into the bottom of this Justice Shallow. Never mind.
If the business is done, it matters little whether I have
any talents or not.’ Hoche, indeed, saw through Tone,
but still on the whole liked him. He determined to
take him with him, as likely to be useful in landing;
and, that he might have a chance, if taken, of escaping
the gallows, he gave him a commission in the French
army.

All was now running smoothly. The expedition
was to sail, and sail as soon as transports could be
got ready. Tone mentioned the English fleet. Hoche
laid his hand on his arm:

‘Ne craignez rien,’ he said; ‘nous irons, vous
pouvez y compter,’ but again intimated, like de la
Croix, that a mutiny of the Irish seamen would be
highly convenient. He was equally positive as to the
point on which the invasion was to be directed, and
he would have acted more wisely if he had listened to
Tone’s opinion. The most dangerous and the best
organised of the United Irishmen were the Ulster Re-
publicans. ‘Tone advised that the expedition should
sail from some port in Holland, and be directed upon
the North of Ireland or on Dublin. Hoche decided to
sail from Brest, and to land in Munster. ‘The essential
thing, however, was to land somewhere, and about this

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

no question was longer entertained. The plans were

arranged. Hoche was to take with him ‘the very -

élite of the Army of the Ocean,’ and as large a number
as Tone himself had asked for. They went together
to Brest in October to hurry forward the prepara-
tions. At Brest they heard that the Irish Government
had taken the alarm, and had arrested the members
of the Belfast Committee. At the moment Wolfe
Tone was unable to realise how serious a blow had
been struck. In a society at once secretly and se-
verely organised an injury to the brain is temporary
paralysis. He had been kept in ignorance of the
accession of Lord Edward and O’Connor to the cause,
and outside his own circle there was no one known
to him to whom information could be sent of the
intended expedition, that the separate lodges might
be prepared. ‘To deceive the English, the armament
assembling at Brest was represented in the papers as
designed against Portugal. The Irish County Com-
mittees were at the mercy of rumours. The French
were actually coming, and there were no means of
letting the Irish insurgents know it, that they might
prepare to receive them.

For his reception in Ireland Hoche relied wholly
upon Tone. In his own share of the matter he
meant, as he said, to leave nothing to chance. An
English squadron lay between Brest and Ushant.
There would perhaps be a fight, but he intended to be
in overwhelming force. An American officer, Colonel
Tate, was despatched as a diversion with eleven
hundred ruffians of the Légion Noire to surprise
and burn Bristol. Admiral Joyeuse was busy day

1 This party landed at Milford, and were almost immediately taken
prisoners.

202

BOOK

X.
a
1796.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and night in harbour and dockyard with the equip-
ments of the fleet. Hoche, to Tone’s disgust, amused
himself in the interval with a pretty Breton aristo-
crat, risking a bullet which might ruin all. ‘Tone
himself plunged daily up and down on the ramparts,
watching the sea and ships, and cursing the lagging
hours.

On the 1st of December Joyeuse announced that
he was ready, and orders were issued to embark. The
expedition was on a scale which, if it reached Ireland,
could not fail to effect something considerable. The
fleet consisted of seventeen ships of the line and eleven
frigates and corvettes. In addition there were fifteen
transports, large and small. The army was composed
of fifteen thousand of the very best troops which
France possessed, with heavy trains of field artillery,
and sufficient spare muskets and powder to arm half
the peasants in Ireland. The reputation of General
Hoche was second only to that of Napoleon. The
officer next in command was Grouchy. The point
of attack was to be either Cork, Waterford, or Lime-
rick, as circumstances might determine. The weather
was unusually fine. The wind had hung in the east
throughout November, and remained in the same
quarter, blowing straight for the Irish coast, with the
water as smooth as at midsummer.

The inveterate negligence which characterised Eng-
lish policy whenever the interests of Ireland were at
stake had left Brest for a moment unwatched. The
blockading squadron, so inattentive while at its post
that a French admiral had passed in without a shot
being fired, bringing five large ships to Joyeuse, had
drawn off afterwards, leaving the sea entirely open.
Independent of the Yeomanry, Lord Camden had not

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

ten thousand men on whom he could rely, and. to
bring them into the field he must strip of its garrison
every town in the country. Could Joyeuse carry his
fleet into some safe Irish harbour, and could Hoche
throw his army on the shore, nothing short of a
miracle could save the English power in Ireland from
temporary destruction or the unhappy country from
an insurrection which would reproduce on a yet more
extended scale the crimes and miseries of 1641.

The troops embarked as they were ordered. Day
passed after day and the east wind blew fair; yet still
one obstruction after another delayed their departure
for a fortnight. On the evening of the 15th of De-
cember the signal was made at last to prepare to
weigh. The morning following the entire fleet, forty-
three sail in all, cleared out of the harbour and were
on the way to the Irish coast. The weather was
still so fine that they ventured the passage of the
Raz, a narrow sound, peculiarly dangerous from the
violence of the tide which sweeps through it. Night
came on them before they had reached the open water.
The ‘ Séduisant,’ with five hundred men on board,
struck on arock and was lost with all hands. Her mis-
fortune was unknown to her consorts. rom bad sea-
manship, or some other cause, the ships were scattered.
When day broke eighteen sail only were visible from
the deck of the ‘Indomptable,’ an 84-cun line-of-battle
ship, on board which were ‘Tone and the regiment to
which he was attached. ‘The ‘ Fraternité,’ a frigate,
which carried Hoche and his staff, was nowhere to be
seen. ‘The rendezvous, in the event of separation, was
Mizen Head. ‘The orders to each vessel which might
have strayed was to cruise off Mizen Head for five
days, then to proceed to the mouth of the Shannon and

203

CHAP.
I.
an eno?
1796.

December,

204

BOOK
IX.
ee

1796.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

wait there for three days; if by that time the rest of
the fleet had not appeared, she was to return to Brest.
On the 18th there was a dense fog, which partially
lifted towards evening. The same eighteen ships were
in sight. The ‘Immortalité,’ with Grouchy, was made
out to be one of them. Atdawn, on the 19th, twelve
other vessels were showing, but there were still no
sions of the ‘ Fraternité.’ The fog was followed bya
dead calm, which continued all day, a sure precursor
in those seas at that time of year of a shift of wind
or change of weather. Three more stragglers drifted
up in the afternoon. Thirty-three out of the forty-
three were now collected. The wind on the 20th
chopped round to the westward, bringing mist and
haze, but it remained light, and at night there was
againacalm. On the 21st Cape Clear was in sight,
twelve miles distant. Thirty-five sail were then
counted, and only two frigates missing; of the two,
however, one was still the ‘ Fraternité,’ with her pre-
cious freight. As the wind stood they could then with
ease have either made Kinsale, where there were but
two English men-of-war to oppose them, or they could —
have forced their way through the weak defences of
Cork Harbour, or have run up to Waterford. Bantry
jay was open before evening. At any time during
that day or the next, had Grouchy ventured to act on
his own responsibility, he might have chosen his own
point of landing, and Cork must inevitably have fallen.
It had no land defences, and on the side of the sea
no batteries which a couple of line-of-battle ships
could not have silenced. General Dalrymple, who
was incommand there, had four thousand men only.
Had Grouchy known Dalrymple’s weakness, and had
he known also that at that moment there were in

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

Cork two years’ provision stores for the British navy,
valued at nearly two millions, he would probably
have risked the displeasure, or rather have earned the
eratitude, of his senior officer by stooping at once on
so splendid a prize.

Then, as twenty years later, on another occasion no
less critical, Grouchy was the good genius of the
British Empire. He continued to cruise as he was
directed, standing off and on upon that uncertain coast.
On the evening of the 22nd the wind whirled back
into the east, and surged down the rifts between the
hills with fitful menacing gusts that foretold a storm.
Beating in the face of it with extreme difficulty, six-
teen of the best sailors, the ‘ Immortalité’ among them,
recovered Bantry Bay and beat their way into it to
Bere Island, where they anchored. The rest were
blown to sea, to stay there till the wind should abate.

On the morning of the 23rd it was blowing a gale,
and blowing with the peculiar fury to be met with
only in long narrow bays enclosed within mountain
ranges. Snow was falling fast, hiding the land and
hiding the ships from one another. During that day
they were unable to communicate. On the 24th
there was a lull]. <A council of war was held in the
cabin of the ‘Immortalité.’ The division in the bay
was found to contain between six and seven thousand
soldiers, with the largest proportion of the small
arms and cannon. Tone advised that they should pro-
ceed immediately as they were, and work the ships to
the head of the estuary, to the sheltered roadstead be-
hind Whiddy Island. There a landing would be easy,
and they could push their way instantly to Cork.
The officers were eager and in high spirits. Grouchy
agreed, the anchors were lifted, and the fleet began

205

CHAP,
I.
rr a?

1796.

December.

206

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Boek to struggle towards Bantry. Unhappily for them, the.

wind rose again and blew dead in their teeth. After

1796. i _
December. Cight hours of desperate effort they had not gained

a yard. At dark they anchored again at their old
places.

Wilder yet broke Christmas Day, the bay brown
with dirty foam, the hills deep in snow, the tempest
shrieking over the water. What was to be done?
Every moment was precious. ‘Their arrival had been
a surprise, but their presence on the coast must have
been by this time signalled over the island, and
whatever troops the English had must be on the march
to the threatened point. Tone had calculated, and
perhaps rightly, that could they have landed on the
24th they would have taken Cork without firing a
shot. Now, at least, they would have to fight a
battle, and visions began to float before him of cap-
ture and a possible gallows. He was fertile in expe-
dients. The troops in Limerick would be on the way
to Cork. As the wind stood it would be easier to
reach the mouth of the Shannon than Bantry. To
take Limerick might be even better than to take Cork.
But Tone could give no commands, and the ‘ Immor-
talité’ was anchored on the other side of the bay, and
the sea was too wild to allow a boat to live. Ano-
ther day went by, spent in curses upon weather which
refused tomend. At night a frigate swept by the ‘ In-
domptable.’ Some one on her deck shouted through
the screaming of the storm to cut cable and make for
sea. The officers of the ‘ Indomptable’ knew not what
the frigate was or who had hailed them. They
waited for day, and day brought a fog so thick that
they could not see the length of their own ship.

Six days now in Bantry Bay, the Irish shore almost

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

within speaking distance, the wind fair from England,
and the English fleet still neglecting to come in search
of them. Yet with so fair an opportunity they were
prevented from using it by an accident which might
not occur in a bay like Bantry once in a dozen years.

On the 27th the tempest was so furious that they
dragged their anchors. One by one they cut their
cables and were swept, under bare poles, to sea. By
midday eight vessels only remained. But these were
the best in the fleet. They had still four thousand
men, afraid of nothing, and equal to any work which
soldiers could do. The chance of Cork was lost, but
they might try some other point on the West coast.
They were ashamed to go back having attempted
nothing. The eight ships weighed and sailed, intend-
ing to keep together and attempt a descent on Clare.

But it was the story of the Armada over again, and
in the same sea where the mightiest of the Spanish
galleons had gone down the revolutionary invaders
were encountered by the same enemies. As they ran
out clear of the Durseys the hurricane backed towards
the west. The sea, which, as long as the wind was
off shore, had been moderately smooth, now rose with
a fury with which French seamanship could not dare
tocontend. A huge wave struck the ‘ Indomptable,’
stove in the quarter-gallery, and swamped the cabins.
At asignal from the commodore the remnant of the
magnificent squadron wore round and retraced its
course towards Brest, where, after having met with
no human opposition, having never seen an English
flag, and having been baffled only by an extraordi-
nary combination of accidents, all the ships but four
eventually reappeared. The ‘Séduisant’ and one
other vessel were lost; two, being crippled by the

207

CHAP.
Au

—— —_—
1796.

208

BOOK
ib€

a
1796.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

storm, were picked up by English cruisers. The
‘Fraternité,’ which had parted from the fleet on
the night after they had sailed, had never reached
Ireland at all. She had strayed from her course in
the fog; and being afterwards caught in the gale, had
crept into Rochelle.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

SECTION VI.

Sucx is the story of the French invasion of Ireland

209

CHAP.

in 1796, so far as it was known to Wolfe Tone on the dist s *

deck of the ‘ Indomptable.’ The inner or Irish side
of it is equally curious and instructive.

On the 23rd of December, Mrs. White, the wife of
Mr. White, of Seafield, near Bantry, rushed breath-
less into Cork barracks to tell General Dalrymple
that twenty-five French men-of-war were beating into
Bantry Bay. An O'Sullivan from Berehaven came
immediately after, saying that he had himself counted
eighteen large ships, and that ten more were reported
to have been seen in the offing. A third messenger from
Dunmanus! came with further news that a boat had
landed there, the crew of which declared that the
whole number of the fleet was thirty-eight, and that
on board they had fifty thousand men. It was clear
to Dalrymple, at all events, that a large French force
of some kind had arrived. An express was sent off
to Dublin and an express-boat to England. Dai-
rymple set what force he had in motion without a
moment’s delay, and pushed forward to Dunmanway,
where fresh information was waiting for him. Mr.
White himself, knowing the importance of time, was
doing his best to obstruct, if he could not prevent,
the expected landing. The people, having received
no orders from the Revolutionary Committee, were

1 The south-east side of Bantry Bay, opposite Berehaven.
VOL. IIT. a:

1796.

210

“BOOK
IX,

1796.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

falling into their natural places. White reported
that all ranks were supporting him, and every hour
was bringing him fresh volunteers. For the moment
the weather made landing impossible. Should the
storm abate he undertook to do his very best,’ and
he received unexpected and valuable help in a naval
officer, Lieutenant Pulling, who came up from Bere-
haven. Admiral Kingsmill, having heard at Kinsale
that a large fleet was on the coast, had despatched his
Flag Lieutenant, Mr. Pulling, in a revenue cutter to
reconnoitre. Pulling had followed the French fleet
into the bay, had slipped in behind Bere Island into
Castletown, and after attempting in vain to examine
the ships more closely, had ridden off to Bantry, to
Mr. White’s house. Had the weather moderated they
could have offered but little resistance, but at any rate
there was as yet no disposition visible in the peasantry
to join the invaders.

Dalrymple’s experience was not less favourable.
On the road between Cork and Dunmanway he de-
scribed the people as ‘ behaving charmingly,’ ? and on
the people everything depended. If there was a
general rising, troops could not: be spared to reinforce
him from other parts of the island.

If the same spirit which prevailed in Cork prevailed
elsewhere, and if he was allowed but a week before
Hoche attacked him, he counted that by that time
he would have of regular Yeomanry and militia
perhaps fourteen thousand men, and with them,
though all too few, he hoped to make a stand. He
calculated with certainty that before many days the
Portsmouth fleet would be in the bay. If due ex-

1 ‘Richard White to General 2 ‘Dalrymple to Pelham, De-
Coote, December 24.’ 8S. P. O. cember 24,’

-

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

pedition was made, it might come in time to find!
the French army still on board, and take or destroy
them.

He might look long before he would see the Ports-
mouth fleet. While Dalrymple was straining every
nerve at Dunmanway, the Duke of Portland was calmly
writing to Lord Camden that there was no harbour
in France except Brest where a hostile expedition
could be equipped, and Brest had been so closely
watched that it was impossible such a force could have
come out as the news from Ireland reported.” Camden
too, when the Cork express reached him, ‘ confessed
himself not to entertain any strong expectation that
the fleet would prove to be that of an enemy.’ *
Camden, however, did not rest in his incredulity.
Acting as if the worst was true, he sent from Dublin
every man that he had, ‘the Yeomanry corps dis-
playing the most splendid spirit,’ and taking charge
of the city while the garrison was wanted in the field.
Limerick and Galway ‘ vied with each other in de-
monstrations of loyalty.’ rom all parts of the
southern provinces regiments of the line and of the
militia were streaming by forced marches towards
Dunmanway. ‘The militia betrayed no signs of back-
wardness. Snow fell and lay deep. The peasantry
‘showed the troops the utmost hospitality.’ They
lodged them at night in their cabins; they shared
their potatoes with them when they rested in the
villages at midday. ‘Though sworn probably to a

1 ¢Tf the wind fly to the west, to Pelham, December 26, From
which it probably will, and if it Dunmanway.’ §. P. O.

snows, which we expect, they can- * ¢ Portland to Camden, Decem-
not leave Bantry Bay, and must ber 26.’
fall a sacrifice to that which, I sup- 5 ‘Camden to Portland, Decem-

pose, must arrive, unless the pro- ber 24,’ 8. P.O.
bable never happens.’—‘ Dalrymple
PQ

211

CHAP.
I.

———_
1796.

December.

212

BOOK

. THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

man to join the French when they arrived, they

ee turned out with their spades to clear the snow from

1796.

December.

the roads for the baggage-waggons.

It was now a question of time. Could reinforce-
ments reach Dalrymple before Hoche could land and
destroy him and make himself master of Cork? Most
nervously he watched the sky. Another French boat
had come on shore. The officer was made prisoner,
brought to Dalrymple’s head-quarters and questioned.
He told the exact truth, and the truth was not re-
assuring.

‘Unless our fleet arrives,’ he wrote again on the
26th, ‘the first fair day the French will assemble in
the bay and the troops land. They will find diffi-
culties; but composed as they are of the chosen part
of the army, I am inclined to think they will find
the way. I cannot say what we shall do. The troops
suffer extremely from the inclemency of the weather.!
The greatest alertness appears in the Yeomanry and
the people in the towns. I would fain hope the
attachment will ie change in case of misfortune.
Time will prove.’

The next morning Dalrymple was at Bantry,
breathing somewhat more freely.

‘December 27.—The tempest continues. No de-
barkation has been effected, and we have had more
time to prepare than we expected. The arrival of
the troops from Limerick will enable us to cover
Cork. The French fleet must soon go to sea, but
they will probably land the soldiers, and not unlikely
occupy Bere Island, which may easily be defended.

1 It was the usual story. The spare clothes, nor any one other re-
call for service was sudden, and  quisite for a winter campaign at
there were neither tents, blankets, hand.

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

The season has been uncommonly severe. The troops
were little prepared for war, and have suffered.

‘ December 28.—Blew a hurricane last night. Re-
port says they are driven to sea. If forced by supe-
rior strength, we mean to fall back towards Cork ; at
all events, to endeavour to secure Cork, which we
shall not abandon unless forced by imperious circum-
stances.’?

A few hours later Mr. White briefly announced—
‘ They are all gone to the devil.’ He was premature.
After the first detachment had disappeared, stray ships
dropped in with the mending of the weather from
the rest of the scattered fleet, and the expedition was
thought to be returning. On the 31st four line-of
battle-ships, a frigate, and two sloops were in the
mouth of the bay, and four others were in the offing.
On the 3rd of January six large ships were at the
Berehaven anchorage, two frigates at Whiddy Island,
and four other frigates in the bay. They formed a
part of the fleet which had been in the mouth of the
Shannon, and were returning in search of their con-
sorts.” But no consorts appeared, and at length they
gave up expecting them. On the 7th they were re-
ported to have finally disappeared. The suspense
was over, and a danger so great that only when it
was over men were able to understand what they had
escaped, passed away as suddenly as it had ap-
peared.

Two points, before uncertain, had been established
by the attempt—

First, that Ireland could never more rely on the

1 ¢Letter from General Dal- * € Dalrymple to Pelham, Janu-

rymple to Pelham, December1796,.’ ary 3, 1797,’
S. P. O.

213

CHAP.
AF

——
1796.

December.

214

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Bee protection of the British fleet. A French expedition

——SE
Tuy,

had been able to leave Brest, to approach the Irish

January. Shore, to lie in and about its bays for a fortnight, and

return to France without being met and fought with.
Admiral Kingsmill had at Cork and Kinsale the
‘ Monarch,’ an eighty-gun ship; two frigates, the
‘ Magnanimous ’ and the ‘ Diana;’ and the guardship.
On the first alarm the ‘ Powerful,’ a seventy-four, was
sent over, and half-a-dozen frigates. Two of the
latter came into Cork so shattered by the storm that
they were described as wrecks. As soon as Portland
could be brought to believe that the expedition was
a real fact, Lord Bridport was ordered over from
Portsmouth ; but instead of hurrying to Bantry, where
he might still have been in time to catch the last
division which left it, he lmgered in the mouth of
the Channel, and took at last one ship and one frigate,
and that was all.

When the worst was over the Cabinet made light
of the peril. Portland affected to regret that the
landing had not been attempted, ‘so confident was
he of the loyalty and bravery of the troops.’ As
soon as Bridport had sailed he promised Camden
‘that he should hear no more of the Armada but its
disasters and distresses.’ ‘The French fleet should be
again in Bantry Bay, but brought there as an example
of their rashness, and trophies for the loyal and brave
people of Ireland to contemplate.’' Bombast was
a bad substitute for energy. ‘The loyal and brave
people of Ireland’ had received but poor encourage-
ment at a moment when England was needing their
services to the full as much as they needed the help
of England; and the proved facility by which a

1 ¢ Portland to Camden, January 17, 1797.’

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY. 215

French invasion could be accomplished on the largest cnap.
scale was an obvious temptation to the Irish rebels em ot
to expect, and to the French to venture, a second ate 6
experiment.

‘We have had an escape,’ Lord Camden wrote, on
the 10th of January, ‘which, on account of the im-
pression which it has made, I wish had not been
owing so entirely to the winds. I should not deserve
the confidence with which I am honoured if I did
not apprise you that a universal discontent prevails
here that a hostile fleet should have presumed to
have insulted our coast for three weeks. ‘They argue
that a descent was to have been expected. They
feel their situation much less tranquil if the French
may think their fleet has been here so long unmo-
lested by that of Great Britain. Great dissatisfaction
is expressed at the conduct of the absentees, who
have neither contributed in person nor by subscription
to the defence of their country.’ * |

The second point on which the attempt at invasion
had appeared to throw light was the disposition of
the country. It had been represented as universally
disaffected. Lord Camden wrote, on the 10th of
January, that on the whole, ‘reviewing what had
passed, the best disposition had been shown. The
regular troops had behaved excellently. The militia,
so much dreaded, had not been backward. The An-
trim regiments, which there was cause to suspect, had
been specially forward. The Downshire men said
they had seen their folly, and would fall in with
their officers. Noblemen and gentlemen of large for-
tune had been employed in escorting baggage and

1 Camden to Portland, January 10,1797. Secret.’ S. P. O.

216

BOOK
IX.

Cee
1797.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

carrying expresses. Mr. John La Touche, the banker,
a private in his son’s corps, rode twenty-five miles
in one of the severest nights with a message. The
merchants of Dublin, many of the first eminence,
marched sixteen Irish miles with a convoy of arms
to the North. A useful impression had been made
on the minds of the lower Catholics by Dr. Moylan,
Bishop of Cork. The Viceroy anticipated ‘the best
effects on the disaffected at home and the enemy
abroad from the spirit which had been shown.’ *

So far Lord Camden had spoken only of those who
might naturally have been expected to exert them-
selves in the interest of order. But of the great re-
volutionary organisation said to pervade the island
no signs had been outwardly visible. The people
had shown a good will towards the troops. No ad-
vantage had been taken of the opportunity for local
riots. Dalrymple, indeed, had confessed a fear that
in the event of a reverse a different disposition might
manifest itself. But it seemed impossible that the
description which Wolfe Tone, Arthur O’Connor, and
Lord Edward had given to the French Government
of the reception on which they might calculate in
Ireland, could have resembled the fact. The British
Cabinet especially, and English opinion generally,
came to a conclusion that the Irish Government had
been needlessly alarmed; that the discontent of
which they had heard so much, so far as it was real,
had been created by the bigoted prejudices of the
Castle Administration, and had been designedly exag-
gerated for the purposes of Protestant faction. They
were misled, as the event proved, into a mischievous
and even fatal delusion.

1 ‘Camden to Portland, January 10, 1797.’

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

The revolutionary leaders in their subsequent con-
fessions referred the conduct of the peasantry simply
to the want of orders from head-quarters. The or-
ganisation had been deranged by the Belfast arrests.
The appearance of the French was a surprise. ‘The
impression among the local committees was that
the expedition had been postponed, or was not to be
looked for till the spring. The insurrection was in-
tended to be sudden; local independence of action
had been strictly forbidden; and the French fleet had
departed before it had been thoroughly understood
to have arrived.

The explanation was correct as far as it went, but
it was not the whole truth. It had been shown also
that the mass of the people, if left to themselves, were
not spontaneously disaffected to the British connec-
tion. As an agrarian conspirator the Irish peasant
is effectively dangerous. He clings to his home and
his land. He has a keen consciousness of Injustice;
and when the law has been his enemy he has not
scrupled to avenge his own wrongs, often with the

217

CHAP.
Li

Se
1797.

January.

ferocity of a savage. Politically he allows himself ,

to be worked upon by scoundrels, who flatter his
hopes and play upon his grievances. He talks, he
shouts, he affects to conspire for a cause in which,
nevertheless, in his heart he has little belief, and for
which, so long as he is left unplundered, in his heart
he cares not at all. Political disaffection in Ireland has
been the work, on the one hand, of the representa-
tives of the old disinherited families—the Kernes and
Gallowglasses of one age, the Rapparees of the next,
the houghers and ravishers of a third; on the other,
of the restless aspirations of the Catholic clergy, who
refuse to live on even terms with other religious

218,

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

communities, who have compelled the so-called he-

Co ree to pare their claws and draw their teeth, and

rut.

January.

have thus maddened themselves in secret by binds
ing over their imagined wrongs. On the back of these,
ate bred out of misgovernment, have come the poli-
tical adventurers—the Lucases, the Floods, the Grat-
tans, the Wolfe Tones, the O’Connells— who have
used the discontent and oppression of their country-
men as instruments of a wild ambition after an im-
possible national independence; and working in a
country where neglect and tyranny had gone hand-
in-hand, where laws were so unjust that Nature
herself rejected them, and where the people were
singularly susceptible of rhetorical appeals to their
emotions, these elements might and did create a
state of things which appeared on the surface like
universal national hostility.

The appearance was not the reality.

The peasant in the British army fights by the side
of his Scotch and his English companions, and the
enemy knows no difference between them, save that
where the fray is hottest the Irishman is first to the
front. Enlisted in the police corps, he is the most
loyal servant of order, and faces undismayed the
fiercest frenzy of men of his own blood and creed.
In the militia, in the approaching rebellion, the in-
stinct of the soldier was stronger than the seductions
to which he seemed to have yielded. For the most
part he was found true to his colours, if false to his
nationalist oath. Physically brave, he is morally a
coward. In his own cabin at home he sinks before
the terrorism of the secret societies. He consents to
be sworn, because he is marked for vengeance if he
refuses. He will give no evidence in court, because

THE FRENCH AT BANTRY.

he knows that the English Government cannot, or
will not, protect him; while the power that will punish
him is at his door. He clings to his creed and to
his farm. The appeals of demagogues to his super-
stition, or their denunciations of his oppressors, make
him drunk for the moment like whisky, and he be-
comes capable of the most horrible atrocities. But
this is not his real nature. He is too shrewd to believe
in the illusions with which he allows himself to play.
So long as disloyalty can gain its ends by the help of
the assassin or the incendiary, there is a vile mino-
rity in Ireland who will shrink from no atrocity; and
so long as he is himself treated with injustice, the
peasant will look on with indifference or with secret
sympathy. But he will fight in the field only in the
ranks of a legitimate force, under orders from the
officers of a lawful government. When left to his
own impulses he allows himself to be guided by his
natural chief, the owner of the soil on which he
lives. Let the law and the landlord become his
friends indeed, and the instinct will then turn to
active loyalty, and the field of Irish agitation will
cease to yield a harvest.

219

CHAP.
i

——_ ——
1797.

January.

220

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER II.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

SECTION I.

A PaRLIAMENTARY Opposition is the most finished

ee product of modern political genius. The functions of

1797,

January.

it are to teach the people that they are ruled by men
who are unfit for the position which they occupy,
and are pursuing measures impolitic and mischievous.
The Opposition is assumed by the theory to consist
of persons who are the intellectual and moral equals
of those whom they denounce, and are prepared to
take their places, if they can persuade a majority in
Parliament to agree with them. Men of ability and
character will not advocate a cause which has not
elements of justice and wisdom in it ; and the result
is, that either the two parties in the State must
divide between them the principles of political admi-
nistration, each when in power consciously regarding
but half the truth—doing what it ought not to do, or
leaving undone what it ought to do, to avoid tres-
passing upon its rival’s province—or else each must
of deliberate purpose blind one of its eyes, lay aside
its better knowledge, consent to be a representative
of passion, prejudice, and ignorance.

Each party also when in Opposition must assist in
bringing Government itself into contempt by holding
up those who hold the reins to public ridicule or

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

detestation. Under the Plantagenets and Tudors dif-
ferences of opinion between leading statesmen were
confined to the Committee of Privy Council, which was
composed of men of rank and intelligence, irrespective
of the complexion of their views. The Cabinets of
Henry the Eighth and Elizabeth contained Conserva-
tives and Radicals, Anglicans and Puritans, Catholics
and Protestants. Difficult questions were argued in
private like the plan of a campaign in a council of war,
and the passions and conceits of the multitude were
not blown into a flame by hearing the measures
taken by the Administration publicly reprobated by
persons of accredited consideration. To the world
outside the Government appeared undivided, and
thus commanded the respect and submission which
the rank and file of an army pay to their officers.

The public, no doubt, experience a general satis-
faction when the debates of their rulers are submitted
to their own judgment. They can test the abilities
of their representatives; they can pass their own
criticisms on the questions submitted for discussion ;
and at times, when deeper passions are asleep, when
the motives at work are the common forces of selfish-
ness, and dangers are to be anticipated rather from the
intrigues of individuals or of classes, than from a false
choice of policy, the advantages of the modern system
may for a time outweigh its evils.

As certainly in times of excitement, when reason
is unseated by passion, and large masses of men be-
come possessed with illusions under which, like sheep,
they bleat but one senseless note, and can be driven
in multitudes where any barking demagogue desires
to misdirect them, a constitutional Opposition must be
composed of materials different from any of which we

221

CHAP.
aL.

——_,—_—
1f 97.

January.

222

BOOK
IX.

ed
L797.

January.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

have yet had experience, if it is not the Most effective
of the instruments of anarchy. It embarrasses the
executive Government when it most requires dis-
cretionary liberty of action, and brings discredit upon
it by unscrupulous abuse when its difficulties require
most candid consideration. It encourages the hopes
of fanatics and enthusiasts, provides madness with
argument, and tells the incendiary and revolutionist
that his objects are good, and are resisted only by
selfishness and wickedness.

In no country and at no time could an Opposition
in Parliament have worked more mischievously than
in Ireland at the existing crisis. Grattan had sown
the seeds of disorder by feeding the nation with hopes
of an independence to which no political short-cut
was possible. If Ireland was to be independent, the
road towards it lay through order and industry, and
practical energy and union. The liberties which she
desired were for ever impossible so long as the pas-
sions were alive which he had stimulated by his fervid
declamation. He had persuaded his Irish clients
that a millennium was only waiting for them till
they had thrown off the authority and influence of
England. They had gained step after step, yet the
millennium was no nearer. As the direct power of
England declined, English influence had become more
all-pervading than ever. Their obvious conclusion
was that they had not liberty enough; they must
strike at the point where that influence was seated.
They must have Parliamentary Reform ; they must
have Catholic Emancipation; they must place the
power of the country where England would be unable
to reach it ; and independence would then be a reality.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

Mr. Grattan insisted, and perhaps he believed, that
Ireland in complete possession of self-government
would become a loyal member of the empire; but
he had led the country to expect that with: self-
government her material misfortunes would give
place to plenty and prosperity; and when this hope
was disappointed, when, instead of prosperity and
internal union, they found only internal quarrels:and
consequent increase of misery, was it not inevitable,
had it not been the unvarying experience in the
history of every revolutionary movement recorded,
that when the millennium proved still an zgnis fatuiis,
that when the hoped-for prosperity still hovered un-
obtained beyond the people’s grasp, they would have
carried Grattan’s arguments to their natural con-
clusion, and have insisted on complete separation?
The rule of England, Mr. Grattan told them, had
been the source of all their woes. The rule was
gone, but an English Viceroy was still at the
Castle ; there was still the baneful connection under
the Imperial Crown. The reins would have been
snatched by bolder hands, or Grattan himself would
have been swept away in the torrent. The de-
mand would have risen that Ireland should be as
free as America; and England must have either
yielded to her own destruction or drawn the sword
at last at a worse disadvantage than in 1690, when
the control of the army and the police, and the
internal functions of the executive authority of the
State, had been allowed to pass out of her hands.
The United Irishmen had avowed from the begin-
ning that Emancipation and Reform were but means
with them towards a further end. The leading

223

CHAP.
iB

ed
EtQ7.

January.

224

BOOK
IX.
——_~———

D797,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND. -

Catholics professed to be loyal ; but every one who
knew the genius of the Catholic Church knew also that
when the power was in its hands it would be content
with nothing short of complete ascendency, and the
ascendency of a Catholic majority meant a return to
the measures of King James’s Parliament. The feeble
and half-affected moderation of a few bishops and
noblemen would have been but a bulwark of straw
against the will of three million Celts clamouring for
a restoration of the lands, and under these conditions
the continuance of a shadowy connection between the
islands could have been purchased only by acquies-
cence In a confiscation to which England could never
consent without dishonour and degradation.

These consequences of the political measures which
Grattan demanded were so obvious on the surface,
and were so undisguisedly confessed as their real
objects by the conspirators out of doors, that the
Parliamentary Opposition, the Duke of Leinster and
Lord Moira, the two Ponsonbies and Grattan, must be
credited with weaker intellects than they possessed
could they have been really blind to them. They

- probably considered that the war with France would

fail, that democracy was to be in the ascendant over
Europe, that Ireland was to achieve separation, and
that it would be better arrived at constitutionally than
through open rebellion. Grattan may have calculated
that his services to the patriot cause would secure him
the first place in the new Commonwealth which was
to be added to the Sovereign States of Europe. Moira

- and Leinster may have hoped to secure their estates

amidst the general wreck of the Protestant pro-
prietary. Their more hot-headed and younger con-
federates were less able to wait for the slow process of

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

225

a Parliamentary campaign, or perhaps the rule of cHap.

proceeding continued as before. The Constitutional
leaders were to persevere in pressing their demands
through the legitimate channels, while agitators out
of doors were to enforce their arguments by ter-
rorism.

Arthur O’Connor had been one of the few persons
who on the appearance of the French had passively
if not actively opposed the enrolment of the Yeo-
manry. His loyalty had been reflected upon in a
publication which he attributed to the Castle; and as
he had himself by his own subsequent confession per-
sonally invited the invasion, and was at that moment
a member of the Executive Committee»of United
Irishmen, it must be admitted that he was not ac-
cused without reason. He could not afford at the
moment to show his true colours. He had steady
friends and supporters in the English Whigs, with
whom it was necessary to keep on terms. The
English Cabinet was known to be wavering in its
Irish policy. He used the opportunity, therefore, to

publish an open and insolent defiance of the Govern-.

ment at the Castle. He delivered himself, through
a newspaper at Belfast, of an address to his fellow-
citizens. ‘ In the conscious integrity of his heart’ he
repudiated the charge of disaffection. He represented
himself as a martyr to the cause of the Catholics.
He had been disinherited, he said, for his devotion to
their interests by his uncle, Lord Longueville. Inter-
preting the future by his hopes, he described Great
Britain as an ancient tyrant, now reeling to her ruin;
and in a cataract of that fatal eloquence which hides
truth from Irishmen, as coloured fireworks hide the
VOL. III. Q

iy

—— ee”
1797.

January.

226

BOOK
TX,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

stars, he thus addressed Lord Camden and Fitzgibbon

——*— and the other members of the Irish Executive :—

1797.

January.

‘Abandoned Administration, who have trampled
on the liberties of my country, do you presume to
accuse me of dissuading my countrymen from arming
to oppose an invasion which your and your accom-
plices’ crimes have provoked? Is it that the inalien-
able rights of free-born men to make their laws by
delegates of their choice should be bartered and sold
by usurpers and traitors that I should persuade them
toarm? Is it that our markets, our manufactures,
our commerce, should be sold to that nation which
appoints our Government and distributes our patron-
age, that I should persuade them to arm? Is it to
support the Gunpowder Bill, which deprives them of
arms, or the Convention Bill, that I should persuade
them to arm? Is it to support the suspension of the
Habeas Corpus Bill? Is it to rivet the bolts or guard
the dungeons of their fellow-citizens, who, torn from
their homes and families, vainly demand that trial by
jury which, by proving their innocence, must establish
its guilt, that I should persuade them to arm? Is it
that a vile pander of national honour and legislative
duty should be invested with uncontrolled power
over the opinions and persons of an injured, gallant,
and generous people, that I should persuade them to
arm? (xo, impotents, to the Catholics, whose elevated
hopes of all glorious freedom you have been appointed
to blast! Hence, contemptible Administration, from
those you have insulted and levelled to those you
have raised! Go to the monopolists of the represen-
tation of Ireland and ask them to arm. Go to the
swarms of petty tyrants, perjured grand jury robbers,
army-contractors, tithe-proctors, and land-sharks, and

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

tell them ‘how necessary it is for them to be armed.

227

CHAP.

The Volunteers have been discouraged because they —~~—~

threw off the open and avowed dominion of Great
Britain. These yeomen corps have been raised to
support the concealed deadly influence she has gained
by corruption and treason.’ *

The Administration might be impotent to arrest
the progress of secret conspiracy, but it had spirit
and power to resent the open insolence of Mr. O’Con-
nor. It could not furnish him with the halter which
was his due. He was not even suspected of having
ventured into actual crime. Buta public defiance,
re-issued as it was in loose sheets, spread broadcast
over the country, and showered from the galleries of
the theatres, was not to be passed over, and the
passionate patriot was provided with a lodging in
the Birmingham Tower, at Dublin Castle.

Sir Francis Burdett, who was O’Connor’s relative,
made his arrest an occasion of a philippic.in the British
Parliament, characteristic both in its presumption and
its ignorance of the tone of English Liberal politicians
in speaking of Irish subjects.

‘One person,’ he said, in a savage invective against
the Viceroy and the Chancellor, ‘now immured with-
in the walls of a dungeon in Dublin Castle, I have
the honour of being connected with, whom IJ know
to be as incapable of treason towards his country
(good God! that treason to Ireland and the name of
O’Connor should be preposterously coupled together)
as he is capable of everything that is generous and
noble for his country’s good; a man whose private
virtues equal, they cannot surpass, the integrity of

1 See Plowden, vol. iv., Appendix 10, where there are ten pages of
this rhodomontade.

Q2

1797.

228

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

his public conduct. When such men become objects

_**_ of fear and hatred to Government, it is not difficult

ere

January.

to ascertain the nature of that Government.’

The reproaches which have been showered by
historians on Lord Camden’s government of Ireland
are based on the same ignorance of fact which so
grossly dictated the laudations bestowed by Sir
Francis Burdett on the most worthless of Irish trai-
tors. The ignorance has no longer an excuse, but the
prejudice continues. The florid rhetoric of patriotic
incendiaries has been so agreeable to the palate of
modern Liberal philosophers, that the crimes and
follies of the United Irishmen are forgotten in the
spurious beauty of political sentimentalism. Public
opinion upon Ireland has been formed by men

Whose virtue is

To make him worthy whose offence subdues him,
And curse that justice did it.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION,

SECTION II.

Tue Constitutional friends of liberty were choos-
ing their ground with more judgment, and using
arguments more likely to receive attention. Arthur
O’Connor had all but invited the Irish, in an open
address, to ally themselves with France. Lord Moira
used their apparent orderliness at the time of the
invasion as a plea for a conciliatory policy. The Prince
of Wales was induced to offer his services as Viceroy.
Moira, supposing the time come for the rainbow to
show itself, was prepared to attend him as Com-
mander-in-Chief. The Prince submitted to Pitt an
outline of the healing measures which his Irish ad-
visers recommended ; while Grattan and Ponsonby
were denouncing, in the Irish House of Commons, the
negligence which had exposed the country to a danger
from which only accident had saved her, and were
finding willing listeners.

The attack was made in various forms. It was
urged plausibly that the ease with which the attempt
had been made encouraged a repetition of it. Rumour
said the armament was being refitted, and the chances
of a second expedition were on every one’s lips. It
was alleged also, and with perfect truth, that the
least confident of the Irish were encouraged by the
fact that the French had actually come, and were
venturing boldly and enthusiastically into the con-
spiracy.' The Government had affected to compliment

1 ¢ Evidence of Dr. MacNeven.’—‘ Report of the Secret Committee of
the House of Lords, 1798,’

229

CHAP.
II.

ee
IRL

January.

230

BOOK
IX,
——
Ril.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the peasantry on their loyalty, as if they had de-
pended on it beforehand, and had been justified in
their confidence.

The Irish gentry, who knew better how the truth
stood, were indignant at such idle folly. They were
perfectly aware that if Hoche had landed with his
entire force, Dalrymple must have been overwhelmed,
Cork would have been taken, the whole of Ireland
would have been in arms. Where, it was angrily asked,
had been the vaunted British fleet? and the answers
did not tend to allay uneasiness. Admiral Colpoys
ought to have been outside Brest with fifteen sail of
the line. For some unknown cause he had ‘been off
his post when Hoche slipped out; and when he
found Hoche was gone, instead of following him, he
had gone up Channel to Portsmouth. It was reported
at the Admiralty on the 20th of December that the
French expedition had sailed. Lord Bridport was at

_ Spithead with the Channel fleet. He might have

joined Colpoys and gone in pursuit, and the east wind
would have carried him to Bantry in forty hours. But
as late as the 26th the Cabinet was incredulous. On
the 27th the wind had gone round, a westerly gale
was blowing, and he could not leave his anchorage.
This was small consolation to Ireland. The sheet-
anchor of her safety had failed at the hour of need. To
secure protection for the future, either, it was argued,
there must be concession to the Catholics, and the
pretext for disaffection must be removed, or the mili-
tary force must be increased. Parliament must vote
additional taxes. Private gentlemen must strain
their embarrassed fortunes in raising Yeomanry.
Especial bitterness was felt against the noble lords
and gentlemen who, drawing their incomes from Ire-

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

land, were spending them in London, and contributing
nothing, either in purse or ‘person, to the public
defence. If new taxes were to be laid on, what more
proper than an absentee tax? Such a tax was cer-
tain to be proposed should Government ask for more
money, and Camden wrote to Portland for instruc-
tions how to act towards a measure ‘ which would be
very unpleasant to the feelings of the absentees.’*

Lord Shannon, Lord Ely, Lord Waterford vehe-
mently pressed it. The best men in the country,
the most active friends of Government, as Camden
admitted, were in its favour. ‘The impolitic back-
wardness of the absentees in not stepping forward
with decision and liberality in the late alarm had
added a feeling of resentment to the sense of public
injury.’ ;

Mr. Vandeleur at length brought the subject for-
ward formally, and proposed a tax of two shillings in
the pound on the net produce of the absentee rents.
As a speaker he was unequal to what was called
‘influencing the debate,’ but no one ever spoke more
truth in the Irish Parliament. ‘All the disturb-
ances which had taken place there, which had dis-
graced its character and checked its growth,’ he
accurately declared to ‘have been found to commence
on the lands of absentees.’ Had they been resident,
as they ought to have been, their authority as land-
lords would have prevented disorder, and acts of
. kindness would have removed the temptation to it.
‘A tax,’ Mr. Vandeleur said, ‘ which would compel the
landowners to return to their duties would do more
to tranquillise Ireland than all the repressive laws
which Parliament could devise.’

1 ¢Camden to Portland, February 20, 1797.’

231

CHAP.
iT.
en

1797.

February.

282

BOOK
ee
L797.
February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Sir John Macartney considered a tax of two shil-
lings in the pound to be too small. The injury done
by the absentees to Ireland he regarded as greater
than any contribution which could be laid upon them
would equal, and he proposed to raise the two
shillings to four.

Some friend of the absentees argued that a man
had a natural right to choose the place where he
would live. Mr. Smith replied that society of its
very nature was a restriction of natural rights. The
poor man had as much natural right to eat his salt
untaxed as the rich landowner to spend his rents in
luxuries at a distance from his estates.

Here once more the deepest of the real wounds of
Ireland was opened. The Ponsonbies staid away
from the debate. Grattan supported the tax, but
feebly and without spirit, being ‘tied,’ as Lord Cam-
den said, ‘to Lord Fitzwilliam, Lord Bessborough, and
the Duke of Devonshire.’ These noble advocates of
the cause of the people were themselves the greatest
criminals against the people ; and the patriotic orators,
whose business was with imaginary wrongs, were
languid and apathetic when genuine evils were taken
in hand.t Their coolness and indifference would not
have obstructed the Bill. The better mind of Ireland
had declared itself, and the Viceroy himself confessed
that the non-residence of landowners was the true cause
of all that was amiss. ‘The absentees,’ he admitted,
were bound to visit the estates, ‘to expose themselves.
to the duty by which they held their property and their
situation in the country :’” but his orders from England
were to prevent the passing of a measure which would

1 ‘Camden to Portland, March 1.’ S. P. O.
2 ‘Camden to Portland, March 9.’

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

have irritated powerful interests in both Houses of
the British Parliament. Ireland was sacrificed that
_ Pitt’s majority might not be weakened, and the sup-
porters of the Castle with bitterness at heart were
required to vote against their consciences and against
what they knew to be right.

The United Irish agitation was carried on with
renewed energy. ‘ The appearance of the French had
given the conspirators fresh courage.’* Several of
the arrested leaders were released for want of produ-
cible evidence to detain them. The places of others
were filled up. There was to be no second failure, as,
indeed, if the French had landed, there would pro-
bably have been no failure at all. Connaught and
Munster were vigorously organised. So dangerous
in January was the state of Ulster, that the greater
part of it was placed under the Insurrection Act and
proclaimed. ‘A system of terror had been estab-
lished’ to paralyze the law; and the Viceroy found
himself obliged, as he said, notwithstanding the out-
cry that was certain to be raised, ‘to show the loyal
and well-disposed that the Government was the
stronger party.’ The Orangemen had been severely
checked in deference to Grattan’s clamours. The dis-
affected peasants and artisans had gathered courage
from the suppression of the only body whom they
really feared, and assassination became the law of
the province. Murder had followed murder. Inthe
middle of the winter Mr. Comyn, an active magistrate
at New Town Ards, was shot. In February a Donegal
farmer was shot, as a lesson to others for enlisting
in the Yeomanry. The sacrifice of the next victim,
from his character and position, attracted keener

1 “Camden to Portland, January 30,’

233

CHAP.
II.
> _— Oo”

February.

234

BOOK
TX.

——
1797.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

attention. Dr. Hamilton, a Fellow of Trinity and
rector of a living near Lough Swilly, had given
offence by exerting himself in detecting crime. He
had been shot at once unsuccessfully. One night at
the end of the same month he was dining at the house
of a Mr. Waller, when a party of ruffians who had
marked him down burst into the room. Hamilton,
hearing them coming, had escaped for the moment
through a side-door. Mr. Waller being a cripple and
unable to move, his brave wife threw herself in front
of him ; three shots were fired at her, and she fell
dead. The men then swore they would burn the
house and kill everyone that was init if Dr. Hamilton
was not produced. The servants betrayed his hiding-
place. He was seized and forced out of the house.
He clutched at the staple of the hall-door. One of the
villains held a candle to his hand to make him loose
his hold. He was then dragged upon the lawn,
thrown upon his knees, and piked.

‘It is the system of the United Irishmen,’ wrote
Camden, in telling this story, ‘to prevent the magis-
trates from acting. ‘The unanimous opinion of the
country is that mild measures cannot eradicate the
evil, and that if the French land it cannot be in a
worse state than it is at present. I have therefore
ordered General Lake to disarm the districts where
such excesses have been committed, to establish pa-
trols, take up those who assemble at night, prevent
assemblies, and not suffer the cause of justice to be
frustrated by the delicacy which might possibly have
actuated the magistracy.’ ‘If,’ Camden continued,
‘IT thought the United Irishmen’s measure of reform
in Parliament was really the remedy, and if reform
could be made without shaking the connection between

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

the kingdoms, it might be wiser in the King’s Minis- cmap.

23

5

ters to consider whether the attempt should be made, — 1

But reform is only a popular question under which to
shelter the treason which they are plotting and exe-
cuting, and it would be weakness to be deceived by
the pretended cause of their discontent. If Reform
is resisted, the kindred subject of Catholic Emancipa-
tion must be resisted also. The success of either of
these questions would shake to the foundation the
English interest, and as long as the present system of
governing Ireland is adopted they ought not to be
entertained. If a better can be devised—and there
are many grievances to which the peculiar situation
of this island is subject—it will be to be considered
how those grievances should be remedied ; but while
the war lasts, great and alarming discontent will ap-
pear, and must be assuaged by the vigour of the
Government and the attention of the gentry.’
General Lake, who was entrusted with the duty of
taking away the arms from the mutinous and murder-
ous conspirators of Ulster, became afterwards Lord
Lake of Delhi and the conqueror of the Mahrattas.
He had already distinguished himself in the American
war and in Holland. He was an officer of singular
moderation and humanity, and a better selection could
not have been made for the discharge of a delicate
duty, in which mistake or excessive severity would be
visited instantly by the most factious animadversion.
On the 13th of March he sent out a proclamation from
Belfast that daring outrages were being perpetrated
in many parts of the province with the deliberate
purpose of superseding the laws by terror. ‘The civil
power was defied. Loyal subjects who had enrolled
1 “Camden to Portland, March 9.’ 8S. P. O.

1797.
March,

236

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

themselves as Yeomanry under the King’s commission

See) murdered; the interposition of the army had be-

VOL:
March.

come necessary for the protection of the well-disposed ;
and Lake, therefore, gave notice that he had received
authority to act as the public safety might require.
He enjoined all persons, peace officers and soldiers
excepted, to bring in their arms and surrender them.
He expressed a hope that immediate compliance would
render the use of force unnecessary. He entreated
the disaffected to consider the misery which they were
provoking. He invited the loyal to act with energy
and spirit, and assured them of protection. He pro-
mised informers reward and inviolable secrecy if they
would indicate where arms and ammunition were
concealed.?

Grattan declared in Parliament that such a procla-
mation was a subversion of the Constitution. He did
not care to enquire whether the powers of the Consti-
tution could be abused to protect a deliberate and
avowed conspiracy to overthrow it by force. In a
country where a second secret authority had been
established superior to law, and enforced its orders
by assassinating the officers of the legitimate Govern-
ment, the executive servants of the Crown, who had
hesitated to use the powers committed to them to
put down so audacious a usurpation, would have
deserved to be stigmatised as poltroons, and punished
as traitors themselves. Mr. Grattan was hard to
please. The Lords Justices of 1641 were accused of
having permitted the rebellion to break out when
they foresaw it coming, as an excuse for spoliation
and confiscation. Lord Camden was accused of pro-
voking the rebellion of 1798 by using force to disarm

1 Proclamation of General Lake, March 13, 1797.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

a population who were preparing, without conceal-
ment, for open insurrection.

Irish conspirators have never wanted traitors among
them. Unennobled by true or generous purpose, with-
out heart for the open field of courage and honour,
and pursuing their ends with the assassin’s dagger
and the incendiary’s torch, they cannot impart a
temper which they do not possess; and therefore,
in their committees and lodges, there were always
men who were ready to sell a dangerous secret, when
the Government was willing to purchase it and would
undertake to protect them from publicity. General
Lake found ample assistance of this infamous kind.
He was able rapidly to make a second arrest of two of
the leading committees of Belfast, and to seize papers
which revealed the correspondence with France, the
extent of the revolutionary armament, and the mea-
sures taken for the seduction of the army and militia.
The papers were sent to Dublin, and were laid im-
mediately before a secret committee of the House of
Commons. The prisoners were indicted at the Spring
Assizes at Armagh, and were acquitted either for
want of evidence or through the cowardice of the
juries. Lake, however, went on with his work in
the search for arms, and seized in all fifty thousand
muskets, twenty-two cannon, and seventy thousand
pikes, Lord Moira’s estate being one of the princi-
pal arsenals. The seizures were not effected with-
out severity. Men who had provided themselves
with arms with a serious purpose did not part with
them in answer to a mere request. Where pikes and
muskets were known to be concealed their existence
was fiercely denied. Entire villages combined in de-
termined resistance. Individuals of whose guilty

CHAP.
iT.

—-_---——"

1797.
March,

238

BOOK
IX.

sa
L797.

April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

complicity secret information left no shadow of doubt
were compelled to reveal the hiding-places by the
whip and the picket. Houses were burnt, and en-
tire families were exposed to serious suffering. Par-

ticular officers, it is likely, exceeded their orders.

The officers of thesYeomanry were taken from the
local gentry, whom the murder system had not dis-
posed to. feel tenderly towards the accomplices of
assassins... In some very few instances the innocent
may have been confounded with the criminal. When
society is disorganised, and peace can only be pre-
served by the strong hand, such misfortunes occur
inevitably,.and the responsibility for them rests with
those whovhave rendered the use of force indispen-
sable. But the result was that in the part of Ire-
land where:the populace was most dangerous, and the
insurgent organisation most complete, the teeth of
the rebellion were drawn. |

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

SECTION III.

Tue disarming of Ulster furnished a ready occasion
for Parliamentary declamation. ‘The offer of the
Prince of Wales had been declined. Lord Moira had
not achieved his desired position of Commander-in-
Chief. But as a private peer he could still do his
friends a service in his place in the British House of
Lords. Calling attention to General Lake’s proceed-
ings, he moved an address to the King to interpose
his paternal authority in behalf of his afflicted child-
ren. He described them as being exasperated into
rebellion by gratuitous and barbarous tortures.

The objects of the United Irishmen were no secret
to him, for many of them were his special friends;
yet he dared to say that the Irish Government were
victims of an illusion. Their fears were chimerical ;
the people were utterly innocent of evil design. ‘ Kind-
ness,’ he declared, ‘was all that was needed to call
forth that fond affection of the inhabitants of Ireland
to England, which circumstances could cloud, but
could not extinguish.’

Moira had the support of the whole Opposition.
The Duke of Bedford insisted that Fitzwilliam should
be replaced. Fox, in the House of Commons, rang
the changes on the same note, demanding the staple
measures of ‘conciliation’ — Reform and Emanci-
pation.

Pitt answered, with effective satire, that under the
Constitution of ’82 the British Parliament had no
longer a right to interfere in the internal government

239

CHAP.
Lt

———_—
179%

March,

240

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of Ireland; and that to remodel the Irish Constitu-

_ 1% tion in the existing state of the world would be an

ay uT.
March.

experiment too rash to be ventured.

In England Pitt was supported by the common-
sense of both Houses. In Ireland, where the blood
was hotter, the battle was fiercer. At Grattan’s in-
stance a meeting of the Dublin freeholders was held
in the Exchange, to petition the King for Lord Cam-
den’s removal. The resolution was carried, with the
help of the mob, who were introduced into the build-
ing, and was presented to the Viceroy himself for
transmission. In the Irish House of Commons Mr.
Grattan, in one of the most passionate of his speeches,
denounced Lake and all that he was doing, and ac-
cused Camden of violating the laws. A debate fol-
lowed, or series of debates, in which the forces of the
two parties were arrayed in fiery antagonism.

Grattan thundered his loudest. De Blaquiere re-
buked him for misusing his great abilities in encou-
raging anarchy. The Government were embarrassed
by the nature of their information, and could not
produce a tithe of the evidence which they possessed ;
but when magistrates were being assassinated, and
peaceful and loyal citizens were robbed unjustly of
their arms, the Attorney-General turned to scorn the
pretence that the conspiracy was unreal. ‘ Was the
Government to sit by and suffer such things?’ he
asked. ‘ Were they to wait till the fire was lighted,
and the whole country had burst into flame?’

The Prime-Sergeant, Fitzgerald, said desperate
cases must be met with desperate remedies. If the
French invaded the South again, and the army was
forced to collect to encounter them, was Ulster to be
left in a condition to rise in their rear?

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

The sensitive vanity of Irish patriotism showed

itself especially in abuse of England. Ponsonby
complained of the contempt felt by England for the
Irish. Lord Sheffield, it seems, had consulted Gibbon
on some Irish question. Gibbon had answered, ‘ While
Iam engaged in writing the History of the Decline
and Fall of a great Empire I have neither leisure nor
inclination to attend to the affairs of a remote petty
province.’ ‘Remote!’ exclaimed Ponsonby, ‘and
sixty miles distant. Petty! The whole kingdom of
Ireland ! It is useful to cure this habit in the people
of England.’
- Jreland ought to learn that she will be respected
when she deserves respect, and that till then respect
for her is impossible. The debate degenerated into
personalities. Egan, once a patriot of the patriots
and a supporter of Fitzwilliam, but now in the service
of the Crown, told the Opposition that if they would
not work at the pumps they ought not to increase
the leak; and, with an evident allusion to Grattan,
said that ‘a man who overlooked the dangers of his
country, and thought only of his own diminished
influence, deserved the guillotine.’

Egan, after his manner, had spoken coarsely and
roughly. Grattan rose, and after taunting him with
deserting his party, said, ‘ The honourable gentleman
spoke of cutting off my head, and that in a manner
so peculiarly his own, in the fury and whirlwind of
his passion, that though I did not see the guillotine,
methought I saw the executioner.’

‘T will have no allusions made to me with impu-
nity,’ roared Egan. ‘No little duodecimo volume
shall discharge its contents at my character and per-
son without meeting the treatment it deserves. [

VOL. III. R

241

CHAP.
It

Sloat
1797

Tasch

242

BOOK
19.¢

——___
1797.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

would have the honourable gentleman know that no
part of the support I gave Lord Fitzwilliam was
directed to him. When he was in the zenith of his
power, and strutted in pigmy consequence about the
Castle, I avoided his intimacy. I once admired his
talents; but when [ reflect on the acrimony and. in-
flammation which he has since poured on the popular
mind, when I reflect on the mischief his doctrines
have created, [ see that he has done away his ser-
vices, and betrayed his country, to his own disap-
pointment.’

Again Grattan rose, the wild Irishman showing as
in a dissolving view through the Parliamentary de-
corum.

‘The honourable gentleman’s swaggering,’ he said,
‘is no indication either of talent or spirit. I have
read somewhere—

An angry fool’s a very harmless thing.

The folly of his paroxysms and the blockheadism of
his fury are too ridiculous to excite serious notice.
I smile at them. The honourable gentleman in his
contortions represented to my mind the idea of a
black soul writhing in torments, and his language is
like that of a certain description of the fail Sex,
whom in manner and language he seems desirous to
imitate.’ * |
Neither eloquence nor invective could hold toge-
ther Grattan’s Parliamentary following. . . Ina House
of 148, sixteen members only enoted him on a
division against the Castle measures. |
Four days later George Ponsonby renewed 2
attack, and moved the repeal of the Insurrection

1 Trish Debates, March 1797,

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

Act. His object was no longer to persuade the
Parliament, but to inflame the people out of doors.
_ He described England as struggling hopelessly with
the French giant. He pictured the attitude of Ire-
land as a magnificent spectacle of determination to
submit no longer to tyranny. The Irish, he said,
demanded liberty, and liberty they would have, if
not at the hand of England, then from France.
There was a second display of oratorical fireworks;
Grattan brilliant, as he always was, Curran spark-
ling with wit; the fine speaking all on one side, truth
and good sense upon the other. The same majority
which defeated Grattan defeated Ponsonby.”
Parliament was firm, both in England and Ireland.
In the Cabinet, however, the same influence was
still at work which had led to the appointment of

Fitzwilliam.

1 Trish Debates, March 24.

2 <The inability of the Patriots
to understand the real sores of Ire-
land was as conspicuous as their
fury with the imaginary ones. In
an interval of this debate Sir John
Blaquiere recalled attention to the
Foundling Hospital, the condition
of which he had exposed some
years before. A committee of en-
quiry had reported that out of
2,200 children annually received
into the Hospital, 1,900 disappeared
unaccounted for. Blaquiere had
twice attempted to introduce a
measure for a change of manage-
ment. The first time he was op-
posed by Grattan. The second
time “his bill was lost by the un-
accountable apathy of gentlemen
who could not be brought to give
it support.” Having been unsuc-
cessful in his efforts, he had hoped

The Government refused to let the

that the publicity of their misdeeds
would have shamed the governing
body into attention. He had lately,
however, he said, been again in-
vited to take up the subject in
the interests of humanity; and,.
on enquiry, he had found that the
same mortality continued. Out of
540 children received into the
house between December 1795
and March 1796, 473 were mur-
dered by negligence. The loss of
life had been concealed in the for-
mal returns. On the books three
deaths alone had been entered, and.
the truth was only brought out on
a strict examination. Blaquiere
said he had personally inspected
the hospital, and in one instance
had found fourteen children thrust
away into a garret to die.’—Jrish
Debates, April 12, 1797.

2

a

243

CHAP.
AL

—_—
1797.

April.

244

BOOK
IX.

1797.

April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Opposition dictate to them, but were themselves still
wavering, and Camden could obtain no help in the
form of additional troops, and no definite encourage-
ment. At the secret prompting of their English friends,
Lord Kenmare, Lord Fingal, and other Catholics
whose loyalty was unquestionable, presented a petition
for Emancipation. The Viceroy in transmitting the
petition showed that he was aware of, and that he
acutely felt, the uncertain position in which he was
placed. The quiet and good behaviour of the pea-
santry at the invasion had affected Portland and
affected Pitt. Camden said that his own opinion
remained unchanged. If the Cabinet disagreed with
him, however, he entreated that no consideration for
him should be allowed to embarrass them. He was
heartily willing to retire.’

The severities of the North had been much des-
canted on, he wrote a few days later, on receiving a
copy of Lord Moira’s speech; his own doubt was
whether, if the policy of severity was right, the
measures adopted had been severe enough. The
alternative was to grant a boon to disaffected people,
the want of which they pretended was the cause of
their discontent, but no moderate concession would
satisfy either the Northern Reformers or the Catho-
lics. There were objections to the present Constitu-

tion, but as long as the two countries were connected

Jreland must be governed by an English party. The
Catholics could not be admitted without a change in
all the establishments in the country, and to make
such a change in the existing humour of men seemed
to him impossible. Conciliation, therefore, by those
methods was not in his opinion to be thought of, and

1 ¢Camden to Portland, March 23,’ 8, P. O.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

meanwhile murder and terrorism could not be per-
mitted.' He could encourage no hope that the con-
_ spiracy would be suppressed without bloodshed, but
he insisted that the responsibility was with the United
Irishmen ; that in his measures of coercion he was not
attacking opinion, but a deliberate design of revolu-
tion ; and in proof of his words he enclosed a state-
ment which had been secretly made to him by a
member of the Military Committce of the society, that
the cry of Reform was a mere blind; ‘ that a total
separation from England and the establishment of a
Republic was the sole object of the conspirators ;
that they had a plan to surprise the army in one night
all over the kingdom.’*

The Duke of Leinster now took upon himself to
add to Lord Camden’s difficulties, with the object,
perhaps, of forcing him to resign. On the 25th
of April he informed the Viceroy that he could
no longer be a passive spectator of his country’s
sufferings. He did not hold himself responsible either
to Lord Camden or to any one in the kingdom, but
he thought proper to inform him that he intended to
invite the county of Kildare to join him in a petition
to the King to change the Government.’

The Dublin mob had set an example which the
Duke of Leinster did not think it unbecoming to
follow. Camden, embarrassed as he was, could not
venture to resent the Duke’s insolence, but begged

characteristic : ‘In Down they are
pretty well disciplined. Not so in
Belfast. The idea of the United

1 ¢Camden to Portland, April 3.’
Abridged. 8S. P. O.
2 ‘Camden to Portland, April 15.’

—The informer in this instance
was a miniature-painter, named
Nevile. This man added one remark
in his deposition which is extremely

Irishmen was that discipline was
not necessary. They needed only to
give one fire aud rush on with the
bayonet, like the French.’

245

CHAP.
II.

———_ —
1797.

April.

246

BOOK
IX.
Spe ee”
HFT.
May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

humbly for a few minutes’ conversation. The Duke
‘desired leave to decline the honour, for his mind was
made up.’ }

Two murders followed in April of a clergyman
and a magistrate in Meath. At the beginning of
May the secret committee of the House of Commons,
which was still sitting and collecting evidence, received
information which, if true, made the situation appear
almost desperate.

‘Tt is with the utmost alarm,’ Camden wrote on
the 6th of May, ‘ that the Committee have heard that
on Sunday se’nnight Mr. Edward Byrne? and Doctor
Troy *® appear to have been sworn of the Society of
United Irishmen, as well as about sixty priests. The
person who gave the information had seen several of
the Kilkenny and Kildare Militia sworn. When the
intelligence is confirmed by accounts from the other
parts of Ireland, it 1s impossible to deny that confi-
dence to a testimony of the kind which its extraor-
dinary tendency would otherwise induce me to pause
upon. The Committee urge my impressing the ne-
cessity of a force being sent to this kingdom more
to be relied upon than its own soldiers. It is really
my opinion that an insurrection may take place any
day, and the dreadful effect of its success if it could be
attained must fill the minds of his Majentyt Ss servants
with infinite uneasiness and alarm.’ *

On the back of these communications from Ireland
came the mutiny of the British fleet. First at Ports-
mouth, and then at the Nore, the seamen, exasperated

1 ¢ Correspondence with the Duke § Catholic Archbishop of Dublin.
of Leinster. Enclosed by Camden 4 ¢Camden to Portland, May 6,’
to Portland, April 28.’ 8. P. O. at).

2 Late Chairman of the Catholic
Committee.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

247

at official inattention to their complaints, deposed  cuHap.
their officers and seized the ships, and for six weeks ~~~

such a storm appeared to have overtaken England as
had never before touched her in the darkest hour of her
fortunes. No Irish element was visible in the demands
of the mutineers. Yet it was singular that to corrupt
the fleet with the help of the Irish seamen had been
a favourite idea of M. de la Croix. ‘Though Tone at
first listened coldly, he afterwards caught the notion
with enthusiasm. Half the sailors and petty officers
in the service were Catholics, and in fact it was dis-
covered, when the causes of the mutiny were enquired
into, that the United Irishmen had been busy in-
‘struments in inflaming discontent. Lee, who was
one of the leaders, had been sworn to the society in
Dublin and had enlisted but a few months previously,
‘ probably with a view to create the mutiny for which
he was condemned.’* Wolfe Tone, in a published
address, had invited his fellow-countrymen to use an
opportunity to make themselves masters of the ships,
and he promised them as a bribe the plunder of Eng-
‘lish commerce. The Secret Committee of the British
House of Commons discovered that the crews had
been largely sworn to be true to Ireland, to erect a
Catholic Government there, and ‘to be faithful to

their brethren who were fighting their cause against:

tyrants and oppressors.’ There had been plans among
them to carry different ships into Irish harbours, to
kill the officers if they hindered them, and to hoist
the green flag, with the harp in the place of the
British ensign, and afterwards kill and destroy the
Protestants.”

1¢B, Cooke to Mr. Greville, 2 Report of the Secret Committee
July 4, 1797. 8S. P.O. of Commons. England. 1799.

1797.
May.

248

BOOK
IX.
o—--———l
1797
May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The mutiny gave the French the opportunity for
which they had looked so earnestly. ‘The sea was
open; the fleets at Brest and in the ports of Holland
had six weeks in which they could have gone where
they pleased without danger of being fought with,
The seamen at the Nore had not returned to their
duty till the 15th of June, and those in England
best able to form an opinion were expecting daily to
hear that Hoche was again on the coast of Ireland.
Under these circumstances the resolution of the
Cabinet gave way. Pitt and Dundas recurred to the
hopes with which they had played, and Portland
wrote to tell Lord Camden that he must ‘ weigh and
consider whether means could not be devised to re-
concile the Catholics, bring their support to the
Establishment, and dissolve the unnatural coalition
between them and the Dissenters.’ ”

The Secret Committee of the Irish House of Com-
mons had at that moment completed their report, and
Camden, for answer, sent it over for the Cabinet’s
perusal. The designs of the United Irishmen had
been unravelled from their origin. The political
reforms which they had demanded had been pursued
avowedly as a means of disuniting Ireland from Eng-
land and establishing a Republic, and by the side of
the political agitation the leaders had made prepara-
tions for rebellion to take advantage of the confusion
and excitement which must, under any circumstances,
accompany a change in the Constitution. They had
a hundred thousand men secretly organised and
officered. Notwithstanding Lake’s exertions they

“Unless the business of the Ross, May 9, 1797.’— Cornwallis
fleet can be speedily adjusted, afew Correspondence, vol. ii. p. 326.

days must place a French army in * ‘Portland to Camden, May 13,
Ireland. — Cornwallis to General 1797.’ S, P.O.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

had still large quantities of arms. They had a re-
venue, the last quarter of which had been collected
before the usual time, in anticipation of a French
landing. ‘The magistrates were held in terror by a
secret tribunal of assassination, and efforts were made
in all parts of the island to seduce and corrupt the
soldiers.

‘You ask,’ said Camden, ‘ whether his Majesty
should be advised to accede to a concession which is
made the excuse of rebellion. Rebellion must first
be overcome. It will afterwards be to be considered
how the country is to be governed. As to what you
say of disuniting Catholics and Dissenters, it appears
to me to be merely an expedient to divert a present
danger, and that the country must either be governed
according to its present system, or a change more
extensive must be adopted. I cannot conceal how
melancholy a presage I consider the system to which
we appear to have been forced, of yielding to the
demands of persons who have arms in their hands.’ !

1 «Camden tu Portland, May 18.’ Abridged. S. P. O.

- 249

CHAP.
i

——_—_ _—-
1797.

May,

250

BOOK

MES
1797.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

THE Secret Committee spoke of attempts to seduce
the troops. ‘Those attempts had been so successful
that four of the Monaghan and two of the Wexford
Militia were tried and shot as an example to the rest.
They spoke of the existence of an assassination tri-
bunal. While they were preparing their report,
sentence of death had gone out against Lord Car-
hampton, the Commander-in-Chief, who next to the
Chancellor was the best-hated man in Ireland. So
long as Luttrell was at the head of the army the rebel
leaders knew that their game would be dangerous.
Luttrell, therefore, was to be taken away. The in-
teresting gentlemen who were dreaming of making
themselves masters of Ireland were not growing more
true to each other as the melodrama developed itself.
A member of the Assassination Committee, James
Ferris, was in Carhampton’s pay, and gave him notice
that his death had been determined on. A meeting
had been held to talk the subject over. A blacksmith
named Dunn had volunteered his services; and being
one of Carhampton’s tenants, born on his estate, living
at his gate, in constant employment about his house,
and so thoroughly trusted that he had access to the
grounds at Luttrell’s Town at all hours, he was wel-
comed as well fitted for his work. Already he had
given proof of his qualifications. He had himself
been the murderer, as he confessed afterwards, of two
obnoxious persons to whom Carhampton had given
shelter, and who had been found dead in the park.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

The day fixed for the death of the Commander-in-
Chief was Sunday, the 14th of May. Luttrell was
in the habit of driving out from Dublin to his
house on Sunday mornings. He carried pistols, and
was known to be a cool and certain shot. The assassin
proposed to follow the carriage on horseback, with

three or four companions armed with blunderbusses,:

fire a volley of slugs into the windows at Luttrell
and his aide-de-camp, and then shoot the postillion and
the servants. If the plan failed, a bold villain, named
Farrell, said that he would kill Carhampton in the
street single-handed.

Ferris consenting, contrary to general experience,
to give evidence in court, there was no occasion to
wait till the assassin could be caught in the act.
Dunn and several others were arrested; and Car-
hampton, kuowing the man so intimately, visited
him in his cell, and enquired the meaning of such
a return for his past kindness. Carhampton, with
all his experience, confessed himself astonished at
the coolness of the answer. ‘The man, who had been
in his own service from his childhood, told him he
considered it would be a meritorious act to kill him,
and acknowledged frankly that he had meant to
do it with his own hand. <A second time Carhampton
went to see him, accompanied by Lord Enniskillen.
Dunn was on his knees praying when they entered.
He repeated his confession without a sign of contri-
tion. As it was not impossible that the man might
spring on him, Carhampton on these occasions had
his pistols with him. ‘The third time on which he saw
him he had nearly reason to regret that he had
omitted the same precaution. The prisoner was then
unfettered, walking in the yard. His demeanour

252

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

was changed. He denied all that he had confessed,

IX. |
——-— swore he was falsely accused, and swaggered up so

1797.
May.

close and so menacingly to his visitor that Luttrell
bade him sharply to keep off, struck him across
the face with a switch, and laid his face open.
He was tried; and though Curran as his advocate did
his best to discredit the approver’s testimony, was
convicted and hanged.!

The blindest enthusiast for Irish liberty must now
have been aware of the spirit with which the Govern-
ment had to reckon. ‘The occasion of the conspiracy
to kill Carhampton was appropriately selected by the
Ponsonbies and Grattan for their last effort in Parlia-
ment. They knew that their friends in England were
working upon the Cabinet, and they knew that the
Cabinet was undecided. The mutiny in the fleet was
at its height. Any hour might bring news that a
French squadron was in the Shannon or in Lough
Swilly. On the 15th of May George Ponsonby
brought forward a series of resolutions in the House
of Commons—that all religious disabilities must be
abolished ; that it was the indispensable right of the
people of Ireland to be fully and freely represented in
Parliament; that the Constitution must be remodelled,
the country must be divided into electoral districts
of six thousand houses each, and every district must
return two members.

Lord Camden had to act on his own responsibility,
without the support from England which at such a
moment the Cabinet was bound to have extended to
him. By their own intolerable folly in 1782 and in
1789 the Protestant Parliament of Ireland had set the
agitation rolling of which they were now discovering

1 ¢ Trial of James Dunn,’—State Trials, vol. xxvi.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

the meaning. They had taught English statesmen to
know that they were not to be depended on; and
_ though the Cabinet declined to force them to strike their
colours, they left them to gather the bitter harvest of
their infatuation, and deal as they could with the
wild spirit which they kad let loose. They had in-
sisted on the exclusive right to manage their own
affairs. Pitt was taking them at their word, forget-
ting that he and Dundas had contributed their own
share to the present danger in forcing on the conces-
sions of 93.

At this moment Fitzgibbon was the sustaining
genius of the Irish Administration. He had himself
from the first foreseen the issue to which the fine
talk of independence was tending. Lord Camden,
undirected from home, consented to be guided by the
one man whose advice had never been neglected
without penalties, or followed without being 2 justified
in the result.

Ponsonby’s motion was felt to be a final effort.
The debate lasted through the night and long after
the risen sun was shining through the windows.
Pelham declared for the Government that, with the
report of the Committee in his hands, he would not
consent to launch Ireland on a career of revolution.
As the argument proceeded it appeared more and
more clearly that the neutrality of England would
not affect the result, and that the resolutions would
be rejected by an enormous majority.

Grattan spoke last, the stream which the world calls
eloquence flowing like a mountain torrent, metaphor
and simile flashing like prismatic colours in the spray.
Towards the end he fell into a tone of prophetic so-
lemnity. He affected a conviction that the Government

253

CHAP.
IT,
———-——"
1797.
May.

254

BOOK
1d.¢
———__

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

policy must fail, the resolutions must triumph, and
that for himself and his friends nothing remained
but to wash their hands, like Pilate. ‘You argue,’
he said, ‘ that you can neither emancipate the Catho-
lics nor reform the Constitution till the insurrection
is put down. You cannot put it down. Coercion
has failed ; the war against democracy has failed.
The evil has only been made worse. Agitation, once
insignificant, has been able to influence every county
in the kingdom, to levy an army, to provide arms and
ammunition. As coercion has advanced. the United
Irishmen have advanced. The measures taken to
disarm have armed them, to make them weak and
odious have made them powerful and popular. What
remains, then, but to try our plan and reform the
Parliament ? You say you must subdue before you
reform. Alas! you think so. But you forget that
you subdue by reforming. It is the best conquest
you can obtain over your own people. Suppose you
succeed, what is your success?—a military Govern-
ment. And what may be the consequence of such a
victory ?—a separation. Suppose the war continues,
and your conquest interrupted by a French invasion,
what will be your situation then ?’

Was Grattan sincere in pretending to believe that
the United Irishmen would be subdued by reform ?
Did Grattan suppose that the war with the Revolu-
tion would fail? that France would triumph? that
England this time was going finally upon the rock,
and had no second rally before her as she had rallied
after losing America? Who can tell? This only he
found indisputably, that his power over the House of
Commons of Ireland was gone; and having made the
discovery, he concluded with shaking himself free of

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

further connection with a body to which he had once
considered it his proudest achievement to have com-
mitted the destinies of his country.

‘We have offered you our measure,’ he said. ‘ You
will reject it. We deprecate yours. You will perse-
vere. Having no hope left to persuade or dissuade,
and having discharged our duty, we shall trouble you
no more, and from ar day we shall not attend the
House of Commons.’

As the echo of the words died away the House
divided. Of two hundred members present a hundred
and seventy supported Lord Camden. Mr. Grattan
and his followers seceded, and the Parliamentary
Opposition of Ireland died by its own hand.

The peril of the situation was scarcely increased.
The Constitutional channel for the discharge of incen-
diary rhetoric was closed at least on one side of the
Channel, and the Government was left free to deal
with the problem out of doors. Lord Camden had
to encounter enemies as unscrupulous as they were
cowardly and cruel. Enthusiasts for popular rights,
if unwise, are usually honourable, and in the ab-
sence of other virtues are rarely without courage
and truthfulness. The United Irishmen pursued their
object through secret murder and open lying. General
Lake had been doing his work in the North with as
much tenderness as was compatible with his duty.
The Revolutionary Committee of Belfast published a
manifesto against him on the 14th of April, in which
they invited the universe to be a witness of their
wrongs.

Their fellow-citizens, they said, ‘were confined in
Bastiles; their wives and daughters were made the

1 Irish Debates, May 15, 16, 1797,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

daily victims of a licentious foreign soldiery.’* The
Government accused them of horrid crimes. The
Government, in reality, was endeavouring to goad
them into rebellion by premeditated cruelty. For

the sake of their country they had endured hitherto

their unparalleled sufferings, but a time was ap-
proaching when forbearance might be a crime. Should
they ever be roused, the armies of United Ireland
would trample their oppressors into dust. They ap-
pealed to the ‘ national armed force,’ the Militia. They
appealed to the Yeomanry. They appealed to the
British nation. They appealed to the great Father of
Mankind to look upon their wrongs and redress them.
To this language Lord Camden replied on the day
after Grattan’s secession, giving the Committee an
opportunity to make good their words :—

‘Whereas there exists in this kingdom a traitorous con-
spiracy by persons calling themselves United Irishmen to
subvert the authority of his Majesty and Parliament, and
to destroy the Constitution. And whereas, for the exe-
cution of those wicked designs they have planned open
violence, and formed secret arrangements for raising, arm-
ing, and paying a disciplined force, plundered houses of
arms, cut down trees for pike-handles, have attempted to
disarm the Yeomanry, and fired on his Majesty’s troops. It
is now necessary to use the utmost powers with which Go-
vernment is by law entrusted for the suppression of such
traitorous attempts. And whereas the exertion of the civil
power has proved ineffectual, We, the Lord-Lieutenant
and Council, determined to suppress such attempts, and de-
sirous to prevent the evil-disposed or misled from falling
into dangers to which ignorance may expose them, do fore- ©
warn all men from entering into the said societies. We

1 These charges were examined mons, and it was found ‘that the
into in the following year by a _ search for arms had been conducted
committee of the House of Com- with all possible mildness,’

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

charge all persons having knowledge of those meetings to
give information of them; and as it has become necessary
to employ military force, we have ordered all officers to
oppose such as should resist them in the execution of their
duty with the exertion of the utmost force. We command
our officers, civil and military, and all other subjects, to use
their utmost endeavours to discover pikes, guns, swords,
weapons, and ammunition of all kinds concealed. We charge
all persons. having such arms in their hands to deliver them
at their peril. Believing that many of his Majesty’s subjects
may have joined these societies without knowing their na-
ture, or from intimidation, and may be willing to return to

their allegiance, we promise full pardon to all persons so
seduced who, before the 24th of June, will surrender to
any magistrate of the county where they reside, take the

oath of allegiance, and give recognisances for their good
behaviour.’

A copy of this proclamation was sent to every
magistrate and to every officer in command of a
detachment. Precise directions accompanied it to
disarm. the people everywhere, to send parties of
troops to search where arms were supposed to be
concealed, and to treat every person as a rebel who
resisted them in the discharge of their duty.

The gauntlet was thus thrown down. The Govern-
ment»had given a clear intimation that they would
yield no further, and now was the time for the United
Irishmen to show of what metal they were made.
The French negotiation was hanging fire. The pre-
cious interval of the mutiny’ was passing away.
On the appearance of the proclamation a secret
meeting of Delegates, from all parts of Ireland, was
held at Dublin to decide what they should do. The
Ulster men were for an instant rising. The Militia
they believed to. be disaffected to a man. They
asserted, with or without ground, that they had

VOL, III. s

258

BOOK
TR: ;
~--—— surprise. There were depdts of arms and ammuni-

1797
May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

friends in the Castle garrison who would assist in a

tion at Athlone and Mullingar which they were con-
fident of being able to secure. If they had Athlone
in their hands, the country was expected to rise
between that place and Drogheda. Communication
with the North would thus be cut off, and Lake
could be overpowered. Arthur O’Connor was for
immediate action also, and undertook to raise twenty
thousand men in the South.

At that time, and while the disarmament had
been only commenced, they might doubtless have
effected something considerable. But the Dublin
Committee, magnificent on platform or in leading
articles, were in action arrant cowards. They in-
sisted that the French must be waited for. High
words rose. The hard republican Northerners, when
they went into a conspiracy, meant business by it,
not blatant timidity. When the Dublin men refused
to go with them, they thought at one time of attempt-
ing the Castle alone. There were seventy or eighty
of them who could depend on one another. They
trusted that the mob would join when a beginning
had been made ; and only an accidental change of the
guard made them relinquish their purpose after all.
They returned to Belfast, meaning to rise alone against
Lake, but they were embarrassed and alarmed by the
frequent arrests of their leaders. Treachery of some
kind was evidently at work. A coolness arose between
them and the Southern Catholics. They distrusted
their allies; they doubted whether, in company with
cowards, they could make the revolution the glorious
thing which they had anticipated. They began to
think it was time to take care of themselves—some

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

went abroad, others stayed at home, and meddled no
more in politics, and from that moment the interest
of Ulster in the rebellion began to decline.!

Wolfe Tone, in France, bewailed bitterly his Dublin
friends’ poltroonery. Keogh he had long known to
be a poor creature, but he confessed himself astonished
that Emmett had not shown more energy. The
labour of years was crumbling away. One after
another his comrades joined him with the same pitiful
story, that the United Lodges throughout the North-
ern counties were disheartened and dissolving. The
people waited till the last day mentioned in the pro-
clamation, and then, seeing their leaders passive and
no help reaching them from abroad, ‘submitted
almost entirely,’ gave up their arms, and took the
oath of allegiance.” Tone consoled himself with the
hope that when the French landed the oath would
be forgotten, or, as he expressed it, ‘that their pre-
sent submission would not prevent the people from
doing what was right.’ But the loss of Ulster was,
in fact, the loss of the right arm of the insurrection.
The Presbyterians fell away, and gradually re-united
themselves to their own Orange kindred. The con-
spiracy declined rapidly into the form which rebel-
lions in that country inevitably assume, and became
a strictly nationalist movement of the Catholic Irish,
with a few foolish enthusiasts of no religion at all
in the Committee by which it was nominally ruled.

The supreme direction passed now to the Dublin
executive. Wolfe Tone was not completely in their
confidence. An attorney named Lewines, who had

1 «See a most curious accountof in London, October 8, 1797.’
the Dublin meeting, and the conse-_ 5. P.O.
quences of it, given by one of the * Wolfe Tone’s Journal, Au-
Ulster Delegates to Lord Downshire — gust 5, 1797,
§ 2

al

259

CHAP.
II.

_——o
1797.

August.

260

BOOK
ix.

———
Woy,

August.

dispelled.
favourably considered. The Irish agents pressed for

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

been bred as a Jesuit, was sent to Paris as their
resident agent with the Directory. A memorial was
drawn up, indicating the points of the coast where
an invading force could most easily be landed, and
where it would be most certain of receiving support
from the people. Doctor MacNeven, the ablest
member of the association that remained, undertook
the delivery of it, and followed Lewines? to France.
Difficulties had arisen with the French Government
as to the scale on which assistance was to be rendered.
The Directory, if it meddled with Ireland, preferred to
invade with a force which would make France master
of the country after the English had been expelled.
The Irish Committee desired to limit their dangerous
auxiliaries to numbers which would be insufficient to
enable them to make Ireland a second Italy. Sus-
picions, which had arisen on both sides, were now
MacNeven’s memoir was received, and

immediate assistance. The Directory promised to
use the very first opportunity, and undertook mean-

while to make no peace with England of which the

independence of Ireland was not a condition.

Thus on all sides the situation was clearing. The
memoir said that the Irish priests were no longer
alarmed at French irreligion, and were now well-
affected to the cause.?, The English Cabinet ceased

1 “Doctor MacNeven is a phy- ployed as he appears to be. He

sician, very eloquent and very
clever; a member of the Catholic
Committee, and calculated by his
talents to take a lead in the treason
entrusted to him. He has been in
close habits of intimacy with Lord
Edward Fitzgerald. I did not
know this person was so much em-

must be strictly watched, both here
and in England; and an exact de-
scription of his person, which is a
very remarkable one, shall be trans-
mitted.’—‘ Camden to Portland,
August 30.’ §. P. O.

It is remarkable that although
MacNeven himself carried the me-

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

to worry Lord Camden with suggestions of a change
of policy. Their hearts had failed them after Grat-
tan’s secession. ‘The hatred of Carhampton had led
them to think of superseding him by a more popular
Commander-in-Chief. Lord Cornwallis had been
spoken of, and Carhampton and Camden, who had
no love for their ungrateful office, were but too will-
ing to pass over to him the responsibility both of the
command of the troops and of the Viceroyalty itself,
if he would accept it.’ Cornwallis’s solid qualities
were unequal to the understanding of the Irish pro-
blem. He believed, perhaps under the influence of his
friend Lord Moira, in the common platitudes of the
Liberal party. In aconversation with Pitt and Dundas
he declared it impossible for him ‘to engage in the
business . . . unless means were taken immediately to
separate the Catholics and Dissenters.’ He considered
that ‘very great concessions, little, if at all, short of
what was called Catholic Emancipation, were neces-
sary, and ought not to be withheld.’ When pressed
to undertake the command he replied that, ‘if Ireland
was invaded, or was in immediate danger of inva-
sion, he would go there ;’ but that otherwise he was
convinced that no force that England could employ
would reduce the country to obedience, and ‘that he
could not honestly undertake a task which he be-
lieved could not be accomplished.’ ?

moir to Paris, and no suspicion them forwarded to Lord Camden.
has been suggested of MacNeven’s 1¢Camden to Lord Cornwallis,
treachery, the original document, May 23, 1797.’—Cornwallis Letters,
not a copy, but the memoir itself, vol. ii. p. 327.

was in a few days in the hands of * ¢ Portland to Camden, June 10.
the English Cabinet, and was by Most private.’ S. P.O.

261

CHAP.
II.

a
Davi.

August.

262

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION YV.

Wotre Tone meanwhile, inspired by steady hate of

ee England, and refusing to be dispirited by his dis-

1797.
August

appointment at Bantry, had unweariedly kept the
cause of his country before General Hoche, who had
taken Ireland for his peculiar province. The spring
passed without fresh efforts; but with the summer
came Lewines and MacNeven, and on the 21st of
June Hoche told Tone that a second expedition had
been resolved upon, but on a scale so large that two
months must pass before the preparations for it
would be completed. ‘The opportunity of the Mu-
tiny of the Nore had been allowed to pass unused.
It was now over, and the men had returned to their
duties ; but the impression prevailed in France that
the fleet was still unfit for active duty. Both Tone
and Lewines besought instant action. If a landing
could be effected in Ireland at once, they undertook
that the Irish seamen would again make themselve

masters of the Channel squadron, and that 5,000
men at that moment would be worth more than
25,000 in the autumn or winter. Hoche listened ;
the Directory listened. There was a Dutch fleet
prepared for sea in the Texel, and a Dutch army of
15,000 men eager to distinguish itself. General
Dandaels offered to go as commander of the land
forces. Admiral de Winter said his ships could be
ready in a fortnight. To the Dutch the Irish cam-
paign was made over; and Tone, who was in despair
at; parting from Hoche, was consoled by hearing from

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

him that French jealousy would be piqued, and that
he would himself be despatched immediately after
with a second expedition from Brest.

De Winter had not overstated his forwardness. In
the first week in July the army was on board. Tone,
who was to accompany the admiral, was delighted
with the appearance of the ships—sixteen sail of the
line and ten frigates, all in excellent fighting order,
with seven-and-twenty transports. Here once more
was hope. Admiral Duncan lay outside with the
blockading squadron. ‘Twelve and sometimes four-
teen sail could be counted from the shore, but in
Tone’s eager eyes they were filled with his injured
countrymen, whose hearts were beating time with
hisown. ‘There was no fear of Duncan, either in him
or in the Dutch commander, who was looking forward
to an engagement outside the harbour with enthusiasm
and confidence. The difficulty was to sail out and
meet him. In Bantry Bay a gale from the east had
divided the French fleet and prevented a landing. In
the Texel a steady wind from the west confined the
Dutch to their anchorage. Day followed day, week
followed week, and still the west wind blew, while,
warned by MacNeven’s memoir, the Admiralty sent
Duncan reinforcements, and the twelve ships increased
to twenty.

Once more we observe the scene through Tone’s
impatient jottings.

‘July 16.—A spy sent out. Returns last night with
news that the English fleet is twenty-four sail of the
line. I believe it is a lie. Duncan has fifteen or
sixteen at most. We sail instantly that the wind will
let us. July 17.—A wind foul as the devil. July
18.—Foul as possible this morning. Cannot be worse,

263

CHAP.
II.

———
eee

July.

264

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Hell! hell! hell! July 19—There never was and

—— never will be such an expedition as’ ours, if it suc-

SESE.
August.

ceeds. It will change the destiny of Europe, open
the sea to the commerce of the world, and subvert a
tyranny of six hundred years. Gun exercise every
day. They fire incomparably well. July 28.—Fair
wind yesterday at last, but so late and feeble we could
not weigh anchor. July 29.—Wind fair, but so light
we cannot stir. ‘ihe admiral counted to-day the
English fleet at anchor. Twenty-five three-masters,
fifteen or sixteen liners, the rest frigates. Wind ex-
cellent to-night. We are off to-morrow.’ !

At daybreak the signal was flying to weigh. The
sails were dropping from the yards, the rigging of
sixty vessels all black with busy figures clinging to
the ropes. Ifthe wind held, they would be engaged
before noon.

The perverse wind which had mocked their hopes
edged to the south and thence to the south-west, with
a gale and a thunderstorm.

‘ There is a fate in this business,’ was the entry of
the 2nd of August. ‘We have been twenty-five days
on board when twenty-five hours are of moment.
For five or six weeks the sea was open through the
mutiny. We could have gone where we pleased. No-
thing was ready, and the chance was lost. Had we
been in Ireland at the moment of the insurrection at
the Nore, we should, beyond a doubt, have had that
fleet at least.’

‘August 8.—Wind foul. They talk now of the
lateness of the season. England is a second time
saved by the wind. I begin to grow desperate.’

The delay was exhausting the provisions. There

1 Wolfe Tone’s Journal, July 1797.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

were no longer stores to enable De Winter to risk a

265

CHAP.

voyage ee Scotland, with the chance of detention See

at sea. A council of war was held, at which two of
the Belfast Committee, Lowry and Tennant, were
present, and De Winter suggested sending off a small
squadron and three thousand men. The Irish leaders
said that before Lake had disarmed Ulster five hun-
dred would have been sufficient. The conditions
were now changed, but the organisation was not
yet completely broken up. They thought that with
three thousand men the venture might be made.
Now, however, Dandaels made a difficulty. Dandaels
refused to go with less than four thousand, and De
Winter said he could not provide for so many. Finally,
the Dutch Government decided that the original de-
sign must be adhered to. ‘The troops must be landed
for the present, the transports re-victualled, and De
Winter ageriaatile must go out when an 1 opportunity
offered and destroy Duncan.

Readers of English naval history know what fol-
lowed. On the 11th of October De Winter sailed out
of the Texel, not to destroy Duncan, but, after a
desperate engagement, to be utterly ruined by him.
This time the Irish gentry had no reason to complain
that the English fleet neglected their defence, and the
brief absurd dream that Catholic Ireland was to find
a champion in Calvinist Holland was ended at Cam-
perdown.

A second blow to Tone’s hopes almost more severe
was the death of General Hoche by rapid consumption.
In Hoche he lost the only Frenchman in whom he had
been able to kindle a genuine interest in his country.
The direction of the foreign military policy of France
passed to Napoleon, and in Napoleon he found cold

TIT.
‘ October.

266

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

civility and nothing more. Ireland was not to be

X.
a thrown over so long as chronic disturbance served to

1797
September.

divert and embarrass England, but to loud talk of a
re-established Irish neanelity Napoleon closed his
ears. He refused to believe that the native Irish
were more than two millions, and he wounded patriot
vanity by the contempt with which he spoke of them.

The invasion was thus again indefinitely postponed,
and the number of Irish refugees in Paris became con-
siderable. Having brought Ireland to the edge of a
conflagration, they preferred to remain out of danger
on the Continent till the French were ready to place
them at the head of their admiring countrymen.
Some were traitors in Pitt’s pay. The rest chilled
still further the cooling interest of France in their
cause by their petty jealousies and childish vanity.
Each insisted that he and his own knot of friends were
the true representatives of Irish opinion. Among
others there appeared again on the scene Napper
Tandy, from America, giving out that he was some
ereat one. Wolfe Tone and Lewines were civilians ;
Napper, who had commanded the Dublin Volunteer
Artillery, presented himself as an experienced officer.
He had money. His sons still carried on business in
Dublin. He declared that when he set foot in Ire-
land it would be the re-appearance of Achilles; thirty
thousand soldiers would spring to his side.

These foolish beings were the scum and froth which
the rebellion was working off and throwing from it.
The serious part remained at home. Lord Camden
had hoped that the break-up in Ulster might dissolve
the conspiracy. He found to his sorrow that the
Committees in Dublin and elsewhere were at work as
vigorously as ever. He might arrest individuals, but

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION. 267

the system baffled him.t The Duke of Leinster had CHAP.

seceded from the Parliament with Grattan and Pon- re

sonby. ‘The attitude of the Opposition was inter- september,

preted by the people as a constitutional sanction to

rebellion and an open encouragement to them to

transfer their allegiance to France.” The prepara-

tions in the Texel were on everybody’s lips, and kept

alive the excitement and irritation through the sum-

mer and into the autumn. At the end of September

the Dutch were still eagerly looked for ;? and confident

in their new allies, and forgetful or careless now that

Dutch theology was not precisely their own, the Catho-

lics refused any terms of reconciliation with the Go-

vernment short of the establishment of their religion.*
Undisturbed by clamour, and with a courage de-

serving higher commendation than the Cabinet dared

to bestow upon it, Lord Camden, with the invasion

hanging over him, stood to his work of disarming

Ulster. It was Ulster which he chiefly dreaded.

1¢Camden to Portland, June

pendence. Tandy, Tone, and Le-
Pyro, We

wines are the chief agents, The

2 ¢The line of conduct pursued
by the Opposition has tended more
to alienate the people of this coun-
try, and dispose them to connect
themselves with France, than any
other circumstance.’—‘ Pelham to
Portland, September 29,’ S. P. O.

3 On the 26th Mr. Cooke sent a
note to Mr. Greville, which he said
he had received from a person ‘ high
in confidence among the United
Irishmen, who had never deceived
him.’ The note was this :—

‘From undoubted authority I
assure you that an invasion is now
considered inevitable. Assurances
are received from France that the
Government is determined, and that
Ireland shall have complete inde-

time fixed is the first fair wind after
the equinoctial gales are over.
Tandy will have a commission, and
Tone comes as secretary to the
commander of the land forces. All
mouths are at work whispering
the intelligence through the coun-
try. In a few days it will be
known through every village in
the kingdom.’ — MSS, 8. P.O.
September 26.

* “Nothing short of the establish-
ment of the Catholic religion will
satisfy those of that persuasion;
and as the property of the country
is in the hands of Protestants, such
an event can never take place with-
out civil war.’—‘ Pelham to Port-

land, September 29.’ S. P. O.

268 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK If Ulster could be either pacified or handcuffed,
en he believed himself capable of encountering the dis-
October, affection of the Southern Provinces. Severe measures

were used, and the severity may at times have been
excessive. Camden did not deny that he meant ‘to
strike terror.’ ‘Terrorism had been the policy of the
rebels.’ ‘They had brought the Northof Ireland into
such a state that a tenant did not dare acknowledge
his landlord, and the assassinations of informers were
without number.’ Such a system could be confronted
only by proof that the Government had the harder
hand. The ‘ Northern Star,’ the patriot organ at
Belfast, had distinguished itself by inviting the militia
to perjury. The infected Monaghan regiment, four
privates out of which had been shot, was quartered
there, and the loyal comrades of the men who had
been executed, ‘knowing that the “ Star” had been
the means of seduction,’ attacked the office, destroyed
the press, and wrecked the printer’s house. Cottages,
and even villages, had been burnt, where large quan-
tities of arms had been found concealed. Orders had
been given, and were strictly enforced, that lights
should be extinguished at an early hour of the night;
and persons found abroad after dark were made to give
a sharp account of themselves. A shot was fired at
the house of a tenant of Lord Moira, by which a wo-
man was frightened, though not hurt. Incendiarism
and murder, when committed by the rebels, were the
venial effervescence of a too zealous patriotism. Se-
verity, inflicted in the interest of order, was the only
form of outrage which in the opinion of Irish patriots
was held to merit reprobation. The Liberal newspapers
in both islands were filled with accounts of the barba-
rity of General Lake’s soldiers. ‘The outcries rose to

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

a scream when the Government seized a member of the
Executive Northern Committee whom they had long
known to be one of the worst and most dangerous of
them, and against whom, by the help of an informer,
they had at last obtained legal evidence. William Orr
was tried at Carrickfergus,in October, for high treason.
The most passionate efforts were made to save him,
but the proofs were too clear. He was convicted and
duly hanged. His body was carried off, his veins
were opened, and calf’s blood was injected, in the hope
of restoring the circulation. When all failed he had
a public funeral, which was attended by thousands.
His cap was cut in shreds, distributed in relics, and
worn in rings and bracelets by the patriotic daughters
of Ireland. ‘Remember Orr’ was thenceforth added
to the secret byewords of vengeance which were
taking possession of the Irish ear and driving the
people to madness.

General Lake’s measures were felt to be successful,
and the rage was proportionately extravagant. There
now appeared at intervals a paper called the ‘ Union
Star.’ It was printed on one side of a sheet, so that
it could be pasted upon the walls. The avowed ob-
ject was ‘to denounce by name the partners and crea-
tures of Pitt and his sanguinary journeyman, Lut-
trell,’ and offer them one by one to what was called
‘public justice.’ A Government proclamation having
spoken of the ‘Star’ with the indignation which it
deserved, the ‘Star’ replied with the following pas-
sage :— ‘

‘We have seen a paper with the name of Camden
prefixed attempting to hurt the ‘ Union Star’ by
naming it a vehicle for inviting assassination. The
‘Union Star” in the opinion of honest Irishmen will

269:

CHAP.
II.
——-—"

179%.

Novembe«.

270

BOOK
IX.

eee ee”
1797.

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

not be less valuable. We are not advocates for
assassination, but we know on the authority of his-
tory that assassination preserved the liberties and
rescued many of the ancient republics from aspiring
villains. . . We certainly do not advise, but we do
not decry assassination, as we conceive it is the only
mode at present within the reach of Irishmen to bring
to justice the royal agents who are constantly exer-
cising rapes, murders, and burnings through our de-
voted country. We appeal to thy noble and venerated
name, oh! Brutus. Prince of patriotic assassins, thy
noble and virtuous spirit should pervade our land.’ 4

The ‘Star’ preached tyrannicide. The Dublin
Committee employed agents like the blacksmith Dunn
to practise it. Simultaneously the patriots of higher
orade had abandoned the field in the Irish Parliament
only to transfer their efforts to the sister country,
where they could count better on popular ignorance,
and where they knew that they could appeal with
effect to the national abhorrence of oppression. The
Duke of Leinster drew up a formal indictment against
the proceedings of General Lake. The London press
took it up, and the misgovernment of Camden and
Clare was represented as the only cause of the dis-
quiet of Ireland. Lord Moira threatened a second
attack in the House of Lords, and the Prime Minister
wrote to Pelham and Camden for an explanation of
particular acts of cruelty with which Lake was popu-
larly charged. Pitt himself did not affect to believe
them, but to special accusations he desired to be able
to give a special reply.

The answer was painfully easy. The policeman
who has stunned a man with his staff may appear a

1 Report of the Secret Committee of the Commons, Appendix, 27.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

gratuitous savage till it has been shown that the man
whom he struck was beating his wife to death.
Camden had but to send authentic proof of the con-
duct and temper of the people with whom he had to
deal.

The Irish complaint reduced to plain language was
simply this:—You English, they said in effect, have
conquered this island, and we wish to have it for our-
selves. We will not fight for it, but we require you
to let us alter our Constitution so that we shall be
free in spite of you. If you refuse, we will conspire
with your enemies, we will murder your friends, we
will make it impossible for you to govern us ; your
magistrates, your constables, your witnesses shall die
if they put your laws in force against us; and if in
return you dare to punish us by shorter methods, we
will proclaim to the world that what you call our
crimes are the fruits of your own tyranny.

For eighteen years the air had been filled with the
windy declamations of Grattan, and the fierce and
sullen spirit which lies at the bottom of the Irish
nature like the sleeping fire of a volcano was now
awakening in its dreadful reality.

Camden and Pelham wrote at length in painful
detail.! Each morning’s post brought with it some
fresh tale of horror. Before the Viceroy had closed
his letter news came from the South that one magis-
trate had been murdered, another wounded ; a con-
stable had been found dead with his limbs hacked in
pieces, and a label left in his hand threatening the
same treatment to anyone who should bury him.
At Two Mile Bridge, near Youghal, a farmer, his

1 ‘Pelham to Pitt, November 2. land, November 3, Private and
Lord Camden to the Duke of Port- secret.’ S. P.O,

271

CHAP.
I.

——
1797.

November,

262

BOOK
IX.
————’
Nv ALi

November,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND. |

wife, his servant, his pigs, his dogs, even his poultry,
had all been slaughtered. The bowels of. the man
had. been torn out, and on him too a label was lying,
that such was the reward of an informer.

Were these things to go on? were the tears of the
friends of liberty to flow in, streams for the sullen
scoundrel who was flogged till he confessed to the
store of secret arms which he had laid up for deeds
of devilry; and was there to be no pity for the
victims who were nightly sacrificed because : they
had dared to exert themselves for his detection and

punishment ? *

1 Let the reader who desires to
understand Lord Camden’s _posi-
tion study the following letter from
Mr. Rolleston, of Green Park,
Youghal, dated October 26, 1797.
Mr. Rolleston had already reported
the mutilation of some horses:and
cows, almost within view of his
windows :—

‘On the night of the 23rd,’ he
wrote again, ‘a day remarkable in
history,! a murder of the most
atrocious kind was committed on
three persons, at a village named
Two Mile Bridge . . The surgeons
and physicians who went to view
the bodies came away sickened.
The deceased were a man, his wife,
and a servant-maid. The head was

a respectable, wealthy farmer, who ,

first provoked the miscreants by not

selling his milk at their reduced
prices. For that they houghed jhis

cows. He gave information to Mr.

Swayne, a magistrate here, and two /

men were taken up and sent to
Waterford Gaol. The night but

one following, this murder was

committed, and the people: of the

\ The anniversary of the out-
break in 1641. i

_ their father.

village pretend to say they heard
nothing of it, so determined are
they on secrecy. The terror sys-
tem is universal. We hear of fresh
murders every day. Mr. Power
had a tenant, whose bowels were
torn out... . The clerk of Temple
Michael parish has been murdered.

. Forty pounds are publicly of-
fered for Mr. Swayne’s head; but,
in fact, all yeomen are proscribed.
This day I got a hint not to join in
out parties; that’ my father, my
uncle, and myself were loved and
respected, and that I should not
wantonly deprive my children of
I answered, I pre-
ferred an honourable death to a dis-
honourable life. I would always

endeavour to bring a murderer to

justice, and defend my property.
We were ready to hear any real

_ grievances, but could not allow our

properties to be torn from us. . .
We have little composed sleep. I
cannot place entire confidence in
any servants I have; they are
either under the influence of terror,
or their minds are vitiated.. . A
little time will show what our te-
nants mean to.do. Tithes are not
their real object—they have amuch

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

To drive the peasantry to madness forged Orange
oaths were hung on the doors of the chapels, threaten-
ing Catholics with extermination. When the batile
of Camperdown had destroyed their hopes of in-
vasion, they were told that the Irish seamen in the
fleet had won the day ; that at the ‘moment when
the blood and brains of generous Papists had adorned
the last victory of the wooden walls of England, but
not of Ireland, the bloody dastardly hand of tyranny
was pointing the dagger at their hearts.’ They were
reminded ‘ that while the honest United Irishmen
were grasped with the iron hand of ferocity and
cruelty, the infamous Orangemen, who thirsted after
blood and murder, were caressed and encouraged by
the heavenly Government.’ They were informed—
and the sham oath was referred to as a proof—‘ that
the Orangemen had sworn to be true to the King and
Government, and to destroy the Catholics of Ireland.’
They were invited to believe that an Orangeman
had invented a toast, ‘That the skins of the Papists
should be drumheads for the Yeomanry,’ and that the
framer of that toast had been appointed secretary at
the Castle. A list was posted against a chapel door
at Nenagh, of certain Protestants in the neighbour-
hood, whom the people were desired by no means to
injure, but were advised to remember their names.’

In the condition of the public mind these stories
were accepted as truth, reported in the papers, and
wider view. They want fairly to letter from Mr. Rolleston, October
overturnus. Ifmyhouseisattacked, 26, 1797.’ 8S, P.O.
we shall all go together, for the 1 ‘Letter posted on the door of
bloody ruffians did not leave adog _ the Catholic chapel at Nenagh, No-
or a cat alive in the last massacre. vember 1.—Enclosed by Camden
T am well assured the Defenders’ to the Duke of Portland.’ 5S. P.O.

oath goes to a general massacre of 2 Ibid.
all Protestants.’—‘ Iixtracts of a

VOL. III. T

273

CHAP.
ae
--—"

1797.

November.

1797. |

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

gained credit even in England. Pelham thought at
one time of going over and dragging before the
English Parliament the situation in which the Castle
was placed. He was deterred by the fear of exas-
perating further the bitterness between the two
countries. Camden said that only dreary familiarity
with details of outrage and cruelty prevented every
one of his despatches from being filled with accounts
‘of murders of magistrates, assassinations of in-
formers and yeomen, and conspiracies against persons
of rank.’ ?

Pelham, perhaps, would have been wiser if he had
been less cautious. Lord Moira took advantage of
the silence of the Irish Government in the midst of
the clamour with which it was assailed to come
forward a second time as the advocate of the mis-
creants, whom he represented as victims of Lord
Camden’s barbarity. He had been in Ireland in the
autumn. If he visited his own estates he must have
seen that they were the arsenal of the Northern
rebels. As the advocate of Irish ideas he conceived,
perhaps, that assassins could be best disarmed by
caresses.

‘ He had seen in Ireland,’ Lord Moira said in the
English House of Lords, on the 22nd of November,
‘the most disgusting tyranny that any nation ever
eroaned under, a tyranny creating universal discon-
tent and hatred of the English name.’ The long
nights were the murderers’ opportunity; but to Lord
Moira it appeared a monstrous thing that General
Lake should have ordered the people to stay at home
after dark, or that where lights were seen in cabin

t ¢ Pelham to Pitt, November 2.’ * “Camden to Portland, Novem-
SP 0: ber 15.’ S. P.O,

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

windows the patrol should call and order the extinction
of them. He appealed to British sentiment, and
complained of the revival of the curfew, the badge of
ancient slavery. He knew the superstitious horror
felt by England for the name of the Inquisition. The
Inquisition, he told the Lords, and through the Lords
the English world, was in force in Ireland in all its
horrors. Persons against whom no crime had been
proved were torn from their families, flogged, racked,
picketed, and threatened with the gallows. He did
not tell the Lords that in no instance were severities
resorted to except where the guilt of the parties was
accurately known, or that by these means tens of
thousands of pikes and muskets had been discovered.
General Lake had required the people to surrender
their arms. Lord Moira ignored the Insurrection
Act, and insisted that the possession of arms was a
constitutional right. The people, he said, felt a just
indignation when their arms were taken from them,
and to punish them for natural resistance was cruel
and intolerable. Great Britain was justly jealous of
the liberty of the press. Lord Moira forgot to say
that the press of Ireland was inviting soldiers to break
their military oaths, and was preaching the virtues
of tyrannicide. He denounced the brutal soldiery
which burst into offices of the journals that ex-
posed their tyranny, and destroyed the printing
presses, to prevent the truth from being published.
‘ If the press was interfered with,’ he said, ‘ the last
spark of freedom was extinguished.’ If Lord Cam-
den’s Government continued, ‘ Ireland would not
remain five years longer connected with England.’

It was easy for Lord Grenville, it was easy for

Lord Loughborough, to dispose at the moment of
tT 2

Z75

CHAP,
oe a ee
1797.

November.

276

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Lord Moira’s fable. They had but to relate a few stories

_*_. out of the daily returns of atrocities committed by

Lg OT.

oy einber.

his interesting clients ; they had but to read a few
specimens of ive ih oe of the virtuous and in-
jured Irish press for the House of Lords to dismiss
with contempt the extravagant caricature which had
been presented to them. Lord Moira was to receive
in another place the full measure of chastisement
which his disloyalty or his folly had provoked. By
what irony of fate have the speeches of Lord Moira.
been allowed to govern the opinions of later gene-
rations of Englishmen ?

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

SECTION VI.

WHEN patriotism is genuine it confers on the most
misguided enthusiast a certain nobility of tempera-
ment. It may blind his conscience. It may tempt
him to look without dismay, and even with applause,
on actions which a cooler judgment must for ever
reprobate as crimes ; but in the enthusiast himself it
creates a disregard of self, a fulness of devotion, a
readiness to forego private advantage, to sacrifice
fortune, life, even reputation itself, to the cause which
he has embraced.

The character of political combinations may be
fairly tested by the quality of the men concerned in
them, and by the disposition which they are able to in-
spire. The conspiracy of the United Irishmen pro-
duced, perhaps, a larger number of deliberate villains
than have ever been found arrayed in a movement
which has called itself national. From the first mo-
ment of its institution the most trusted members of the
society were traitors to it. As the design proceeded,
and information becaine more valuable, men deepest
in the secret and seemingly most ardent, were selling
their knowledge to the Castle, stipulating only for
concealment from the execration and revenge of their
confederates. An instance has now to be related,
remarkable for the ingenious perfidy with which it
was attended, for the mystery which still attaches
to the principal performer, and for his connection
with the fortunes and fate of Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald.

277

CHAP.
iI.

ee
1797.

November,

278

BOOK
Las

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Lord Edward’s movements had for some time been

——-— observed with anxiety, as much from general uneasi-

aii.
October.

ness as from regret that a brother of the Duke of
Leinster should be connecting himself with conspi-
racy and treason. His proceedings in Paris in ’92
had cost him his commission in the army. In the
Irish Parliament he had been undistinguished by
talent, but conspicuous for the violence of his lan-
guage. His meeting with Hoche on the Swiss fron-
tier was a secret known only to a very few persons ;
Hoche himself had not revealed it even to Tone; but
Lord Edward was known to be intimate with Mac-
Neven. He had been watched in London, and had
been traced to the lodgings of a suspected agent of the
French Directory ;' and among other papers which had
been forwarded by spies to the Government there was
one in French, containing an allusion to some female
friend of Lady Edward, through whom a correspond-
ence wes maintained between Ireland and Paris.
Lady Edward’s house at Hamburgh was notoriously
the resort of Irish refugees. Lord Edward himself
was frequently there, and the Government suspected,
though they were unable to prove, that he was seri-
ously committed with the United Irishmen. One night
early in October 1797 a person came to the house of
Lord Downshire, in London, and desired to see him
immediately. Lord Downshire went into the hall,
and found a man mufiled in a cloak, with a hat
slouched over his face, who requested a private inter-
view. The Duke took him into his library, and
when he threw off his disguise recognised in his
visitor the son of a gentleman of good fortune in the

1 “Camden to Portland, August 30, 1797.’ 8. P.O.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

North of Ireland, with whom he was slightly ac-

279

CHAP.

quainted. Lord Downshire’s ‘friend’ (the title under Arr

which he was always subsequently described) had
been a member of the Ulster Revolutionary Com-
mittee. From his acquaintance with the details of
what had taken place it may be inferred that he had
accompanied the Northern delegacy to Dublin, and
had been present at the discussion of the propriety of
an immediate insurrection. The cowardice or pru-
dence of the Dublin faction had disgusted him. He
considered now that the conspiracy was likely to fail,
or that, if it succeeded, it would take a form which he
disapproved; and he had come over to sell his services
and his information to Pitt. In telling his story to
Lord Downshire he painted his own conduct in
colours least discreditable to himself. Like inany
of his friends, he had at first, he said, wished only for
a reform in Parliament and a change in the Consti-
tution. He had since taken many desperate steps and
connected himself with desperate men. ‘ He had disco-
vered that the object of the Papists was the ruin and
destruction of the country, and the establishment of a
tyranny worse than that which was complained of by
the reformers; that proscriptions, seizures of property,
murders, and assassinations were the certain conse-
quences to be apprehended from their machinations; ’
that he had determined to separate himself from the
conspiracy. He was in England to make every dis-
covery in his power, and if Lord Downshire had

not been in London he had meant to address himself .

to Portland or Pitt.: He stipulated only, as usual,
‘that he should never be called on to appear in a
court of justice to prosecute anyone who might be
taken up in consequence of his discoveries.’

1797.

October.

280

BOOK

IX.
———

ad «
October.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Lord Downshire agreed to his conditions; but, as
it was then late, desired him to return and complete
his story in the morning. He said that his life was
in danger even in London. He could not venture
a second time to Lord Downshire, or run the risk
of being observed by his servants. Downshire
appointed the empty residence of a friend in the
neighbourhood. Thither he went the next day in
a hackney-coach. The door was left unlocked, and
he entered unseen by anyone. Lord Downshire then
took down from his lips a list of the principal mem-
bers of the Executive Committee, by whom the
whole movement was at that time directed.’ He
next related at considerable length the proceedings
of the United Irishmen during the two past years,
the division of opinion, the narrow chance by which
a rising had been escaped in Dublin in the spring,
and his own subsequent adventures. He had fled
with others from Belfast in the general dispersion
of the leaders. Lady Edward Fitzgerald had given
him shelter at Hamburgh, and had sent him on to
Paris with a letter to her brother-in-law, General
Valence. By General Valence he had been intro-

1 ¢ Jackson and his son; Oliver
Bond; John Chambers, a book-
seller; James Dixon, a tanner;
Casey, a red-faced Dublin priest;
Thomas Addys Emmett; Doctor
MacNeven, a physician, who had
great weight with the Papists;
Braughall; John Keogh; and R.
McCormick, who belonged to the
Committee, though they did not
attend; Samuel Turner; Lord Ed-
ward Fitzgerald; Arthur O’Connor;
Alexander Stewart; two Orrs, one

an attorney, and a dangerous per-
son, the other of Derry, described
as a clever, sensible, strong-minded
man; Barclay Teeling; Tennant, of
Belfast ; Agnew, of Larne; Lawless
(Lord Cloncurry’s eldest son); Ha-
mill, of Domenick Street; Inishry,
a priest, a canting, designing, dan-
gerous man, who swore-in Lord
Edward Fitzgerald and Lawless.’—
‘List and description given to
Lord Downshire, October 9, 1797.’
SePLO.

THE SECESSION OF THE OPFOSITION.

duced to Hoche and de la Croix. He had seen Tal-
leyrand, and had talked at length with him on the
condition of Ireland. He had been naturally intimate
with the other Irish refugees. Napper Tandy was
considered mad, strolling about the streets in uni-
form, and calling himself a major. Hamilton Rowan
had been pressed to return, but preferred safety in
America, and professed himself sick of politics. After
this, ‘the person,’ as Lord Downshire called his
visitor, keeping even the Cabinet in ignorance of
his name, came to the immediate object of his visit
to England. He had discovered that all important
negotiations between the Revolutionary Committee
in Dublin and their Paris agents passed through Lady
Edward’s hands. The Paris letters were transmit-
ted first to her at Hamburgh. By her they were for-
warded to Lady Lucy Fitzgerald, in London. From
London, Lady Lucy was able to send them on unsus-
pected. Being himself implicitly trusted both by
Lady Edward and by Lady Lucy, he believed he could
give the Government information which would enable
them to detect and examine these letters in their
transit through the post.

Pitt was out of town. He returned, however, in a
few days. Downshire immediately saw him, and Pitt
consented that ‘the person’s’ services should be ac-
cepted. There was some little delay. ‘ The person’
took alarm, disappeared, and they supposed that they
had lost him. ‘Three weeks later, however, he wrote
to Downshire from Hamburgh, saying that he had
returned to his old quarters, for fear he might
be falling into a trap. It was fortunate, he added,
that he had done so, for a letter was on the point of
going over from Barclay Teeling to Arthur O’Connor,

281

CHAP.
ri,

os, -—_’/
1797.

October,

282

BOOK
IX.

ee

1797.

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and he gave Downshire directions which would en
able him to intercept, read, and send it on.

Such an evidence of ‘the person’s’ power and
will to be useful made Pitt extremely anxious to se-
cure his permanent help. An arrangement was con-
cluded. He continued at Hamburgh as Lady Ed-
ward’s guest and most trusted friend, saw everyone
who came to her house, kept watch over her letter-bag,
was admitted to close and secret conversations upon
the prospect of Irench interference in Ireland with
Rheinart, the Minister of the Directory there, and
he regularly kept Lord Downshire informed of every-
thing which would enable Pitt to watch the con-
spiracy.

One of his letters, dated November 19, is pre-
served :

‘A. Lowry writes from Paris, October 11, in great
despondency on account of Hoche’s death, and says
that all hopes of invading Ireland were given over.
I then saw Rheinart, the French Minister, who begged
me to stay here, as the only mode in which I could
serve my country and the Republic. I instantly
acquiesced, and told him I had arranged matters
with Lord Edward Fitzgerald in London for that
purpose. I showed him Lowry’s letter. He said that
things were changed. Bonaparte would not listen
to the idea of peace, and had some plan, which [ do
not know.

‘I told him the spirit of republicanism was losing
ground in Ireland, for the Catholics and Protestants
could not be brought to unite. I mentioned then
what Fitzgerald told me in London, viz. that after
I left Ireland they had thought of bringing matters
to a crisis without the French. Arthur O’Connor was

THE SECESSION OF THE OPPOSITION.

to have had a command in the North, he himself in
Leinster, Robert Simms at Belfast; that the Catho-
lics got jealous of this, and Richard McCormick, of
Dublin, went among the societies of United men and
denounced the three as traitors to the cause and dan-
gerous on account of their ambition.

‘ All letters to or from Lady Lucy Fitzgerald ought
to be inspected. She, Mrs. Matthieson, of this place,"
and Pamela carry on a correspondence. Lewines,
Teeling, Tennant, Lowry, Orr, and Colonel Tandy
are at Paris. ‘Tone expects to stay the winter there,
which does not look like invasion. Oliver Bond is
treasurer. He pays Lewines and MacNeven in London.

‘ Now for myself. In order to carry into effect the
scheme which you and Mr. Pitt had planned, it was
requisite for me to see my countrymen. I called on
Maitland, where I found A. J. Stuart of Acton, both
of them heartily sick of politics. Edward Fitzge-
rald had been enquiring of them for me. I[ went to
Harley Street, where Fitz told me of the conduct of
the Catholics to him and his friends. He said he
would prevail on O’Connor or some such to go to
Paris. If not, he would go himself in order to have
Lewines removed. Mrs. Matthieson has just heard
from Lady Lucy that O’Connor is to come. [
supped last night with Valence, who mentioned his
having introduced Lord Edward and O’Connor to the
Minister here in the summer, before the French at-
tempted to invade Ireland. They both went to
Switzerland, whence O’Connor passed into France,
had an interview with Hoche, and everything was
planned.

‘T feared lest Government might not choose to ratify

1 A relative of Lady Edward.

283

CHAP.
Li

a
1797.

November.

284

BOOK
IX.

——$,§ —_—_
1797.

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

our contract; and being in their power would give me
my choice either to come forward as an evidence, or
suffer martyrdom myself. Having no taste for an
exit of this sort, I set out and arrived here safe, and
now beg you'll let me know if anything was wrong
in my statements, or if I have given offence. If you
approve my present mode of life and encourage me
so to do, with all deference I think Mr. Pitt may let
me have a cool five hundred, which shall last me for
six months to come. To get the information here
has cost me three times the sum; and to keep up the
acquaintance and connections | have here, so as to get
information, I cannot live on less.’

1 “Letter of November 19, 1797, from Hamburgh, to Lord Down-
shire. —Irish MSS, S. P. O.

THE EVE OF 98.

CHAPTER TTT.

THE EVE OF 798,
SECTION I.

No statesmen were ever more painfully situated in
the presence of conspiracy than those who were
responsible for the safety of Ireland on the eve of the
rebellion of 1798. The country was preparing for
an insurrection which, by the confession of the best-
informed of its promoters, was likely if successful to
be attended by scenes like those which had disgraced
the rising of Sir Phelim O’Neil. The temper of the
people was the same, the object was the same. The
Government was exactly informed of all that was
going forward, The names of the leaders, their pur-
poses, their methods of proceeding were known. The
first droppings of the coming storm were apparent
daily in the paralysis of the civil authority and an
organised system of terror. But the witnesses who
in private were ready to betray their comrades or
their cause were unavailable for purposes of public
order and justice. The villager who with his own
eyes had seen a family massacred, and in private,
under an oath of secrecy, told his story with tremb-
ling lips, found his memory fail him when produced
in court to repeat his evidence in public. The magis-
trate who might have dared the immediate menace of

285

CHAP.
I].

—
1797.

286

BOOK
IX.
—_~_,-———’

1797.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the secret tribunals, remembered that, though the pre-
sent danger might be overcome, his family and him-
self must remain in the midst of the people whose
undying hatred he might incur by energetic exertion.
He had learnt by centuries of experience that those
who in times of trouble were most loyal to the
British Crown, could count on no support when co-
ercion was succeeded by the fatal desire to conciliate.
If he rose superior to his distrust, and grappled suc-
cessfully with the rebellious agencies, he was pro-
scribed by name in the patriotic press. Proscription
was followed by death, and the security with which
the sentence was inflicted, from the determination of
the people to shield the executioners from punish-
ment, operated as a frightful and too effective warn-
ing that, if he valued his own or his children’s lives,
he must fold his hands and close his eyes.

The machinery of law was out of joint. Two
alternatives lay before the authorities at the Castle,
each equally dangerous. Lither they, too, must sit
by till the mine exploded, to be reproached, like the
Lords Justices in 1641, for having permitted a re-
bellion which they might have prevented, as an
excuse for further oppression, or they must expose
themselves to the moral indignation of the friends of
liberty and humanity in both countries by acts of
seeming illegality of which they would be unable to
avow the reasons, and be accused, when rebellion
came, of having provoked it by tyranny.

Those who look back from the secure position of
later times have forgotten to allow for a feeling which
was never absent, night or day, from the minds of
the conspirators, from the minds of the Executive at
the Castle, from the minds of the gentry and clergy of

THE EVE OF ’98.

Ireland, whose lives and fortunes were at stake ; they
have forgotten the real probability that the rebellion
might succeed. It had the open support of the
strongest military power in the world. The Bantry
Bay expedition had proved how easily a French
power might be landed. ‘The sailing of the Texel
fleet, at a time when Duncan was too weak to stop it,
had been prevented only by the weather. If the
experiment was not renewed, Bonaparte’s victories
had already inclined, and might at any time compel,
England to come to terms with him, and the Direc-
tory had publicly promised that the independence of
Ireland was to be a condition of peace.

Already the chances of the game were affecting
families of consequence, who were trimming their sails
in expectation of that contingency. The Duke of Lein-
ster was doing his utmost within the Constitution to
bring the Government into public hatred. Lord Ed-
ward was not the only member of his house who was
engaged in actual treason. The heir of Lord Cloncurry
was a sworn member of the Revolutionary Committee,
and was traced on a mission to England to meet a
French emissary there... He was accompanied, un-
known to himself, by an officer whose business was
to watch his motions and report him to the Home
Office. Other information reached Camden, the
nature of which, for the sake of the parties con-
cerned, was never trusted to paper; but so important
was it, that Pelham himself hurried to London to

1 ¢Mr. Lawless, Lord Cloncurry’s Lawless, with directions to find
eldest son, is going to England this out where he means to go in Lon-
night, charged with an answer to don, and to give you immediate in-
a message lately received from formation.’ — ‘Pelham to John
France. I have sent Captaind’Au- King, Esq., November 7, 1797,’
vergne in the packet with Mr. §. P.O,

287

CHAP.
III.

~~”
1797.

November,

288

BOOK
IX.

nee aan
1797.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

communicate personally with the astonished Cabinet.?
Inflamed alternately with hope and rage, the news-
papers became daily more daring. Arthur O’Connor,
after spending a few months in the Castle, had been
released on bail, Thomas Addys Emmett and Lord
Edward Fitzgerald being his securities. ‘ The person’
who had come to Lord Downshire had revealed the
secret of the visit to Switzerland; but without be-
traying his authority, Camden could not again order
O’Connor’s arrest. He immediately instituted a pub-
lication named ‘ The Press,’ which left far behind the
comparatively tame ferocities of the ‘Union Star.’

A letter appeared in its columns, addressed to Car-
hampton, on the failure of the attempt to assassinate
him, signed ‘Satanides,’ and written probably by
O’Connor himself. Carhampton was informed that
he had escaped Dunn to be reserved fora more public
doom. ‘It was to be lamented,’ the writer said
to him, ‘that you should perish by the stroke of
private justice, and defraud the executioner of his
right and the public of its example. Were you at
this moment surrounded by the justly enraged popu-
lace, were their arms raised to inflict the desired
doom, I would throw myself among their poinards.
I would say, Suffer him to pollute the air a little
longer. The day comes when justice shall prevail,
when Ireland shall raise her head from the dust
and perform a solemn sacrifice to the Constitu-

tion. On that awful day of rejoicing to the good,

1¢J have had the pleasure of
passing the whole morning with
Mr. Pelham, from whom I have
learnt some circumstances which
have astonished and grieved me
beyond the utmost extent of my
information.’—‘ Portland to Cam-
den, December 16.’ Lord Camden

answers: ‘I do not wonder at the
surprise and indignation which your
Grace expresses at some of the in-
formation which Mr. Pelham has
given you, and which I thought it
better should be so communicated
than by letter,’

THE EVE OF ’98.

and terror to the wicked, a few victims may be
required, and this wretch may be included in the
- number and meet the doom of a traitor.’

These words were perhaps penned when the French
were immediately looked for. At times the mood
varied. Public justice seemed far off, and the mind
of Satanides reverted to Harmodius and Aristo-
giton.

‘You, my fellow students,’ he said in another
letter addressed to the patriots of Trinity College,
‘you have explored the page of history where the
insect courtier is forgotten, the despot is blasted in
infamy, and the glorious tyrannicide is immortalised.
Can you remember one instance of a people naturally

brave, and wanting but the will to be illustrious,

succumbing to the domination of their own minions,
and passively agonizing under the extremities of
oppression? No! Ireland is singular in suffering
and in cowardice. She could crush her tormentors,
and yet they embowel her. She could be free, yet
she is a slave.’

‘The unheard-of boldness of these publications,’
wrote Camden, ‘has been produced by the very
decided offer of assistance from France. The in-

tellizence with which we are furnished would, if cer-

tain persons could be brought forward, be sufficient
to bring the conspiracy to light, defeat its ill conse-
quences, and make a salutary impression on the
minds of the people.’?

Unfortunately ‘certain persons’ declined to be
brought forward. Pelham, when in London, made

1 ¢ Extracts from ‘the Press.” ’— ? ‘Camden to Portland, Decem-
‘Report of the Secret Committee, ber 2, December 7.’ S. P. O.
1798. Ireland. Appendix, 27,’

VOL. IIl. U

289

CHAP.
Kil.

ed
1797.

December.

290

BOOK
IX.
—---—_—"

1797.

December.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

large offers to Lord Downshire’s friend, but without
effect. Evidence came in through the Foreign Office,
but again ‘ of a nature which could not be produced.’}
Camden has been blamed as well for inexertion as
for exertion. His most earnest desire was to meet
Parliament with a clear statement of all that he
knew, to arrest the leaders, and bring them at once
to trial. He had proof of the correspondence with
France. He had lists of the Assassination Com-
mittee and the Committee of Revolution. He knew
that in the main they consisted of the same persons 5
and that by their public conviction the mind of Eng-
land would be set at rest. The Opposition would be
silenced, and the conspiracy, deprived of the sympathy
by which it was encouraged, might be even yet
extinguished before it assumed a fatal form. But
the witnesses, indispensable to success, were not to be
moved ; and ‘ those persons who best know the coun-

try,’ Lord Camden sadly said, ‘agree with Mr.

Pelham and myself (and I understand it to be the
opinion of H.M.’s Ministers), that unless those who
are at the head could be prosecuted with success no
advantage would accrue, by apprehending them.’ ”
When the time came for Parliament to open, there-
fore, the Speech from the Throne contained no more
than a general statement that the country was dan-
gerously disturbed, that the Government was deter-
mined to put a stop to treason and murder, and that
the King relied upon the loyalty of the Irish gentry.
In the House of Commons the field was abandoned
to the Government. The remarkable feature of the

1 “Camden to Portland, January = * ‘Camden to Portland, January
8, 1798.’ 22, 1798,’ ‘

THE EVE OF ’98.

beginning of the Session was the appearance of Lord
Moira, to repeat in his place as a Peer of Ireland the
indictment which he had brought against Lord
Camden’s administration at Westminster.

It was audacious, for a crisis was evidently near.
The day before Lord Moira spoke, the news had
come in of the murder, under the most horrible cir-
cumstances, of two of the most active magistrates in
Cork, Colonel St. George and Mr. Uniacke. But he
had been taunted apparently with having delivered his
attack where it could be imperfectly met, and the vain
and feeble enthusiasm of his character was impreg-
nable to evidence. |

He rose, he said, to reassert the charges which he
had alleged in the Parliament of Great Britain against
the treatment of Ulster by General Lake. Houses
had been burnt, innocent individuals had been seized,
imprisoned, flogged, and picketed. He did not
blame the troops. He blamed the Government for
having set them upon a duty so barbarous and so
detestable—for having called in the strength of Eng-
land to coerce and tyrannise over Ireland. If the
Lords and Commons of Ireland assisted in depriving
their country of its liberties, he warned them that
they would themselves soon feel in shame the weight
of the chain; they would soon, he said, dropping
into weak sentimentalism, ‘hear the plaintive genius
of Ireland reproaching them for their cruelty.’ The
people were said to be irreconcilable. From his own
experience he insisted that they were misunderstood
and maligned. He had held a meeting in his
own neighbourhood. He had described the con-
fusion and misery which were created by democratic

Republics. He had expounded the blessings of
u 2

291

CHAP.
Ii.

nen amon”
1798.

January,

292 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK

00 Constitutional Monarchy, and had expatiated on the

——-— virtue and benevolence of the Sovereign who filled

lane the throne. ‘ When he spoke of the generous magna-

19. nimity of him who was the future hope of the realm,

and of the regard with which he returned the affec-

tion manifested to him by Ireland on a melancholy

occasion, there was not an eye which did not beam

with the honest pride of meriting by heartfelt self-
devotion the favourable opinion of such a prince.’ ?

‘Appeal,’ he exclaimed, ‘to the hearts of the

people; while you appeal to their fears you will never

succeed. You must grant Catholic Emancipation. I

give the opinion with the more confidence after the

zeal and ardour manifested by the Catholics of the

South when a French fleet was in one of your ports.

You must grant Parliamentary Reform. The greatest

evil to be feared from it sinks to nothing compared

to the mischief which is raging at present. The ex-

pression of a conciliatory desire on your part would

suspend immediately the agitation of the public

mind.’ ?

It was not easy for the members of Council, to

whom the state of freland was better known than to

Lord Moira, if he really believed his words, to sit

patient under his flatulent declamation. At that mo-

ment the Council were weighing intelligence from

the friend at Hamburgh, so serious that they had

all but resolved on an immediate arrest of the entire

EE

1 This was too much for the
stomach of Wolfe Tone, who said
Moira ought to have known better
than to pretend that Ireland would
be satisfied with constitutional re-
form. ‘I can hardly be suspected,’
he said, ‘ of partiality for the Chan-

cellor, but I declare I have more
respect for his conduct on this occa-
sion than for Lord Moira’s. He is,
at least, an open and avowed
enemy.’— Memoirs, March, 1798.

* Speech of Lord Moira, Febru-
ary 18, 1798.

THE EVE OF 798.

Revolutionary Committee. The English Cabinet was
still in favour of delay, hoping for evidence which
would ensure their conviction upon trial. The Irish
advisers of the Crown, who had before been of the same
opinion, had changed their minds, and were in favour
of immediate action. Further hesitation might bring
the French in earnest. ‘The arrest of the leaders
might precipitate the insurrection, but would deprive
it of its directing head; and if the rebels were forced
into the field without their allies, they could be
encountered with less extremity of peril. Anxious
letters had passed and repassed during the first fort-
night of February between Camden and the Duke
of Portland,’ which ended in the Duke leaving the
Viceroy to act at his own discretion. It was from
the discussion of this vital and most critical question
that the Chancellor and the other ministers had been
called away to listen to Lord Moira. |

Lord Glentworth? was the first to reply. He con-
tented himself with giving an outline of the United
Irishmen’s proceedings, so far as they were generally
notorious. He read extracts from the patriot news-
papers. He gave a list of the most atrocious of the
late murders,® and detailed the particulars of the last.
Colonel St. George dined at Mr. Uniacke’s house on
the 9th of February. As Mr. Uniacke and his wife
were lighting him at night to his bedroom, fourteen

that attempts had been made to
seduce him from his allegiance.

1 ¢ Trish Correspondence, Febru-

ary, 1708. 1 8: Pe),

2 Sexton Pery, so long Speaker
of the House of Commons.

3 One of the stories which Lord
Glentworth mentioned is curiously
illustrative of the time. A soldier
of the Limerick Militia had in-
formed an officer of his regiment

The wife of one of the confederates
was sent to pretend love to him.
He was tempted a mile from his
quarters, and while she had her
arms round him, the hatchet of an
accomplice split his skull.

293

CHAP,
ae
ns
1798.
February
19.

294.
BOOK
I

1798.
February
19;

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

men with blackened faces appeared on the landing-

ipa place from the back stairs, while others showed them-

selves below. Mrs. Uniacke threw herself before her
husband. ‘They flung her over the staircase on the
pavement of the hall. They stabbed Uniacke through
and through, and then hurled him down beside her.
They attacked Colonel St. George next, killed him,
slashed and hacked at him till they were tired, and
then pitching his body on the bodies of his friends,
they left them together in their blood.

The facts were not to be denied. A prelate of the
Establishment, Dr. Dickson, Bishop of Down, was of
Lord Moira’s opinion, that such crimes could be best
prevented by loving the perpetrators, who were mis-
led by zeal for their country’s cause.

Then rose Fitzgibbon. He had long waited for an
opportunity to tell the truth about that country in
terms which Europe should hear. The occasion had
been created for him, and he used it. Lord Moira
and his friends had been the fiercest advocates
of the independence of the Irish Parliament.  Fitz-
gibbon commenced with observing sarcastically on
the impropriety of appeals to the British Legislature
by a peer of Ireland against the Government esta-
blished in Dublin. Then he passed rapidly to the
substance of the accusations :—

‘The noble lord has told the British peers that the
Executive Government of Ireland has taught the
soldiery to treat the natives of this country indis-
criminately as rebels, and to goad them with un-
exampled insult and barbarity; that the obsolete
badge of servitude, the curfew, has been revived in
its vigour and enforced with cruelty and insult; that
the detestable principles and proceedings of the Inqui-

THE EVE OF ’98.

295

sition had been introduced into Ireland; that the CHAP.
natives were tortured to extort from them a confession ~~~

_of their own guilt or that of others. These insolent ,

and distorted exaggerations have passed into general
circulation through every seditious and disaffected
print in Great Britain and Ireland under the prof-
fered solemnity of the noble lord’s oath.t It remains
for me publicly and distinctly to refute the foul and
injurious charges of tyranny and injustice which have
been advanced against the Government and Parlia-
ment of Ireland.’

‘It has long been the fashion of this country to
drown the voice of truth by loud and confident
assertion. Since the separation of America from the
British empire, when the noble lord knows some
British politicians successfully played a game of em-
barrassment against Lord North’s Administration,
they have been pleased to turn their attention to
Ireland as a theatre of political warfare, and to lend
their countenance to every faction which has reared
its head in this country to disturb the public peace.
When the noble lord recommends conciliation as a
remedy for the state of this country, I conclude his
information flows from this polluted source. If con-
ciliation be the pledge of tranquillity, there is not a
nation in Europe in which it has had so fair a trial as
in Ireland. For twenty years there has been a liberal
and unvaried system of conciliation and concession.
Concession and conciliation have produced only a
fresh stock of grievances, and the discontent of Ire-
land has kept pace with her prosperity.’

Running rapidly over the history of those twenty

1 Moira had offered to swear to the truth of his charges.

1798.
ebruary
19.

296

BOOK
IX.

——— -——
1798.
February
19,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

years, Fitzgibbon showed how the opening of the
trade in 1779 had been followed in 1782 by the de-
mands for political change; how a new Constitution
had then been formed by Mr. Grattan and his friends ;
how the Commons had assured the King that thence-
forward no question could arise to disturb the har-
mony of the two countries; yet how brief that har-
mony had been. Mr. Flood had discovered that the
repeal of a law was not a renunciation of a principle;
that the Constitution was a bubble, and that the
noblemen and gentlemen who pretended to have
emancipated Ireland were the accomplices of Eng-
land’s treachery. He then continued :—

‘A bill was introduced by Lord Grenville which

passed into law without opposition, renouncing un-

equivocally all legislation or judicial authority in

Ireland. The people of Ireland might now have
taken breath and suspended their constitutional
labours. But a new grievance was discovered—Par-
liament must be reformed. After due deliberation it
was determined to elect a military convention to meet
in the metropolis as the surest, most efficacious, and
most constitutional organ through which to convey the
sense of the nation. The Convention assembled with
military pomp and parade, and assumed the form of
a House of Parliament. A Bull for the reform of the
representation of the people was regularly presented,
read a first time, a second time, committed, reported,
and agreed to, and being engrossed was sent at the
point of the bayonet by two members of the Con-
vention, who were also members of the House of
Commons, to be registered by that assembly. The
House of Commons treated this insult with the con-
tempt which it merited. The Convention dispersed,

THE EVE OF ’98.

and we had a short respite. But soon a new topic
of discontent was started. It was discovered that
the manufactures of Great Britain were imported into
this country upon terms which gave them a prefer-
ence in the Irish market, a preference which superior
excellence alone can give them, and the remedy
proposed was that we should commence a war of
prohibitory duties, although it was notorious that the
balance of trade was considerably in our favour ; and
if Parliament had been so infatuated as to yield to
popular clamour, we had not the means of manu-
facturing woollen cloths sufficient for our wants.
Hence came the memorable treaty of 1785 for a final
adjustment of commercial intercourse. A fair and
liberal offer was made by Great Britain to open her
markets and share her capital with this country. The
offer was wisely rejected by the Irish House of Com-
mons under a silly deception. The people were
taught to believe that it was an insidious artifice to
revive the legislative authority of the British Parlia-
ment. In 1789 came the Regency question, when
the intemperate, illegal, and precipitate conduct of
the Irish Parliament shook our boasted constitution
to its foundations, and contributed to bring our country
to its present alarming condition. A political schism
followed. The author of it+ founded a political club
for the reformation of public abuses. It was an-
nounced to the world with a manifesto in which the
British Government was charged with a deliberate
and systematic conspiracy to subvert the liberties of
Ireland. The measures proposed were a Place Bill,
a Pension Bill, a Responsibility Bill. The debate
on these subjects in the House of Commons was

1 Grattan.

297

CHAP.
i4e
——
1798.
February
19.

298

BOOK
IX.

a
1798.

February
19.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

carried on in a series of disgusting invectives suited
to the meridian of Billingsgate. The people were told
that the British Government intended to subvert the
liberties of the Irish nation, and their aim became
thenceforward to subvert the Monarchy and separate
the country from Great Britain. Clubs were formed
of United Irishmen. Appeals were addressed to the
Volunteers, beseeching them to resume their arms ; a ~
general outcry was raised of commiseration and love
for the Catholics of Ireland, in which for the first
time since the Reformation a great body of the Pro-
testant Dissenters joined, and Catholic Emancipation
and Reform went forth as the watchwords of innova-
tion and treason. The object of these Jacobin in-
stitutions was to detach the Catholics from the
Catholic Committee, composed of the chief noblemen
and gentlemen of their communion, and place them
under a Jacobin Directory. The Catholics were
stimulated to associate under the title of Defenders to
disarm the Protestants, so finally to be relieved from
tithes, taxes, and rent. A close correspondence
existed between the Catholic Directory and the Irish:
Union. Orders were issued by the Jacobin clubs to levy
regiments of National Guards all over the kingdom.

The noble lord who imputes Irish disaffection
to a system of coercion will please to recollect that
the system of midnight robbery and avowed rebellion
was completely established before any one coercive
statute was enacted here. In 1792 and 1793 the
project of levying a revolutionary army had been
formed. Soldiers were forthcoming in abundance.
I will tell the noble lord the conspiracy has been dis-
closed by evidence the most clear and satisfactory,
by the testimony of gentlemen of rank and character,

THE EVE OF ’98.

some of them at this moment high in military com-
mand in the King’s service. ‘The Parliament. of
Ireland did their duty in framing new laws to repress
these outrages. If there be ground of censure on
Parliament it is this, that the vigour was not propor-
tioned to the magnitude and extent of the evil. Every
man accused by the brotherhood of loyalty was
stripped of his arms. If he presumed to defend him-
self he was murdered. The few magistrates who
ventured to execute the law were marked for assassi-
nation, and many of them were murdered. In 1796
the Insurrection Act was passed. Magistrates in a
proclaimed district were authorised to order all
persons to remain in their houses and put out the
lights after a certain hour of the night, and this the
noble lord represents as a revival of the feudal badge
of servitude, the curfew. The United Irish com-
bination is a complete revolutionary government
organised against the law. Has the noble lord heard
of the murders perpetrated by order of the Irish
Union for the crime of putting the laws in execution?
Has he heard of the murder of Mr. Butler, a clergy-
man and a magistrate? of Mr. Knipe, a clergyman
and a magistrate? of Mr. Hamilton, a clergyman and

1 Tn this part of the speech Fitz-
gibbon remarked sharply on the
state of Lord Moira’s own estate,
which he described as ‘a main ci-
tadel of treason.’ Lord Moira had
fiercely denounced the picketing
of a certain blacksmith. Fitz-
gibbon reminded him of what he
had been pleased to omit, ‘ that
the man did immediately discover
the names of several persons for
whom he had manufactured pike-
heads, in consequence of which dis-

covery near two hundred pikes were
seized.’ ‘He requested the noble
lord to reflect on the number of
probable murders which were pre-
vented by that act of military seve-
rity; to consider whether the
injury done to society by picket-
ing that blacksmith was to be
compared to the injury which must
have risen from leaving two hun-
dred pikes in the hands of rebels
and assassins,’

299

CHAP.
IIT.

ed

1798.
February
19.

300

BOOK
IX

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

a magistrate? of Mr. Cummins, whose crime was

—— that he had enrolled in a Yeomanry Corps? of

1798.
February.

Colonel St. George and his host, Mr. Uniacke ? of the
two dragoons who discovered to their officers an
attempt to seduce them? In a word, has he heard of
the numberless and atrocious deeds of massacre and
assassination which form part of the system of the
Irish brotherhood, and are encouraged by the privi-
leged order of innovators? I hold the dark and
bloody catalogue, but [I will not proclaim to the
civilised world the state of cannibal barbarism to
which my unhappy country has been brought back
by these pestilent and cowardly traitors. These are
the men of sentiment whom the noble lord is anxious
to conciliate. These are the injured innocents whose
cause he has so pathetically pleaded—innocents who
deal in robbery, conflagration, and murder, and
scatter terror and desolation over the face of this
devoted country. The noble lord may contemplate
this scene of horrors with coolness from another
kingdom, but he will not be surprised that the gentle-
men of Ireland whose existence is at stake do not
view it with the same indifference. What alternative
has been left to the Executive Government but to
surrender at discretion to a horde of traitorous bar-
barians, or to use the force entrusted to it for self-
defence and self-preservation? What would have
been the folly and debility of a Government which
would have hesitated to assist itself at such a crisis?
Lord Camden issued an order to disarm the rebels in
the Northern districts. If he had not issued that
order he would have betrayed his trust. General
Lake has executed this service with the moderation,

THE EVE OF ’98,

ability, and discretion which have marked his cha-
racter as an officer and a gentleman.’

Such in outline, abridged and mutilated for pur-
poses of necessary compression, was the once celebrated
oration in which the great Earl of Clare replied to
the sentimental advocates of Irish murderers. True
as his words were to the last fibre of them, and
the more inevitably because they were true, they
were received with a yéll of fury by those from off
whose crimes and follies he stripped the gilding of
spurious patriotism ; andthe echoes of their execrations
have rung on to the present age, as if an Irishman
and one of themselves had sinned against Irish
nationality by holding a mirror before it in which to
behold its real image.

England, too, has behaved to Clare like herself.
When the danger was passed she fell back into her old
dream of conciliating the irreconcilable. She selected
for political advancement the incendiaries of the Irish
Parliament who had fostered the rebellion, the
dangers of which they shrunk from sharing. She
gave the Great Seal to Ponsonby, and she made Curran
Master of the Rolls. She elevated Grattan by adu-
lation into the most honoured place among the heroes
of his country. She sent Moiraas Governor-General
to India. As in earlier times, she left the gentlemen
who stood by her in her hour of trouble to the ven-
geance of the patriots, caring no more for them when
they had served her turn, so when Clare died,
the best friend she ever had, she gave a sigh of
relief at being rid of his oppressive presence. She
permitted the scum of Dublin to dishonour his open
grave, and she has left his memory to be trampled on

301

CHAP.
Kil.

ed
1798.

February.

302

BOOK
IX

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

lest she should offend the prejudice of later gene-

—— rations of patriots by confessing the merits of the

1798.

greatest statesman whom Ireland ever produced.

On one person in Europe, whose opinion at that
time happened to be of consequence in these Irish
matters, the speech, perhaps, was not without effect.
Copies of it were circulatedin France, and Wolfe Tone,
who could not refuse his admiration of Clare’s
courage, brought it under thé eye of Napoleon, in the
hope that he might be encouraged to head the army
of invasion in person by the confirmation which it
contained of ‘Tone’s own representations of the humour
of the Irish people.

Napoleon never said what he thought of it, but
from that time he listened coldly to the advice of the
Directory to make Ireland a principal scene of his
duel with England. The chosen friends of the Irish
in Paris were the Jacobins, whose principles they
adopted, and whose affectations they caricatured.
Napoleon did not admire Jacobins, either native
or foreign. He had no desire to assist a_half-
insane nation to an independence which would be a
scandal to Europe. The Directory adhered to their
views, and acted on them to their misfortune and dis-
credit. Napoleon, says Wolfe Tone’s son, in amemoir
of his father, disliked the Irish leaders, refused to
appreciate Ireland’s importance to him, and when
Ireland was waiting to receive him carried his arms
to Keypt.

THE EVE OF ’98.

SECTION II.

INTELLIGENCE more and more alarming continued to
be received at the Castle. The intimate knowledge
of their proceedings displayed by Fitzgibbon quick-
ened the movements of the conspirators. On the
26th of February a member of the Revolutionary
Committee in the pay of Pelham wrote to tell him
‘that the military organisation was almost complete.’
‘Gentlemen of considerable property were daily unit-
ing. ‘The number of fighting men was increasing
with astonishing celerity.’ ‘The public officers, those
in the law departments especially, were furnishing
recruits.’ ‘The Yeomanry were. shaking.’ ‘The
clerks in the bankers’, merchants’, and traders’ houses
were reckoned upon almost to a man.’ Dublin Castle
itself was not pure from infection, and ‘there was
scarcely a house where there were three male ser-
vants which could not boast of a domiciliary Com-
mittee.’ ‘The number of men in all Ireland who
had returned their names on that day as prepared to
take arms was 279,896. Carlow, Meath, Wicklow,
Kerry, even Down and Antrim, notwithstanding
Lake’s exertions, had reported themselves ready to
begin. Connaught, however, was still behindhand.
The Committee had passed a resolution that the
counties which had completed their organisation had
deserved well of their country, but had requested
them to bear their tyranny a little longer, till the

303

CHAP.
Iii.
pA oa eed
1798.

February.

304

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

whole country should be in a condition to move

Sans
——— simultaneously.1

1798.

March.

Lord Camden sent the communication to Portland
on the day that it was received. A few hours later
another informer presented himself at the Castle, of
more consequence, who ultimately consented to give
public evidence. |

Thomas Reynolds, a Dublin silk merchant, had
purchased an estate in Kildare. The coming of the
French fleet to Bantry had led him to expect another
attempt which might be successful. The landing of
a French army, he had assured himself, would be fol-
lowed by a revolution, and he had therefore been
sworn in as a United Irishman. In his new county he
had become acquainted with the Fitzgeralds. Lord
Edward had given him a colonel’s commission in the
insurgent army. He was treasurer besides, and a
member of the Committee. A chance conversation
at a dinner talk had first alarmed him as to the pru-
dence of his conduct. He had been further agitated
by Lord Edward telling him on the 19th of February,
perhaps after Clare’s speech, that he was afraid of
arrest, and was going to Paris to see Talleyrand and
hasten the French expedition. Arrest was a word
of ominous sound. Reynolds put himself in commu-
nication with Pelham. He told him when and at
what hours the Revolutionary Committee met. He
pointed out how they might be all captured, together
with their incriminating papers.

It happened that at this particular time Lord
Downshire’s friend was in London, and Pelham knew
it. Ifthe friend could be brought over, and could be

1 ¢ Enclosure in a letter from Lord Camden to Portland, February 26,
1798.’ §S. P.O.

THE EVE OF ’98.

induced to give evidence, a case could then be estab-

lished against all the United Irish leaders. They ——-~

could be prosecuted with certainty of conviction, and
the secrets of the plot could be revealed so fully that
the reality of it could no longer be doubted.

Most earnestly Camden begged Portland to im-
press on ‘the friend’ the necessity of compliance.
‘Patriotism might induce him to overcome his na-
tural prejudice.’ If patriotism was insufficient, ‘ there
was no reward which he ought not to receive.’?

Portland’s answer was not encouraging :-—

‘The friend,’ he said, ‘shall be detained. As to
his coming over to you, I have reason to believe that
there is not any consideration upon earth which would
tempt him to undertake it. He is convinced that he
would go to utter destruction. Better he should stay
here and open a correspondence with some of the
principal conspirators, by which means you may be
apprised of their intentions. If I could be satisfied,
or if you would give it as your positive opinion, that
this person’s testimony or presence would crush the
conspiracy, or bring any principal traitor to justice,
J should not, and Lord Downshire would not, hesi-
tate in using any influence to prevail on his friend to
run any risk for such an object. But if he should
fail, and escape with his life, he could render no
further service. Weigh well, therefore, the conse-
quence of such a sacrifice.’ ”

Every day’s delay made the situation more danger-
ous, and Camden’s position more embarrassing. Evi-
dently neither Pitt nor Portland had yet realised the
urgency of the peril, yet each morning continued to

1 “Camden to Portland, March 2 ¢Portland to Camden, March
Paes ce. 0), Tues Oe

VOL, III. xX

306

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book bring its tale of murders. In the first week in March
IX, e e e ° . am ©
———~ two magistrates were killed in open day in Kildare.

1798.
March,

In the body of one of them was found the bayonet
of a Militiaman. A group of labourers were looking
on while the work was done, and the perpetrators
walked coolly away. The Orange lodges offered their
services, and organised for their own defence. The
English mind had been so poisoned against the name
of Orangemen by stupid and lying declamation that
the Viceroy dared not employ them, but felt himself
compelled ‘to repress: their demonstrations ;’ while
the insurgent leaders, though each one of them was
known, were allowed to pursue their machinations
unharmed. The House of Commons was indignant
at what it called the timidity of the Government, and
clamoured for the reimposition of the Penal Laws.
Those best affected to Government were loudest in
demanding measures of most extreme severity. In
the country the magistrates were prostrated with fear.
‘It was equally difficult,’ the Viceroy said, ‘to re-
press the zealous and to give courage to the timid.’?
At this moment his difficulties were needlessly
ageravated. An officer of experience was required
at the head of the Irish army; and Cornwallis having
declined, the choice of the Government fell on Sir
Ralph Abercrombie, who had just distinguished him-
self in the West Indies. The English line regiments
had been almost entirely recalled from Ireland for ser-
vice abroad. The troops in the island consisted of a
handful of Germans, a very few regiments of British
Fencibles, the rest, and by far the largest propor-
tion, being the Irish Yeomanry and the distrusted

1 ‘See two extremely interesting land, March 6 and March 10.’
letters from Lord Camden to Port- 8S, P.O.

THE EVE OF ’98.

and uncertain Irish Militia. The Yeomanry, though
thoroughly loyal, had received no military training.
They had volunteered their services to grapple mabe
the unseen enemy who for years had been the terror
of their families, had compelled every Protestant
house to convert: itself into a fortress; and had filled
the domestic life of Protestant Ireland with the most
painful anxiety. Yeomen and farmers had left their
ploughs’ at the invitation of their landlords; men of
business’ had forsaken their desks; gentlemen had
joined with their Protestant servants to encounter
and subdue this horrible nightmare. .They were
scattered in small detachments over the country doing
police work, and therefore as soldiers were necessarily
disor eiosined.

The Militia regiments had ota satiiled secretly
with perpetual invitations to mutiny. They, too, had
never been regularly disciplined. Their eaicard in
many instances were the worst of the worst class in
Ireland, the pretenders to the name of gentlemen.
Abercrombie, entirely ignorant of Ireland, prepos-
sessed by the prejudices against the Castle Govern-
ment, and perhaps under the influence of Lord Moira,
was outraged at the condition in which he found the
army which he was sent to command. Instead of
looking into its real quality—instead of endeavouring
to understand its motley elements, and fashion them
into shape, he assumed that the disorder was but an
illustration of universal mismanagement. Without
saying a word to anyone, without paying the Viceroy
so much as the compliment of consulting him, he
issued an order immediately on his arrival which was

1 Catholics afterwards joined the Yeomanry, with a deliberate purpose

of treachery.
x2

507

CHAP.
iil

taenssiinjninee?

February
26.

308

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK a censure on the Executive Government. He told
et the troops that they were in a state of licentiousness

March.

which rendered them formidable to everyone but the
enemy. On his own responsibility he superseded
Lord Camden’s orders, and forbade the soldiers to act
anywhere under any circumstances in suppressing
riots, arresting criminals, or in any other function,
without the presence and authority of a magistrate.

The hopelessness of exertion on the part of the
magistrates, whom as residents in the country it was
unfair to expose to the vengeance of the people, had
compelled Lord Camden to pass their duties over to
military officers. In issuing an order in direct con-
tradiction of the Lord-Lieutenant, Sir Ralph Aber-
crombie was himself setting a most signal example of
the insubordination which he condemned; and had
he been as right essentially as he was utterly wrong
and headstrong, his manner of proceeding would have
been without excuse.

Lord Camden was unwilling to create a disturb-
ance. He quietly sent round a circular to each officer
who held a separate command renewing his own in-
structions. Abercrombie, he trusted, would see the
reason for them when he had larger experience. To
Abercrombie himself he said nothing. In his letter
to the Cabinet he passed the matter over in silence.
His own desire was that it should pass unnoticed.’
It was in England that attention was first drawn to
the ill-omened order, and Camden was blamed by
the Cabinet under the impression that he had sanc-
tioned it.

1 Yet Lord Camden has been dismissal, as too just and too hu-

universally accused by Irish writers | mane to execute the cruelties which
of haying procured Abercrombie’s _ he intended.

THE EVE OF ’98.

‘An extraordinary sensation has been created,’

309

a

Portland wrote, on the 11th of March, ‘by Sir Ralph Sein

Abercrombie’s Hetteti order. Can it be genuine ?
And if genuine, for what purpose was it issued, and
how was it allowed? Our friends here cannot repress
their regret at the triumph which they conceive Lord
Moira and his adherents, and indeed all the disaf-
fected, will claim over the Chancellor and the heads
of your Government. ‘The Irish whom I have seen,
and whose conversation has been reported to me,
conceive that there must be some division in the
Government; that you must have been deluded or
intimidated ; that protection is to be withdrawn from
them; that they will be sacrificed, or forced to join
the insurgents. I assure your Excellency I must
request a full and immediate explanation, which will
enable me to give that satisfaction to our friends and
to the public in general which has hitherto uniformly
attended every measure of your Excellency’s Admin-
istration.’ *

It was, of course, easy for Camden to reply, by
telling the literal truth. ‘To have noticed the or-
der in the manner which his feelings dictated,’ he
had feared, ‘ might have had an injurious effect on the
Kine’s service.’ ‘Sir Ralph might have resigned, or
have been recalled, and the Council were all agreed
that his leaving the country on such a ground, im-
mediately after his arrival, would have a bad effect
in the country.’ ‘ He had therefore passed it over, and
explained it away, and in Ireland it was already for-
gotten.’

The attention called to the matter in England

1 ¢Portland to Camden, March 11, 1798,’

1798.
March,

310

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

obliged Camden to communicate to Abercrombie the

—_**_ contents of Portland’s letter. He discharged his task

1798.
March.

‘as delicately as possible,’ with the strongest expres-
sions of personal respect. The spirit in which Aber-
crombie received the reproof throws a painful light
on the motives with which the order was issued, and
shows how far in that unhappy time the sense of
duty in the soldier was obscured by the passions of
the politician. He refused to see Lord Camden; he
wrote a letter to him, in which, although his know-
ledge of Ireland was but a few weeks old, he repeated
Lord Moira’s accusations, and declared the policy of
the Castle to be the cause of the disquiet of the
country. Lord Camden had pressed him earnestly
to retain the command, as his retirement at such a
moment could not fail to weaken further the shaken
authority of the Government. Abercrombie closed
a petulant defence of his conduct with an abrupt re-
signation.?

In this instance Lord Camden had not to complain
of half-hearted support from home. Both the King
and the Cabinet expressed. their strongest satisfac-
tion with Camden’s forbearance and discretion. They
felt as he felt, that the resignation, if persisted in,
would be taken as a censure on the Viceroy, and
a direct encouragement to the rebellion. Entirely
unacquainted as Abercrombie necessarily was with
the secret information on which Lord Camden was
acting, they were willing to pass over his mistake ;
but they entreated him not to add to their difficul-
ties by persevering in it. |

But either Abercrombie had come to Ireland

1 “Camden to Portland, March 13,’ S§, P. O.

THE EVE OF ’98.

primed by Lord Moira, and predetermined to thwart
the Government (and if this was the explanation his
acceptance of the command without informing the
Cabinet of his views was entirely indefensible), or on
imperfect knowledge he had taken a rash and ill-con-
sidered step, the effects of which he was bound to repair.
But his vanity had been wounded by what he construed
into a public affront. ‘He admitted that he had
been misinformed,’ ‘ but it made no difference.’ ‘ He
refused to make any concession to the wounded feel-
ings of the country, or remedy the effects of his in-
discretion.’ ‘We must, therefore,’ said Camden,
‘accept the resignation; and | transmit his request,
though with sensations the most painful. The awful
situation of this kingdom cannot be too early or too
attentively the subject of the deliberation of his Ma-
jesty’s Ministers. Sir Ralph Abercrombie has with-
drawn himself from the command in a manner calcu-
lated, I venture to say, more to shake his Majesty’s
interests in Ireland than any other event could have
produced. The army will suppose that they have
gained a victory over Sir Ralph Abercrombie, and all
that was amiss will grow worse.’?

* “Camden. to Portland, March * “Camden to Portland, March
a late Oo! 26,’

312

BOOK
IX.

————
1798,

March,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION III.

Ir Sir Ralph Abercrombie had been on the watch
for a moment when, by leaving the army without a
head, he could best forward the interests of the insur-
rection, he could not have selected a more appro-
priate occasion.» Fitzgibbon’s language in the House
of Lords, and whispers of treachery among themselves,
had given the Executive Committee of the rebellion
reason to suspect that their persons were known
to the Government, and that further delay would be
unsafe. Lawless had gone to London to see the
French agent. Fitzgerald had spoken of the proba-
bility of his arrest, and of his intention of going to
Paris, to quicken Talleyrand. Fitzgerald, perhaps,
felt that he could not be spared, and Arthur O’Con-
nor was despatched instead of him. Among the Irish
at Paris, Wolfe lone mentions a priest named O’Coigly,
abbreviated into Quigley, as having been there in the
summer of 1797, attached to the faction of Napper
Tandy. This Quigley, a ready, busy, cunning person,
was skilful in disguises, and had learnt the art of
passing to and fro without detection. He had re-
turned to Dublin in the winter following. He had
been with Lord Edward at Leinster House. He was
now going back to Paris, and Arthur O’Connor de-
termined to go in his company. O’Connor had been
released from prison on his recognizances. His move-
ments were suspected; he was called on to appear
and take his trial, but he was already gone. It was

THE EVE OF ’98..

represented that he had been summoned to England
on private affairs, and the excuse was accepted.

On the 27th of February three strange gentlemen
appeared at the ‘King’s Head,’ at Margate. They
had come from Whitstable, and had brought with
them a cart full of luggage. They called themselves
officers, and gave the names of Captain Jones, Colonel
Morris, and Mr. Williams. They said that they were
on their way to Deal, and that they wanted a con-
veyance for their boxes. They remained for the night
at the ‘ King’s Head;’ and the servants of the hotel,
with the usual curiosity of such persons, questioned
the driver of the Whitstable cart as to whence they
came, and who they were. The driver’s impression was
that they were concerned in some smuggling transac-
tion. They had applied to the boatmen at Whitstable
to take them across to Flushing. The Whitstable men
had set their terms too high, and the driver thought
that they meant to try elsewhere. Further enquiry
brought out that they had spoken on the same subject
to some fishermen at Margate. Strangers in those
times of jealous loyalty, seeking a secret passage to
the Continent, were persons to be watched. A hint
was given to the police, and the next morning, when
the party were at breakfast, two officers entered the
room, and asked them for an account of themselves.
Their story was not ready. They pretended to be
unknown to each other, and to have met accidentally
at Margate. Jt was immediately proved that Captain
Jones and Colonel Morris had slept in the same
room at Whitstable. They denied the luggage to be
theirs. It was proved that they had engaged the
cart in which it was brought, and that they had
spoken of taking it with them to Deal.

3138
CHAP,
a8
———— ree ~

1798.
February,

314’

BOOK
IX.

a
1798.

February.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The situation became serious. They were searched.
In a great-coat, which was hanging in the room, was
found a pocket-book, and in the pocket-book was a
letter addressed to the Executive Directory of France.
The letter when opened was found so absurd as al-
most to disarm suspicion. To solid Iinglishmen, inex-
perienced in Irish political compositions, it seemed
like the production of a lunatic. ‘ With the tyranny
of England the tyranny of Europe was to fall.’ The
great nation was invited ‘to pour out its gigantic force.’
‘Its triumphs had been watched with rapture. The
friends of liberty in England, Ireland, and Scotland
had united to forward the common and glorious
cause. ‘he sacred flame of freedom was. kindled.
The United Islands were longing to break their
chains, and were waiting with impatience to see the
hero of Italy and his brave veterans on their shores.’

Dangerous conspirators did not usually carry
compromising documents i coat pockets, nor ex-
pose themselves to danger for the sake of communi-
cating to a foreign power such grotesque nonsense.
Except for the lies which they had told, and for their
appearance which showed them to be gentlemen,
the party might have escaped with a few hours in
the parish stocks. But there was an evident mys-
tery about them. They and their boxes were sent
under a guard to London, when Captain Jones was
found to be the Priest O’Coigly, Colonel Morris.to be
Arthur O’Connor, and Williams to be an English re-
volutionist named Binns. O’Connor wrote a hur-
ried note to Lord Edward, telling him not to be
alarmed, nothing having been taken upon them which
compromised any individual. ‘The messenger to
whom the note was entrusted was unfortunate or

THE EVE OF ’98.

treacherous, for it fell into the hands of the Govern-
ment.! |
Had O’Connor known the connection between the
Government and Lord Downshire’s friend, he would
have felt less confident. ‘There was evidence, if it
could only be produced, which would send both Lord
Edward and himself to the scaffold. As matters
stood, he had been caught red-handed in his mis-
sion of treason. ‘The Government was in the absurd
position of being driven to prove, by imperfect and
inferential testimony, what they knew to be beyond
the shadow of doubt, and to risk the chance of defeat
when defeat would be a victory to rebellion. But
there was now no alternative. The three prisoners
were committed for high treason, and a special com-
mission was appointed to try them.

The arrest of O’Connor and his companions ren-
dered necessary immediate action in Dublin. The
Committee would take alarm, and either give the sig-
nal for the rising, or disperse and assemble elsewhere.
Camden had been left to act at his discretion. Papers
might be seized which would of themselves be suffi-
cient for the conviction of the most guilty, or would
supply links which might be missing at Maidstone. At
any rate, this knot of dangerous men could no longer
be suffered to remain at liberty. Reynolds gave no-
tice that a full meeting was to be held on the 12th of
March, at No. 12, Bridge Street—the house of one
of them, a merchant, Oliver Bond. The Committee
was in two bodies—the General Committee and the
Executive Council of the Committee, which was

weekly changed. Both these bodies would be found

1 ¢Camden to Portland, March 6,’ §. P. O.

316

BOOK
I + ad

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sitting. The Executive Council on the 12th of

——— March would consist of Mr. Jackson, MacCormick,}

1798,
March,

MacCann, Barclay Teeling, and Lord Edward Fitz-
gerald. On the ilth Lord Camden informed the
Cabinet of the resolution which had been taken to seize
them all, and ‘having drawn the sword,’ to arrest
every other person who was known to be implicated.

‘The universal opinion of his majesty’s servants,’
Camden wrote, ‘the temper of the friends of Go-
vernment, and the inconceivable mischief produced
by the machinations of this Committee, have induced
Mr. Pelham and myself to think the measure one of
policy. The longer it is delayed the better the coun-
try will be organised. The timid are joining, the
zealous are becoming lukewarm. Murders are every
day committed, and gentlemen are driven from the
country. The assizes approach, and neither grand

_nor petty juries will be found. It must be shown

that the Government is not afraid to act, and the
capture of the heads of the conspiracy must be fol-
lowed by the march of troops into the parts of the
country most disturbed. If we delay longer we shall
be driven by Parliament into more rigorous mea-
sures. There is not a second opinion as to the neces-
sity of the arrest.’ ”

The seizure was effected easily, though unhappily
with incomplete success. Major Swan, an officer
of the police, repaired at the time indicated by Rey-
nolds to the house in Bridge Street, with twelve
policemen in plain clothes. They burst in the door,
and surprised the General Committee in full session.
Kighteen were secured—secured had they known it

1 Wolfe Tone’s Magog, the se- * “Camden to Portland, March
cretary of the Catholic Committee. 11,1798” 8S. P.O. °

THE EVE OF ’98.

from the consequences of their own treason. Mac-
Neven, Addys Emmett, Sweetman, two Jacksons,
Oliver Bond himself, and twelve others were made
prisoners. An attempt was made to throw the papers
in the fire, which Major Swan promptly stopped by
drawing a pistol; but there was no resistance. ‘The
Executive Committee satin aninner room. Of them
Jackson was taken. Lord Edward, MacCann, Mac-
Cormick, and Teeling had either escaped or had
not arrived. Warrants were sent out instantly for
their apprehension. Their houses were searched and
all their papers carried off. In Lord Edward's room,
at Leinster House, were found many letters, some in
cypher, some in ordinary hand. Of the cyphers a
key was discovered in O’Connor’s dressing-case which
was taken with his luggage at Maidstone. The letters
read by the help of it referred to his journey to
France. Quigley had denied that he had come from
Dublin. A note from him proved that he had been
at Leinster House on business of importance.’

The capture by the police of so many conspicuous
patriots created, of course, the most vehement ex-
citement. The people gathered in knots, talking
eagerly and full of curiosity, but there were no open
signs of anger, and quiet citizens drew their breath
with a sigh of relief. Lord Edward seemed to have
disappeared. Rumours said that he had gone north
to his brother at Ardglass, and from thence would

1 The note was like the address seven in the evening, and talk over

found in the coat pocket, andisa _ that business of the letter, and other
curious illustration of the stilted affairs of that business likewise.

temper of the period :— ‘James ComaLy.
‘ Dublin, January 14, 1798. ‘To Citizen Fitzgerald,
‘ Citizen,— You will please to re- ‘commonly called

main at home to-morrow, as I ‘ Lord Edward Fitzgerald.’
intend to call on you precisely at

317

CHAP.
III.

——-
1798.

March,

318

BOOK
WL

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

escape out of the country. Orders were sent to every

——— port to be on the watch for him, and a strict and

1798.
March.

silent search was maintained in Dublin and the
neighbourhood.

eae Lord Edward for the moment, the story
reverts to the Margate prisoners. Their trial wasno
sooner determined on than they became objects of the
most powerful interest. The Opposition, for reasons
known to themselves, erected O’Connor into a political
hero. They affected to see in him an intended victim
of the savage and barbarous Government which was
driving Ireland into rebellion, and forcing into exile
the noblest of her sons. He was the proprietor of the
‘Press’ newspaper, and the ‘ Press’ was the advocate
of assassination. No matter. Round O’Connor were
centered for the time the energy, the intellect, and the
passion of the great Whig party of England.

The preparations for the trial were elaborately care-
ful. Three judges—Sir Francis Buller, Sir Soulden
Lawrence, and Sir John Heath—were placed on the
commission. Lord Romney presided, as Lord-Lieu-
tenant of Kent. Scott, Mitford, and Abbott conducted
the case for the Crown. Plumer, Dallas, Gurney,
and Fergusson appeared for the prisoners. The evi-
dence against Quigley was that he was carrying a
treasonable letter to the Directory; for the coat in
which it was found was proved, in spite of his denials,
to belong to him. He could offer no explanation of
it, and the account which he gave of himself was
found to be a tissue of falsehoods. Against O’Connor
the direct evidence being still unproducible, the Crown
alleged his companionship with Quigley, the letters
found in Leinster House, to which the cypher which
he was carrying was the key, referring to an invasion
which he was going to France to procure, and the

THE EVE OF ’98.

numberless contradictions in which he had involved
himself, and which proved that he had something to
conceal. Quigley’s defence was desperate from the
first. O’Connor’s would have been desperate but for
the weight of evidence to character which was brought
to his rescue. Plumer pleaded for him that he was
a gentleman of rank and fortune, Lord Longueville’s
nephew, the intimate associate and friend of the most
distinguished statesmen of the day. To suppose that
such a person would implicate himself in treason was
absurd. He had the misfortune to differ in principle
from the existing administration of Ireland. He had
been already unjustly imprisoned, and he was going
abroad to escape further ill-usage. The cyphered
letter was allowed to be a mystery. It certainly
seemed to refer to the introduction of a French force;
but if Mr. O’Connor had really contemplated such a
thing he could not be found guilty on the indictment,
for he was charged with compassing the invasion of
England, and if the allusion in the letter was to an
invasion at all, it was the invasion of Ireland. These
shifts would not of themselves have availed to save
him. So evidently was he on some dangerous errand
when he was taken, that he was found to have
conveyed his property to his kinsman, Sir Francis
Burdett, before he started upon it. In his favour,
however—and considering that not only the evi-
dence already in possession of the Ministers, but his
own subsequent confession, proved that of all the
Irish traitors he was the falsest and wickedest ; con-
sidering that already he had published sentiments in
his newspaper, under the signature of ‘A Child of
Satan,’ in the fullest keeping with the assumed father-
hood of their author, such an appearance in a court
of justice on that errand betrays a temper which

319

CHAP,
Iii.
—_
1798.
May.

$20

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK explains the long exclusion of the Whigs from the
—_*_ service of their Sovereign—the most distinguished

1798.
May.

members of the Opposition in both Houses of the
British Parliament presented themselves to give evi-
dence to O’Connor’s disposition.

Lord Moira came to declare his admiration of him,
though he must have been acquainted with the wild
and traitorous address which had been the occasion of
his first imprisonment.

Erskine claimed Q’Connor as a_ personal friendly
protested that O’Connor’s sentiments were his own,
and declared him incapable of a dishonourable action.
O’Connor, he said, was going abroad. He had seen
him in London on his way from Ireland, and had him-
self advised him to go, though the friend whom he
was thus counselling was avowedly at large on his
recognizances.

Charles James Fox was the next witness. He had
known O’Connor for four years, and professed to re-
gard him as well affected, enlightened, and attached
to the Constitution and the Crown.

One after another these great persons deposed to
the same story, at the cost either of their conscience
or their understanding. Sheridan had talked often
with O’Connor on Irish politics. They agreed in
their detestation of the present Administration ; but
in the face of the address to the people of Ireland, he
said O’Connor had always repudiated the thought of
applying to France for assistance.

Grattan, who had come to England for the trial,
declared that he admired and honoured O’Connor,
and dared to say, though on his oath, that he was
certain that he could not approve of a French inva-
sion. The Duke of Norfolk considered that there

THE EVE OF ’98.

was no difference of opinion between Mr. O’Connor
and himself. So did Lord John Russell, so did
Lord Oxford, so did Lord Thanet, so did Samuel
Whitbread. Grey and Lauderdale were in at-
tendance, and willing to be sworn, but were not
called upon.

Either these distinguished persons believed what
they were saying—and if they believed it, distempered
party spirit had made their judgment blind—or they
so detested the Irish Administration and all be-
longing to it, that they considered treason itself as
the excess of a spirit which was generally virtuous,
and rather merited applause than censure. Buller
summed up fatally against Quigley. Of O’Connor,
on the ground of the uncertainty of the evidence
and the array of testimony to his general excellence,
Buller almost directed the acquittal.

The jury obeyed the Judge’s instructions. The
meaner villain was found guilty. Arthur O’Connor,
another Phelim O’Neil, with the polish of cultivation
externally, and with the inner nature of a savage, heard
a verdict recorded in his favour. He was leaving the
court in triumph, but the Government knew their
man too well to let him go so easily. He was at
once re-arrested on another charge, and was restored
to his quarters in Dublin Castle.

Efforts too were made to save Quigley from the last
penalty of the law. When they proved in vain, and
he was brought out to die, he inflicted such revenge
as was still within his reach on the oppressors of his
country, by protesting from the scaffold that his life
had been sworn away by perjury, that the papers in
his pocket had been placed there by other hands, and
that he died a murdered man. |

VOL. III. Y

321

CHAP,
iil.

———_
1798.

May.

322

BOOK
IX.

Se
1798.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

In Maidstone Gaol he composed a sketch of his life.
His blood, he said, was from the old Irish tribes. Not
one of the plundering settlers did he count among his
ancestors. His family had been stripped of the best
of their lands by James the First. The remnant of
them had fought against Cromwell, and had again
suffered under the Act of Settlement. They must have
been restored again, for he said that one of them sat
for Tyrone in the Parliament of James the Second.
His great-grandfather on the mother’s side was killed,
with seven of his brothers, at the Boyne. Another
great-grandfather had constructed the famous boom
at Derry, and with three of his brothers was killed
at Aghrim. The Orangemen had attacked his
father’s house, had wounded his father, and had
murdered his mother. ‘They had destroyed his own
library, his carefully-collected materials for a history
of Ireland, and had driven him out as a wanderer
over the face of the earth. The bravado with which
he took leave of life deprives the story of its claim to
credibility. The truth, if truth it contained, cannot
be separated from the falsehood, and his obvious
design was to represent himself as a member of a
family which had devoted itself for the liberties of
Ireland. The journal of Wolfe Tone places his con-
nection with the intrigues with the Directory beyond
the shadow of a doubt, yet to the last he declared
his innocence upon oath. A priest was sent to pre-
pare him for death. The threat of the refusal of
the Sacraments failed to wring from him a word of
confession. He wrote to Portland, saying that he
was one of his lordship’s messengers-extraordinary
to the other world charged with tidings of his mer-
ciful Administration.

THE EVE OF ’98.

A day or two before his death he composed an
iddress to the people of Ireland, to whose cause he
was falling a sacrifice. He secured the preservation
of an exact account of his closing behaviour. He
would not have his death thrown away by the manner
of it being belied, and from the platform below the
vallows on Pennington Heath, where he suffered,
he repeated ‘ firmly and distinctly,’ ‘ without passion
and without extravagance,’ that he was an innocent
man.

So, with a certain courage—for according to his pro-
fessed creed he was risking his soul for his revenge—
this miserable being, thus raised by accident into mo-
mentary and tragic visibility, was swung off and died.

Dying declarations of innocence always throw a
certain doubt on the justice of an execution. By his
persistence he dealt a blow not wholly ineffective at
the Government which he abhorred, and raised him-
self in the estimation of the patriots, who were as well
assured of his guilt as of their own.

‘Quigley,’ recorded Wolfe Tone in his journal,
‘has behaved admirably well, which is more than I
expected. He has behaved like a hero.’!

1¢ Trials of Arthur O’Connor xxvi., xxvii.
and James Quigley, at Maidstone, Journal of Wolfe Tone, June 12
May 1798,’ — State Trials, vols. and June 18, 1798.

y 2

323

CHAP.
II.

——_——
1798.

May.

324

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

BOOK THE seizure of the Committee restored confidence
—— in Dublin. The House of Commons demanded their

L798:
March.

immediate prosecution and punishment. But the
evidence was still inadequate. Reynolds, the in-
former, hung back as yet from appearing publicly.
The papers taken, though amply justifying the arrest,
and proving that the Committee generally were en-
gaged in organising and directing an intended insur-
rection, were insufficient, in the Attorney-General’s
opinion, to sustain an indictment for high treason
against any individual. ‘The prisoners were there-
fore left’ for the present in Newgate. The Cabinet
congratulated Camden on his success, and encouraged
him warmly to persevere, after so happy a commence-
ment, in the same direction.’ He was left to his
unfettered judgment, the Duke of Portland, however,
offering a few suggestions.

‘ Now, when the Viceroy was displaying his power,’
the Duke thought there was a favourable opportunity
for making a provision for the Catholic clergy. It
would be a timely encouragement to loyalty. It
would disarm misrepresentation. It would convince
moderate Catholics that they were interested in
supporting the Government. It might tend also to
separate the Catholics from the Presbyterians—‘ an
object considered always so desirable and of so much
importance,’ that the Duke ‘could not avoid bringing
it again under Lord Camden’s consideration.’ ”

1 ¢ Portland to Camden, March ? ¢Portland to Camden, March
B hy fs 20.’

THE EVE OF ’98.

With these notions Portland combined others not
usually thought compatible with them. He desired
the priests to be conciliated, but he wished also to
encourage everywhere the friends of order. Camden
had been reproached with favouring the Orangemen.
He had, in fact, been cold and hostile to them. Port-
land considered that the assistance of a body of which
alone the United Irishmen confessed themselves afraid
was not to be lightly thrown away. ‘I heard yester-
lay,’ he wrote, ‘ that the Orange Association in Ulster
has been joined by all the principal gentry and well-
uffected persons of property in that province, for the
purpose of protecting themselves against the United
[rishmen, and that they have bound themselves by an
yath to defend the King and the Constitution. Asso-
viations of any sort unless authorised by Government
ire not generally to be countenanced ; but, consider-
ng the circumstances of these times, and the neces-
ity of counteracting the attempts of our domestic
nemies, exertions of this kind may do more than all
he military force you could apply towards the esta-
lishment of order. The example may produce the
vest effects in other parts of the kingdom, and may
rive you a disposable force to be carried to the South.
[he sense of danger and the proper spirit which has
rrompted this combination may dispose those who
1ave entered into it to allow your Excellency to
nethodise, direct, and bring them into the state ot
ubordination which may enable you to employ their
real to the best advantage.’ !

Had Camden’s Administration been actuated by
he fanatical spirit of Protestant ascendency which it

1 «Portland to Camden, March 24.’ §S. P.O,

325

CHAP.
Kil.

—O
1798.

March.

526

BOOK

—e___-—
1798.
March.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

is usually said to have represented, the Viceroy would
have caught eagerly at a permission to accept assist-
ance which would have relieved him of all anxiety
for the possible success of the rebellion. He had
shrunk from the Orangemen, and he shrank from
them still, because he held it inconsistent with the
duty of the representative of the Sovereign to raise
again the banner of the Boyne, or arm Protestants
against Catholics. His forbearance was the more
creditable to him, because he had cause to know that
Catholic loyalty, even where most loudly professed,
was from the lips outwards. He was unable to accept
Portland’s advice on either side.

‘As to a provision for the Catholic clergy,’ he re-
plied, ‘the temper of the country will not bear it at
present. There seems much reason to think that the
Catholics in general are not hostile to these commo-
tions ; that even the most loyal of them wait with
some hope that a revolution in Ireland will restore
them to the possessions and the consequence that they
have lost.’ As for the Orangemen, Lord Camden was
still under the spell of the remarkable theory that the
secret of governing Ireland was to humour the ene-
mies of the British connection and look coldly on its
friends. He did not deny that there were among
them ‘very respectable persons.’ Their present
numbers were forty thousand; they were likely to
increase, and in the event of open rebellion might
possibly be useful. He should therefore take no steps
to suppress or dissolve their lodges. To encourage
them, however, would, he said, ‘much increase the
jealousy of the Catholics.’ In ‘the dreadfully dis-
turbed’ condition of the South ‘ he feared to recom-
mend the employing one party in the kingdom to put

THE EVE OF ’98.

down another.’ ‘Many of the Orangemen,’ he be-
lieved, ‘would enter regiments, either in the Yeo-
manry or the Militia.’ ‘They are the persons,’ he
added, with involuntary compliment, ‘most to be
trusted with arms in either kingdom.’ ?

Lord Camden was rejecting assistance which at
that moment would have been of invaluable service.
Having drawn the sword, there was no longer room
for pause. It was obviously necessary to utilise the
confusion which had been created by the arrest of the
Revolutionary Committee, and to disarm Leinster and
Munster by the same measures which had been found
effective in Ulster, before the conspirators could re-
pair the blow and elect a new Directory. For this
purpose he was obliged to appeal to General Aber-
crombie.

The Cabinet had been painfully shocked at Aber-
crombie’s persistence in resigning the command.
Portland feared that Camden himself, weary of calumny
and sick of so ungrateful and dangerous a service, might
himself follow the example. He declared Aber-
crombie’s conduct to be most ‘unjustifiable and. dis-
tressing.’ He insisted that Abercrombie should remain
at his post till a successor could be provided for him ;
and as the circumstances admitted of no delay, Aber-
crombie was called on to undertake the work of dis-
armament. He seemed to have come to Ireland to

1 “Camden to Portland, March
29, 1798.’

2 ¢You, at whatever sacrifice,
we entreat to remain at your post.
I think the existence of Ireland
would be endangered, and its ruin
would ensue, were you to give up
the Government; and, severe as the

avowal of such a sentiment un-
doubtedly is, I should neither do
my duty to my country nor to you
were I to conceal it, or omit to add
that there is not, in my opinion,
any person existing who would fill
your place.’ —* Portland to Camden,
March 31.’

327

CHAP.
III.
ow“
1798.
March,

328

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

effect the utmost extremity of mischief which his

et opportunities allowed him, Instead of complying, he

1798.
March.

said that the whole country was totally disaffected.
The troops were as disloyal as the people. He could
rely neither on the Yeomanry nor the militia, and
‘ten thousand additional troops must be drawn from
Great Britain’ if the disarmament was to be per-
severed in."

The rebels soon rallied their courage when they
saw signs of hesitation in following up the arrest.
On the 80th of March Lord Camden reported that
another magistrate, Mr. Darragh, of Eagle Hill, of
Kildare, had been murdered on his own lawn. A
man brought him a petition, and shot him while he
was reading it.2 The plundering of private houses
began again. Villages had been attacked at noon-
day. Large bodies of insurgents had collected and
fired upon the troops. On the 28th of March a
thousand men, well-dressed and well-appointed, many
of them in regimental boots and pantaloons, rode
into Cahir, in Tipperary, posted guards at the en-
trances of the town, examined every Protestant
house, Lord Cahir’s among them, and carried off all the
arms which they found.’ Mr. Pennefather, who com-
manded a Yeomanry corps at Cashel, reported himself
surrounded by swarms of armed insurgents, and
begged for help. Similar accounts came from Tip-
perary, Limerick, and Cork. The Privy Council una-
nimously decided that the troops must be put in

1 ¢Sir Ralph Abercrombie to Catholic blood.’ For this the se-
Lord Camden, March 27,’ cret tribunal had sentenced him to
* Mr. Darragh had been reported, death. .
utterly without foundation, to have 5 ‘Camden to Portland, March
‘wished he was ancle-deep in 30. S. P.O,

THE EVE OF ’98.

motion. Even Abercrombie, who was at the meet-
ing, appeared to acquiesce in the necessity, and pro-
fessed himself ‘ willing to proceed to the disturbed
districts and suppress the insurrection.’ ?

A proclamation was immediately sent out, re-
sembling that which had been issued in Ulster by
Lake. The country was declared in rebellion. The
people were summoned to give up their arms. The
army received instructions to act as might be neces-
sary for the restoration of order, and if the arms
were refused to take them by force.

No sooner was the proclamation out than Aber-
crombie had changed his mind. Letters had reached
him from England in which he learnt the Cabinet’s
displeasure with his conduct. He spoke of himself
as ‘disgraced and ruined.’ If the troops were to
go, he said that he could not accompany them. Cam-
den told him that the proclamation had been issued
in reliance on his promise. If his objections were so
strong as he now stated them to be, he ought to have
said so at the Council.

At issue with himself, his sense of honour and
propriety contending with some inner feeling which
remained unexplained, he seemed to master his un-
willingness. ‘He said immediately that he would
go; that under the peculiar circumstances in which
he stood he would act with redoubled zeal; that he
would not quit the South of Ireland till it was quiet,
and the arms restored.”

With these words Abercrombie left the Viceroy,
and left him without further misgiving that his orders
would be carried out.

1 ¢Camden to Portland, March * ‘Camden to the Duke of Port-
30.’ 8S. P.O. land, April 2.’

330

BOOK
IX.

SS
1798.
April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Abercrombie had scarcely left the Castle than an-
other informer presented himself, whose name was not
allowed to transpire, but who, like Reynolds, was a
member of the General Committee. This gentleman
told the Viceroy that the blow dealt in the arrest had
been less effective than he had hoped; that the mis-
chief had been repaired, and the vacant places on the
Committee had been refilled. Had Major Swan ar-
rived two hours later, he would have seized fifty of
them, and among the rest ‘ Curran, who was to have
been proposed for the Committee of a hundred.’ ‘ The
Committee had honorary members, of whom Grattan
was one.’ ‘Grattan had been offered all terms if he
would fairly engage, but he looked on.’ *

Some few further particulars this person added as
to the insurgents’ present condition and prospects.
The French Directory had definitely promised to
land an army, which might be looked for before the
end of the current month. They were to receive
three millions sterling to repay the cost of the expe-
dition, and the money was to be raised by the sale of
the property of the nobles and the clergy. Prepara-
tions were being pressed forward to receive them.
Emissaries were engaged at a guinea a day to debauch
the soldiers, of whom the Committee supposed that
they had gained a third. ‘Almost all the lower
priests were bought over, and were ordered at con-
fession to urge the people to stand by the cause
of their country.’ Abercrombie’s order ‘had been
happily calculated to alienate the soldiers from the
Government, when they saw their exertions in
repressing the people made a pretext for abusing

1 Information enclosed by Camden in his letter of April 2.

THE EVE OF ’98.

them.’ The success of the revolution was to be
followed by a wholesale confiscation of estates. Full
accounts had been drawn of the lands and their
owners, and lists made of those who were to be
sacrificed. ‘The most dangerous man in Ireland was
Emmett, from his zeal, his manners, his address, his
eloquence, his ability, and his bloodthirstiness.’ *

These accounts tallied too exactly with what was
known already for any doubts to be entertained of
the truth of them. The Viceroy and Council were sit-
ting over a loaded mine, and for all that they could tell
the match might be already smouldering which would
explode it. Abercrombie had done irreparable mis-
chief. The Viceroy believed himself entitled to hope
that he was now exerting himself in earnest, and
might not even yet be too late.

Some influence was unhappily at work on Aber-
crombie behind the scenes, which had enchanted him
once more in the same fatal irresolution. He went
South, but instead of disarming the people he con-
tented himself with issuing orders that the arms
were to be brought in and delivered up within
ten days. After wasting a fortnight in inactivity,
when time was of all things most precious, he
returned to Dublin, to tell the Viceroy that al-
though no pikes or muskets had yet been surrendered,
he was convinced that they would be surrendered.
His unwillingness had returned to employ the sol-
diers at all. ‘His report to me,’ Camden said, in
sending an account to Portland of his extraordi-
nary conduct, ‘ was intermixed with observations on
the impolicy of allowing the military to act without

1 Informations, April 2.

332

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK waiting for the civil magistrate, and of his opinion of

ah
1798.

April.

the advantage of resorting to the civil power, with
which political remarks it is unnecessary that I
should trouble you.’ ?

Camden could no longer have desired to retain a
Commander-in-Chief on whom he could rely so little
as General Abercrombie. He did, however, once
more, though to no purpose, invite him to remain.
When he refused he was pressed no further; and
after having enormously aggravated every element
of danger in the country, he left Ireland, and the
command devolved on General Lake.

‘Sir Ralph’s delay and long notice has done no-
thing but mischief,’ Camden wrote, as soon as he was
gone. ‘It has cooled the ardour of the well-affected
country gentlemen. No arms have been brought in,
and now the general officers in command are them-
selves hesitating. At the assizes in Kildare the
juries in general did their duty, but there appeared
no good disposition among the Catholics, and the
juries which did not act with propriety were of that
persuasion. ‘The appearance is of the contest be-
coming a religious one. All means shall be used to
avert this danger, but the alarms of the Protestants are
so great, and the hopes of the Catholics are so strong,
that it is difficult to repress the violence of the first
or make any impression on the latter.’ ”

1 Camden to Portland, April 2 “Camden to Portland, April
2Onimae. O. 2828.20,

THE EVE OF ’98.

SECTION V.

StupEnts of later Irish history are familiar with the
ferocious cruelties inflicted by General Lake’s army
on the Irish peasantry in the spring of 1798, the
free quarters, the burnt villages, the pitch-caps,
the triangle, and the lash. To these outrages it has
pleased the Irish to attribute the insurrection.
England, ever stern in extremities, ever penitent
when the danger is over, and inclined to shift the
blame upon her instruments, has allowed this le-
gend, like so many others, to pass unrefuted, and
has permitted one more illusion to swell the volume
of Ireland’s imaginary wrongs. An attention to
dates would have sufficed to reduce the charge
to modest dimensions. Lake did not take the
command-in-chief till the 28rd of April. On the
24th of May the rebellion burst. The atrocities
which are supposed to have caused it were there-
fore limited to a single month. The preceding
history has been written in vain if it be now necessary
to insist that the disarming of the South was no mea-
sure of gratuitous severity. For seven years the
whole of Ireland had been deliberately preparing for
revolt. An invisible authority ruled over the four
provinces, with a code of laws enforced by dagger,
pike, pistol, and houghing-knife. It had formed an
army, negotiated an alliance, and conspired to bring
to its assistance the deadliest enemies of England.
Its regiments were dispersed over the whole country,
ready at any moment for action, yet imperceptible to

333

CHAP,
Tike

———
1798.

April,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the outward eye. The officers were younger bro-
thers, professional men, adventurers, more or less
educated, claiming the status of gentlemen, some
of them men of fortune, and even of noble family.
The rank-and-file were persons pursuing externally
their quiet callings as tradesmen, artisans, clerks,
farmers, or labourers. They had concealed depots
of arms ready to be snatched at a moment’s notice,
whether the object was to murder a magistrate
or to take the field against the army of the Sove-
reign. ‘The long forbearance of the Government had
shaken the confidence of the troops and of the re-
spectable inhabitants, who believed themselves de-
serted. Subtle influences were at work poisoning
the loyalty of the soldiers. Things had come to such
a point that there was scarce a country-house in any
corner of Ireland where a Protestant family could
go to rest without a sense that before morning they
might be awakened by the yells of assassins. The
servants who waited on them at table, the labourers
who worked in their fields or gardens, might, for
all they could tell, be in secret league for their des-
truction. Well-disposed at heart they might be, but
their wills were under the spell of the general terror;
and any magistrate whose loyalty was conspicuous
knew that he was doing his duty to his country at
the risk of his own and children’s lives. The Irish
gentry were looking upon themselves as doomed.
The English press was ringing with execrations
against them. They saw peers and _ statesmen
going into the witness-box, to claim identity of
opinion with the avowed advocate of assassination.
The responsible governor of Ireland would have
shown a craven shrinking from the first elements of

THE EVE OF ’98.

his obligations if at such a moment he had allowed
an impression to go abroad that he dared not grapple
with the. deadly organisation which was thus openly
setting law at defiance. The ten days weakly
granted by Abercrombie were allowed to expire,
and then, as not a pike had been surrendered, Ge-
neral Lake set about his work. He had to deal with
a temper of which the natural stubbornness was
encouraged by the impression that the Castle Go-
vernment would not be supported by the power of Eng-
land. Of British troops he had but a handful. The
force on which he had to rely to carry out his orders
consisted mainly of the loyal Irish Yeomanry, men
whose friends had been murdered, who had them-
selves been marked for murder, whose hands had
for years been tied by a law which gave them no
protection, while to their enemies it was a convenient
shield. ‘There was little cause of surprise if now at
last, when they were permitted to show a people
who had laughed at courts of justice that there
were other modes by which they could be com-
pelled into obedience, the poison-fangs were not
drawn with the gentlest hand. Itis true that during
three weeks regiments were sent to live at free
quarters in districts where the inhabitants combined
to resist the disarmament. It is true that when other
means failed the lash was freely used to compel dis-
closures, though only where sure and certain infor-
mation had led the officers to know that there was
something to be disclosed. It is true, also, that the
lash proved the most efficacious of persuasives, that
under its pressure the labours of the Revolutionary
Committee were rendered futile, that the army of in-
surrection was deprived of halfits means of injury, that

33

CHAP.
III.

April.

5

——,—___
1798.

336

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the rebellion when it broke out was confined to dis-

——-— tricts where the process had been imperfectly carried

1798
April.

out, and that General Lake’s determination, though it
could not prevent infinite horrors, did at least pre-
vent a massacre on the scale of the precedent of 1641.

In so rude a scene there were doubtless instances
of unnecessary harshness. Passionate indignation
had been roused by the long catalogue of unpunished
crimes, and passionate indignation is seldom tempe-
rate, and sometimes cruel.

The United Irishmen had affected the fashion of
short hair. The loyalists called them Croppies, and
if a Croppy prisoner stood silent when it was
certain that he could confess with effect, paper or
linen caps smeared with pitch were forced upon his
head to bring him to his senses. Such things ought
not to have been, and such things would not have
been had General Lake been supplied with English
troops ; but assassins and their accomplices will not
always be delicately handled by those whose lives they
have threatened. Occasionally, not often, men suf-
fered who were innocent, so far as no definite guilt
could be proved against them. At such times, how-
ever, those who are not actively loyal lie in the
border-land of just suspicion. Jurymen who would
not convict on clear evidence, peasants who had
looked on upon murder, yet in court found their me-
mory fail them, those who knew of intended outrages
yet spoke no word of warning, are not innocent. So-
ciety demands the active help of all its members to
prevent or discover crimes, and men who leave these
duties unfulfilled are confounded naturally with the
actively guilty, when society thus treated falls in
pieces and military severity is compulsorily substi-
tuted for law.

THE EVE OF ’98.

Among the gentlemen whom history has been
pleased to gibbet for his share in these transactions
was Mr. Thomas Judkin Fitzgerald, the High Sheriff
of Tipperary. It was in Tipperary, the old home of
the Whiteboys, that the intending insurgents had
shown their colours with the most daring effrontery.
When Abercrombie was seen to be hesitating, a town
in Tipperary was occupied and plundered of arms in
open day by a thousand rebel horse. In another
town there a regiment of Yeomanry had been sur-
rounded, and had been driven to apply for succour to
save it from destruction. No slight courage was re-
quired to disarm Tipperary, nor was the disarming
an easy matter when there was courage to undertake
it. The High Sheriff was a Uniacke by birth. His
father took the name of Fitzgerald. He is likely,
therefore, to have been arelation of Mr. Uniacke, who
had just been assassinated, with his wife and Colonel
St. George. This gentleman did, by decisive measures,
effectually break the insurgent organisation in Tip-
perary, so that when the rebellion came the most
dangerous county in Ireland lay motionless. They
were not gentle measures. He used the whip freely,
and he made one mistake which was not forgotten.
Aman named Wright, at Clonmel, was suspected of
connection with the United Irishmen. The suspicion
in all likelihood was well-founded. On searching him
a letter was found in his pocket, in French. Fitzge-
rald did not understand the language, but his mind,

like that of everyone else, was full of the expected

French invasion. ‘The letter, though utterly in-

nocent, was treated as an evidence of guilt, and

Wright was severely flogged. He prosecuted the High

Sheriff afterwards, and recovered 500/. as damages.
VOL. III. Z

337

CHAP.
III.

——,
1798.

April.

338

BOOK
IX.
———
1798.
April.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Fitzgerald has been rewarded with a black name in
Irish legend and with the scorn of foolish historians.
fle was rewarded, also, by the knowledge that by his
general nerve and bravery he had probably saved at
least ten thousand lives; and the English Government,
though generally too proud to remember good service
in Ireland, yet so far acknowledged Fitzgerald’s merit
that they paid his fine and created him a baronet.
Had Abercrombie acted at once when first required
by Camden to set the troops in motion, there would
have been time to have made the disarmament com-
plete, and Irish history would have been unstained by
the bloody scenes which will have immediately to be
described. Lake, however, had but a month. He
succeeded in crippling the rebellion. He could not
prevent it. His progress was attended, of course, by
renewed outcries from the English Opposition and by
yells from the incendiary press of Ireland. Grattan
accused the Ministers of sounding the horrid trumpet
of carnage and desolation, of encouraging the army
to murder the Irish ; of being in league with the
Orange boys, and at war with the people. It might
have been happier for Ireland and for England
also if Camden had taken Portland’s advice, and
frankly adopted the Orange boys. He had himself
confessed that of all subjects of the Crown they were
the most to be relied upon. He stopped short of the
measure which would have given him the absolute
command of the insurrection. Within the limits
which he had prescribed to himself he went on
upon his way undiverted by clamour. By the 3rd of
May he was able to report that large quantities of
arms had been given up, and an evident impression
made on ‘the deluded wretches’ who had infected

THE EVE OF ’98.

the kingdom.! A week later he could say that there
was a cessation of murders. Before the proclamation
of the 30th of March ‘ not a mail had arrived without
accounts of savage cruelties or extensive pillage;’
‘now he had the satisfaction to think that at least
the lives of the loyal and well-disposed had been
protected.’

‘ But there is still,’ he added, ‘much to be done.
There are great combinations to break. General
Dundas has made much impression in Kildare, where
the treason was more organised than elsewhere.”
After the first measures of severity were adopted
there was an appearance of contrition; but messages
came from Dublin advising them to hold out ten
days, when they should have help. Great numbers
of arms, however, have been delivered up. In Queen’s
County and Tipperary there is great improvement.
Wicklow is very extensively and very formidably
organised. The mountains are depdts of arms and
ammunition. ‘The active and severe measures pur-
sued in the country have driven many persons into
Dublin. The fear of detection, the delay in the
arrival of the French, together with the ill-disposi-
tion of those who Hee been obliged to fly the
country, many imagine will induce the rebels to
attempt an insurrection in the city. Orders have
gone round to the people to be ready.’ ®

1 ¢ Camden to Portland, May 3,’ Leinster.’—‘ Cornwallis to General
2 Owing, as Lord Cornwallis Ross, July 13,’ — Correspondence,
afterwards admitted, ‘to the foster- vol. il. p. 368.
ing hand of Lord Edward Fitz- * “Camden to Portland, May 11.’
gerald, and the countenance which 5S, P.O.
it received from his weak brother of

Zz 2

340

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

Book THE revolutionary chiefs understood the temper of
See ish countrymen. They knew that whenever au-

1798.
May.

thority asserted itself the disposition of the Irish
people was to submit. The arms, so carefully col-
lected, were being swept away. Confidence was failing.
If they waited longer, their boasts that they could
bring into the field hundreds of thousands of men
might turn to scandalous nothingness. Lord Edward
Fitzgerald had never left Dublin. Neilson, Tone’s
friend, one of those who had registered the vow on
McArt’s Hill, was in Dublin also. The vacant places
on the Committee had been filled with other daring
and desperate men; among them were two young
barristers, named John and Henry Sheares, sons of a
merchant at Cork, who had been at Paris in the early
days of the Revolution, and had been infected with
the prevailing enthusiasm. They resolved to act,

and to act at once, and Edward Fitzgerald designed

a plan.

The Government was watching their movements.
Another informer had now tendered his services—a
Captain Armstrong, an officer in a militia regiment
quartered outside the capital at Lehaunstown. Cap-
tain Armstrong happened one day to enter a book-
seller’s shop in Grafton Street. The bookseller,
whose name was Byrne, led by Armstrong’s loose
talk to suppose he was on the insurgent side, told
him that something of consequence was immediately
to be done, and offered to introduce him to two of

THE EVE OF ’98.

the leaders. Armstrong consulted his Colonel, who
ordered him to affect sympathy, accept the introduc-
tion, and learn what he could. On the 10th of May,
the day preceding the date of Camden’s last letter,
Armstrong met John Sheares and his brother in the
back room behind Byrne’s shop, and the reason im-
mediately appeared for their anxiety to secure his
help. They told him that Dublin was about to rise.
Dublin Castle, the camp at Lehaunstown, and the
artillery barracks were to be simultaneously surprised.
Many men in Armstrong’s company were prepared to
desert to the insurgents. He was entreated to use his
influence with the Catholic non-commissioned officers
to spread the spirit, and was told that if he could
bring over the regiment he would be called the
saviour of his country.’

With the help of Armstrong the Castle was exactly
informed, and the conspirators were suddenly asto-
nished by the announcement that Dublin, like the
provinces, was to be disarmed, and by an offer of a
thousand pounds reward for the discovery of Lord
Edward Fitzgerald. Major Swan, who had arrested
the Committee, with Major Sirr and Captain Ryan,
instituted an instant search for pikes and muskets.
Five cannon were taken in a brewer’s yard in King
Street, four others at a house in Townshend Street.
Stores of arms of all kinds were found concealed
about the Custom-house Quay. A blacksmith and his
journeyman were caught forging pikes. The journey-
man, threatened with the whip, told where pikes
already made had been hidden, and many cartloads
were thus seized. Still Dublin was too well pro-

1 «Trial of Henry and John Sheares.’—State Trials, vol. 27.

841

CHAP.
TI.

ST
1798.

May.

542

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

vided to be easily stripped of its means of mischief.

_1*_ These measures only determined the conspirators the

1798.
May.

more to be prompt in their work, and the order went
out for all Ireland to be ready to rise at an early
day.

For many reasons the Government was specially
anxious to discover and secure Lord Edward. A
Fitzgerald in the field would be a rallying cry to the
insurrection of which more than one Viceroy of Ire-
land had felt the power. Reynolds, whose treachery
was unsuspected, was still admitted to the secrets of
the confederacy, and was satisfied that Fitzgerald had
never left the city. Fitzgerald, he knew, had been
anxious to see Talleyrand. He wanted the French
to send two or three frigates to the Wexford coast,
which could be done on the instant, merely as an
encouragement ; and Lady Edward, who was now in
Dublin, told Reynolds that her husband had slipped
away to Paris to hasten matters.1 Reynolds, how-
ever, did not believe it. On the 18th of May Major
Sirr received communications from a quarter un-
hinted at in the most secret letters of the Viceroy,
telling him where Lord Edward would be found;
and on Saturday, the 19th, between five and six in
the evening, Swan, Sirr, and Ryan, with eight sol-
diers, in plain clothes, went quietly and without. at-
tracting attention to the house of a featherman in
Thomas Street, named Murphy. As they approached
the door a woman, who had observed them, was seen
to rush in and up the stairs, to give the alarm.
Major Swan was too quick for her, and running close
behind her, entered a room at the stair-head, when

1 Information of Thomas Reynolds, May 11.

THE EVE OF ’98,

he discovered Lord Edward, lying on a bed, in a

345

CHAP,

dressing-jacket. It was still full daylight. Major - ee

Swan told him quietly that he had a warrant for his
arrest ; resistance would be useless, but he would be
treated with the respect due to his rank. Lord Ed-
ward cared nothing for his rank. He had abjured
his title six years before in Paris, and in Dublin
among the initiated he was called Citizen Fitzgerald.
But below his citizenship ran the fierce wild blood of
the Geraldines. Springing from the bed, he levelled
a pistol at Major Swan’s head. The pistol missed fire,
and he leapt on him with a dagger, and stabbed him
through and through. It was the work of a moment.
Captain Ryan had followed at his best speed, and
when he came in he found Swan bleeding on the
ground, and Lord Edward striking at him. Ryan,
too, snapped a pistol. The flint-lock failed him. He
had a sword-cane, and made a lunge with the blade,
which bent on Lord Edward’s side, and forced him
back upon the bed. In an instant he was up again.
tyan closed with him. Lord Edward, naturally a
powerful man, and now with the added strength of
rage and despair, hurled him to the ground, rolled
upon him, plunged his dagger into him again and
again and again with such fury that in a few seconds
he had given him fourteen wounds.

He then sprang to his feet and attempted flight.
Major Sirr, now entering, met Lord Edward strug-
gling towards the door, endeavouring to extricate
himself from the grasp of the two officers, who,
though lying on the floor, with the blood streaming
from them, still clung to his legs.

Major Sirr’s pistols were in better condition than

his comrade’s. He fired. Lord Edward fell struck

May 19.

344

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

heavily in the shoulder, and surrendered. A guard

IX. 7
——— of cavalry was sent for, and he was conveyed to

1798.

Newgate through a silent, sullen crowd. Major
Swan recovered. Captain Ryan died of his wounds
in a few days.

In Lord Edward’s room were found a green uniform
and the official seal of the Irish Union. Ina pocket-
book was the sketch of the plan for the surprise of
Dublin, in which he was himself to have taken the
command. The wound was thought at first not to
be dangerous. It proved otherwise. Violent spasms
came on, attended with delirium. At the end of a
fortnight he too died, to the confessed relief of the
Government, who were spared the necessity of bring-
ing him to trial.t ‘Alas!’ said Tone, when he heard
of the capture, ‘ Lord Edward Fitzgerald is taken. I
knew him little, but I honour and venerate his cha-
racter. He is not the first Fitzgerald sacrificed to
his country. ‘There is a wonderful likeness between
him and Lord Thomas, who lost his head on Tower
Hill for an attempt to recover Irish independence.’ ?
Individuals are known by their friends, nations by
their traditionary idols. Silken Thomas, who mur-
dered an Archbishop of Dublin with his own hand ;
Lord Edward, who for a dream of ambition would
have drowned his country in blood, and when caught
in his lair fought with the ferocity of a wild beast, are
surrounded in the Irish imagination with the aureoles
of heroes; while England in an indolent dream of con-

1¢Qord Edward died at two _ his trial, and prolonged the excite-

o’clock this morning. I know not ment.’—‘ Camden to Portland, June
whether to consider this event a 4,’ S. P.O,
very unfortunate one. The state of 2 Journal, June 1798.

his health must have postponed

THE EVE OF ’98.

ciliating Ireland by humouring her illusions acquiesces
in the amazing verdict.

On Lord Edward’s capture the Committee felt that
they must give the signal instantly, or that their or-
ganisation would dissolve. The day after, Sunday,
John Sheares told Armstrong that ‘their friends in the
country would hold out no longer unless Dublin sup-
ported them.’ The Executive Committee would meet
on the following morning to settle the last details. The
general plan, however, had been already arranged.
The time appointed was to be the night of Wednes-
day, the 23rd of May. Five or six determined men
had been told off to take charge of each of the Privy
Councillors, and kill or capture them in their houses.
Especially they were to make sure of Lord Clare, the
peculiar object of the Committee’s fear and hatred.
Strong bodies of men were then to occupy the quays.
The Castle was to be attacked in front and rear. The
country for fourteen miles round the'city had received
its orders, and would surprise the camps. The mails
were to be stopped after leaving the city, and their non-
appearance had been agreed on as the general signal
for the rise of the whole island. A further scheme
had been formed by Neilson, the character and pur-
pose of which is unknown, but it was something too
atrocious even for John Sheares, who recoiled with
horror from it, and threatened to denounce Neilson
to the Government unless it was abandoned.!

1 ¢T am acquainted with the de-
structive design you meditate, and I
am resolved to counteract it, what-
ever it may cost me. Your scheme
I view with horror, whether its
effects be considered as relating to
my imprisoned friends, the destruc-

tion of whose property and lives
must be the consequence even of
your success, or as affecting Arthur
O’Connor’s existence, the precarious
chance for which you thus cruelly
lessen; or (which is superior to
every other consideration) as en-

345

CHAP,
it,

———
1798.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The resolution of the Committee was carried by
Armstrong to the Castle, and two days before the
blow was to have been struck in Dublin the second
set of leaders were seized, like their predecessors.
On Monday, the 21st of May, at eight in the morning,
Alderman Alexander was at the door of the Sheares’s
house, in Baggot Street; an entrance was forced, and
the brothers were arrested. In a writing-case on the
library-table was found the draft of an address in the
handwriting of John Sheares, prepared for issue on
the news that the Castle had been taken, and the
Viceroy and the Privy Council either dead or captured.
This paper, written as it was by a person capable of
strong indignation at acts which overstepped the mar-
gin of permitted violence, is a curious evidence how
extravagantly the minds of men otherwise honour-
able can be unhinged or perverted by patriotic
delirium : ?

‘Irishmen! your country is free, and you are about to be
avenged. ‘That vile Government which has so long and so
cruelly oppressed you is no more. Some of its most atro-
cious monsters have already paid the forfeit of their lives,!

few misguided, not to say guilty,
individuals should perish, than that

suring the ruin of Ireland’s freedom.
In short, to be candid with you,

the scheme is so totally destitute
of any apology, even from the plea
of folly and passion, that I cannot
avoid attributing its origin to a
worse cause. My resolution, and
that of my friends, is this :—If you
do not, by nine o’clock this evening,

- give us every necessary and sacred

assurance that you will counteract
and prevent the perpetration of this
plot against all that you ought to
hold dear, notice shall be given
to the Government without a mo-
ment’s delay. We prefer that a

every remaining hope of our coun-
try’s success, and the lives of our
most valued friends, should be sa-
crificed by the accomplishment of a
stupid, perhaps wicked under-
taking. — John Sheares.’ ‘The
letter was found on Neilson’s
person at the time of his arrest,
May 23, 1798.’—Musgrave, Appen-
dix 15.

1 Showing evidently that the or-
der had been to kill rather than
make prisoners of the most ob-
noxious of the Council.

THE EVE OF ’98.

and the rest are in our hands, waiting their fate. The na-
tional flag—the sacred ereen—is at this moment flying over
the ruins of despotism, and that capital which a few hours
since witnessed the debauchery, plots, and crimes of your
tyrants is now the citadel of triumphant patriotism and
- yirtue. Arise, then, united sons of Ireland! Arise, like
a great and powerful people, determined to be free or die!
Arm yourselves by every means in your power, and rush
like lions on your foes. Consider that for every enemy you
disarm you arm a friend, and thus become doubly powerful.
In the cause of liberty inaction is cowardice, and the coward
shall forfeit the property he has not the courage to protect.
Let his arms be seized, and transferred to the gallant spirits
who want and will use them. We swear to punish robbery
with death and infamy.. We swear we will never sheathe
the sword till every being in the country is restored to those
equal rights which the God of Nature has given to all men.
As for those degenerate wretches who turn their swords
against their native country,! the national vengeance awaits
them. Let them find no quarter, unless they prove their
repentance by speedily deserting, and exchanging the stand-
ard of slavery for that of freedom, under which they may
share the glory and advantage which are due to the patriot
bands of Ireland. Many of the military feel the love of
liberty glow in their breasts, and have joined the national
standard. Receive with open arms such as follow so glo-
rious an example. ... Rouse all the energies of your souls.
Heed not the glare of a hired soldiery or aristocratic
Yeomanry. ‘They cannot stand the vigorous shock of free-
dom. ‘Their trappings and their arms will soon he yours,
and the detested Government of England, to which we
vow eternal hatred, shall learn that the treasure it expends
on its accoutred slaves, for the purpose of butchering Irish-
men, shall but further enable us to turn their swords on its
devoted head. Attack them in every direction, day and
night. Avail yourselves of the natural advantages of your

1 Grattan, who had joineda Yeo- that, come what might, he would
manry corps, retired when he saw never fight against his country.
what was approaching, declaring

348

BOOK
IX.

pean poe
1798.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

country, which are innumerable, and with which you are
better acquainted than they. War, war, alone, must occupy
every mind and every hand in Ireland. Vengeance, Irish-
men! Vengeance on your oppressors! Remember what
thousands of your dearest friends have perished by their
merciless orders. Remember their burnings, their rackings,
their torturings, their military massacres, and their legal
murders! Remember Orr!’

Of the many gifts which nature has bestowed on
Irishmen the fatallest is, perhaps, the fluency of
speech, the fertility in florid diction, which at once
exhausts the energy that in robust nations takes the
form of action, and makes them the victims of their
own illusions, by clothing their emotions. and fancies
in the shining dress of rhetoric. Ideas so brilliantly
expressed seem too beautiful to be unsound or untrue.
It is only when brought in collision with fact that the
unsubstantial pageant fades, and leaves its dupes to
add their disappointment to the long catalogue of
their wrongs.

Were it-not for the enormous crimes which these
infatuated men confessed that they were deliberately
contemplating, the spectacle of Ireland.on the eve of
the rebellion of 1728 would rise into tragic piteous-
ness. The long era of misgovernment had ripened
at last for the harvest. Rarely since the inhabitants
of the earth have formed themselves into civilised
communities had any country suffered from such a
complication of neglect and ill-usage. The Irish
people clamoured against Government, and their real
wrong, from first to last, had been that there was no
government over them; that, under changing forms,
the universal rule among them for four centuries had
been the tyranny of the strong over the weak; that
from the catalogue of virtues demanded of those who

THE EVE OF ’98.

349

exercised authority over their fellow-men the word CHAP.
Justice had been blotted out. Anarchy had borne ger

its fruits. The victims of scandalous misadministra-
tion had risen at last to demand redress; but they
had risen in blind rage in pursuit of objects which, if
obtained, could but plunge them deeper in their misery.
They had appealed to England, and England had for
bread given them a stone, for a fish a serpent. Instead
of practical justice she had given them political liberty,
and when political liberty had proved a mocking phan-
tom they had gone mad and had started to arms, and
were preparing for universal massacre and ruin.

Their leaders disguised the hideousness of their
schemes in patriotic rhapsodies. They compared
themselves in fancy to the lberators of America, or
the heroes of Jacobin France. They believed, or
dreamt that they believed, that they were to enrich
the annals of mankind by the achievement of a glo-
rious revolution. Their road to it hitherto had lain
through midnight murder, through seduction of
honest men from their duty, through the contempla-
tion of crimes so horrible that they shrunk appalled
from the ferocity of each other’s conceptions. Though
engaged, as they supposed, in the most glorious of
causes, they had been unable to inspire one another
with the fidelity which the pickpocket displays to his
comrades. In every Committee there were traitors,
one ormany. They had generated round them an
atmosphere of villany, and when they lifted their
hands at last to strike the blow which was to break
the chains of Ireland they found themselves in the
hands of the police, fallen from the high peaks to
which they were in imagination soaring, to the level
of common felons.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Two nights after the arrest of John and Henry
Sheares the keeper of Newgate saw a man, mufiled in
a cloak, reconnoitring the prison. He sprung upon
him and seized him, and found that he had taken
Neilson.

Why, it may be asked again, had the Government,
with the threads of the conspiracy so long in its
hands, allowed it to go forward? ‘They had per-
mitted and encouraged the progress of the rebellion,’
says modern Irish opinion, ‘in order that the sup-
pression of it might be effected with more éclat and
terror.’?

Lord Camden’s letters form a conclusive answer to
the charge of encouragement. It is scarcely less
unjust to charge him with having looked on pas-
sively, since the arrests which he ventured, and his
efforts to disarm the disturbed counties, were re-
ceived with a tempest of denunciation from the
friends of liberty in both islands ; and his attempts to
prevent the rebellion were described as the gratuitous
provocation of an innocent well-disposed people. He
did what he could. That he did not do more was
the consequence of his situation. The common law
of England was not calculated for the Irish meridian.
The existence of a country where juries would not
convict, where witnesses were afraid to give evidence
and magistrates to commit, where laws had no terror,
because the general sentiment combined to shield a
criminal, had not been allowed for when the Consti-
tution was framed which the connection with Great
Britain extended to the Sister Island. Until acts
had been perpetrated which no art could conceal or
palliate, until the ordinary laws were suspended by

1 Plowden,

THE EVE OF ’98.

open and undisguised rebellion, the Government did
but expose itself by interference to defeat in the
courts of justice and to reproach for unjust prosecu-
tions ; and thus sate spell bound, while the catastrophe
was approaching, surrounded by a ring of traitors,
whom only at the last extremity it was able to
touch.

The Executive Committee were finally disabled by
the loss of Lord Edward, the two Sheares’s, and Neil-
son. On them, after the arrest of the 12th of March,
the general direction had devolved, and the rebel
bodies in the capital and the provinces were left to
their local chiefs. The last act of the central autho-
rity had been to fix the day for the game to begin.
The match had been lighted, and the explosion was
certain. How serious it might now be, the result
only could show. Dublin at least was secured.

‘If there is a rising in the city,’ Lord Camden

wrote, on the 21st, ‘the insurgents will be anni-
hilated.’ 1

1 ¢ To Portland, May 21.’ S.-P. O.

552

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK X.

CHAPTER I.
THE REBELLION.

SECTION I.

HOOK salman conspiracy of the United Irishmen had departed
——— almost wholly from its original character before it

1798.
May.

assumed the shape of rebellion. The first lodges had
been formed to spread the principles of the French
Revolution. The founders of the society were be-
lievers in what is now called the religion of humanity.
The belief in God they regarded as a worn-out and
vanishing superstition, and their dream had been of
uniting Catholics and Protestants, to establish a Re-
public, in which the petty quarrels of the Christian
sects would disappear in the light of a more sublime
philosophy.

The opinions of Tone and MacNeven were alien to
the Irish character, and could never gain permanent
influence over it.

The Catholic of the South and the Presbyterian
of the North have this in common—that each believes
firmly, and even passionately, in the form of Chris-
tianity which he professes. The alliance so ardently
aimed at proved incapable of realisation. The country

THE REBELLION.

population of Ulster became, year after year, more
and more Orange, the party of insurrection more and
more Catholic. The Protestant politicians of Dublin
and the Northern towns adhered to the cause with as
much sincerity as they were capable of feeling. But
the Irish politician is usually made of weak material.
Belfast was disarmed, Dublin was overawed. The
Protestant leaders were in Newgate. The Catholics
remained alone in the field. But the Catholics were
four-fifths of the population, and they were sworn
into the confederacy nearly to a man. ‘The patriots
of the Parliament had stirred them out of their de-
sponding sleep. Pitt had forced the franchise upon
them, that they might help him against the revolu-
tion. Powers were immediately after held almost
within their grasp which would have made them
masters of Ireland, and enabled them, without strik-
ing a blow, to undo the Reformation and overthrow
the Protestant settlement.

The hand had been withdrawn. Protestant ascend-
ency was again riveted upon their necks. But the
fierce Irish spirit, which had lain asleep since Aghrim,.

was awake again; and whatever became of his re-
publican Protestant allies, the Catholic Celt intended

to try conclusions with sword and pike before he

would consent to sink down once more into his
bondage.

The Irish are the most unchanging people on the
globe. The phenomena of 1641 were repeating them-
selves. In 1641 Puritans and Catholics had com-
bined to demand political concessions. In 1641 they
found themselves ill-yoked and ill-mated, and the
unnatural coalition was dissolved. The plot for the
rising of Sir Phelim O’Neil was identical, even in

" VOL. III. AA

y

B54

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK minute particulars, with Lord Edward’s plan for
—— 1798. In the latter, as in the former, the rising was

1798.
May.

to be simultaneous throughout the island. Dublin
Castle was to be surprised, the Privy Council were
to be killed or captured. In both instances the inten-
tion of massacre was disavowed, but in both it was
rendered inevitable by reports ingeniously spread
that the Protestants meditated the destruction of the
Catholics. In both there was a settled purpose of
eliminating the Protestants out of the country. In
both was evidenced the infernal element which lies
concealed in the Irish nature, and the vindictive fero-
city to which it will descend.

In this only there was a difference between the
two periods, that in 1798 there was no surprise.
Lord Clare understood Ireland too well to mistake
the effect which the conciliation policy of Pitt must
produce. He knew that it must end at last in de-
mands which could not be conceded, and that rebel-
lion was then certain. He had watched the conspi-
racy step by step. He was aware of the coming ex-
plosion, and all had been done that the circumstances
would allow to limit the extent of its destructiveness.
Numerically, and on paper, the troops in the island
might have seemed sufficient. Of one kind or an-
other the Government had under its command nearly
40,000 men, but they were of doubtful quality. Of
British regiments there were scarcely any, the An-
cient Britons—a Welsh Fencible regiment, under Sir
Watkin Wynn—a Durham regiment, and a regiment
or two of Scotch militia, being nearly the whole.
The Irish militia, eighteen thousand strong, were all
Catholics, and the utmost uncertainty was felt as to
their probable conduct. The rest were Irish Yeo-

THE REBELLION.

manry, most of them, though not all, well-disposed, but
untrained as soldiers, and no better than armed
volunteers. The Orangemen Lord Camden was
still afraid to employ. But taking the men as
they were, his force disposable for service was not
in proportion to the apparent numbers. <A. large
part of the army was required in the North.
Several thousand men were kept in and about Dublin.
Quiet could only be secured in Belfast, Cork, Li-
merick, and Galway by garrisons of overpowering
streneth. The regiments who were employed by
Lake in the disarmament were scattered in sections
over Leinster. and Munster, many miles apart.
For better security, and to prevent combinations, the
companies had been broken up. Each party consisted
of a score or two of men from one regiment, as many
from another, and perhaps as many more dragoons.
They were more like divisions of police than parts of
an army; and being thus split in handfuls, with
some seditious elements less or greater in every de-
tachment, they were dangerously lable to be over-
whelmed. United Irelanders had enlisted in the
Yeomanry with the purpose of betraying them. To
surprise these parties separately, by simultaneous at-
tacks in overpowering force, and destroy them before
they could re-combine, was the rebel plan for the open-
ing of the campaign. The Irish are credited for pas-
sionate impetuosity of temperament, Nothing is more
remarkable in the present instance than the cool,
deliberate treachery of their proceedings. The neigh-
bourhood of Dublin was relied on to prevent any of
the troops in the environs from going to the assistance
of their comrades in the city. An illustration of their

position may be seen in an account of the garrison
AA2

356

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

at Rathcool, a town ten miles distant, on the South-

—_*— western Road. Captain Ormsby had been stationed

1798.
May 28.

there with twenty loyal Armagh militia. Mr. Clinch,
a Catholic gentleman in the district, in apparent loy-
alty had raised a company of local infantry to sup-
port him. These men were all traitors. Their inten-
tion was to destroy Ormsby and his Protestants
on the appointed day, and then march into Dublin,
with Clinch at their head. The Catholic corps
attended their own chapels. To throw Ormsby the
more off his guard, the Rathcool priest addressed
them on the 20th of May, the Sunday after Lord
Edward’s arrest, in two eminently loyal sermons, in
Ormsby’s presence, although he discovered after-
wards that this priest had been the instigator of the
plot.

Notice happily had been sent to all the officers in
the environs of Dublin to be on the alert. A secret
friend told Ormsby what was prepared for him. The
corps was paraded and disarmed. Clinch and the
priest were sent to Dublin, where the former was a
few days later tried and hanged; the latter was
transported to Botany Bay.’ As at Rathcool so
everywhere such of the troops as were known to be
loyal were marked for destruction; but the warning
placed them on the alert; and the people finding the
surprise fail, waited for the issue of the expected rising
in Dublin. Would Dublin venture to rise?—that
was the question. On the night of the 23rd patrols
went round the country within a radius of twelve
miles to gather arms and warn the people to stay at
home. The week preceding, Sir Richard Musgrave
had watched the beacon-fires night after night on the

1 Musgrave’s History of the Irish Rebellion.

THE REBELLION.

distant hillsides from his window in the city. That

men, children, and old men. Every man who could
shoulder a pike was off to the rendezvous. In Dublin
itself strong bodies of troops were posted along the
river and on the bridges. At daybreak notices were
seen upon the walls from General Lake informing
the people that they must keep within doors from
nightfall to sunrise. By the side of the order of the
Commander-in-Chief was an order from Mr. Fleming,
the Lord Mayor," to every individual to surrender his
arms, and to every householder to hang a list upon
his door of the persons residing under his roof, under
penalty of being sent to the fleet for disobedience.
Dublin, in the face of these precautions, preferred to
be prudent. Dusky bodies of armed men, several
thousand strong, assembled at various points outside
the walls on either side of the river, waiting to hear
that their friends were up, and that their aid was
needed. At noon, when no signal was given, they
melted sullenly away. A gathering at Rathfarnham
was dispersed by Lord Roden’s dragoons. On the
north, at Dunboyne and Dunshaughlin, the genuine
spirit showed itself. At Dunshaughlin the Protes-
tant clergyman and his family were murdered. At
Dunboyne a Protestant revenue officer and three
Protestant policemen were murdered. At Ratoath
and Westfieldstown small parties of soldiers were
surprised successfully and cut in pieces. About
Swords Protestant houses were set on fire. But for
the most part within reach of Lake’s garrison the

1 Fleming was among those who pistols, and was to have admitted
were marked for murder. His ser- the assassins.
want had drawn the balls from his

307

CHAP.

358

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

insurrection missed fire. Martial law had been pro-

ee te claimed ; those who were caught in breach of the

1798.
May 23.

law were carried before courts, Sheth justice was dealt
out summarily and surely, and for some days m con-
spicuous portions of the city dead bodies swinging
from crossbeams were preaching to the patriot incen-
diaries the meaning of armed rebellion.

In the outer circle, at a longer radius from the
metropolis, where the detachments were more thinly
scattered, events assumed a darker aspect. General
Lake had been able to carry out the disarmament only
where he had received the active support of the coun-
try gentlemen. The hostility of the Fitzgeralds to
the Government, the open treason of one member of
the family, and the refusal of its head to co-operate
in enforcing order, had reinforced the disaffection
of the county of Kildare with the elements of feudal
allegiance, which ought to have been on the side of
the Crown. ‘The inhabitants had not only been left
in possession of their pikes, but they were led to
believe that their natural chief was with them, and
that the cause of the rebellion was the cause of the
Duke of Leinster.

On the eastern side of the country, where it ap-
proaches or touches the County of Dublin, were
three towns within a few miles of each other. Naas,
once a frontier garrison of the Pale, was now a thriving
borough, on the Great Waterford Road. North of
Naas, on the Grand Canal, was Clane, or Cluain, little
more than a village, which had grown up as an ap-
pendage to a Franciscan abbey ; and two miles from
Clane was a place called Prosperous, whose name indi-
cated that it had once been a scene of enterprise
and industry. The opening of the Canal and the

THE REBELLION. 359

abolition of the restrictions on trade had restored life oar.
to it. A Mr. Brewer, an enterprising Englishman, had ——~~
established a large manufactory there, and was finding Sh z ‘
employment and comfort for a growing population.
As commanding the canal and. the roads, these towns
were important military stations. Lord Gosford held
Naas, with a garrison of 200 men. Captain Griffiths

was at Clane, with a corps of local Yeomanry and

a party of Armagh Militia. Captain Swayne was at
Prosperous, with a detachment of the North Cork
Militia and twenty-three of Wynn’s Ancient Britons—
dragoons. Among the officers of the Clane Yeo-
manry was Doctor Esmonde, a gentleman of old Ca-
tholic family, brother of Sir Thomas Esmonde, of
Wexford, who had affected loyalty, like Mr. Clinch

at Rathcool, for the better service of his country
and her cause. He had seduced the majority of his
corps. He was in accurate correspondence with the
insurgent leaders in the neighbourhood. It was
arranged that on the preconcerted signal, the non-
arrival of the mail from Dublin on the night of the
23rd, Naas, Clane, and Prosperous were to be attacked

at the same moment. Esmonde and the disaffected
Yeomen were to assist, and the officers and the loyal
part of the soldiers were to be destroyed. Surprise

was an essential part of the scheme. At the two
latter places many of the soldiers were billeted in
private houses. If off their guard they might be
found divided, and could then be dealt with easily.
Swayne had been directed to collect the arms of

the people at Prosperous. On Sunday, the 20th of
May, he took his North Cork men to the Catholic
chapel. Father Higgins, the priest, like his brother

at Rathcool, addressed his congregation on the duty

360

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of submission to the authorities, and Dr. Esmonde,

_*_ who had ridden over from Clane in the morning to

1798.

support his brother officer, spoke to them as a Catholic
in the same tone. A number of peasants, in apparent
obedience, surrendered their pikes. In the priest’s
presence they expressed regret for having been be-
trayed into the conspiracy, and promised to have no
more to do with it.

To avoid recognition by his comrades, Esmonde
undertook the attack at Prosperous, leaving his own
captain half-deserted to be destroyed by others. On
the afternoon of the 23rd, when the hour was drawing
near, he paid Swayne another visit, and dined with him
at the hotelin the town. father Higgins was again
present, and he and Esmonde told Swayne that the
people were really penitent. Very many of them
wished to give up their arms, but they dared not
bring them in the day, for fear of being recognised
by their confederates. They would have brought
them at night and have laid them down in the street,
but they were afraid of the sentinels. Swayne, cre-
dulous and good-natured, suspected nothing. He
ordered the sentinels, if they saw men moving in the
street after dark, to take no notice of them.

The mails left Dublin that night as usual. They
were all stopped on the roads by the country
people, according to the general instructions, and the
call to arms went out. At two inthe morning, when
sleep was deepest, before the first streaks of dawn
had begun to show, Esmonde, with his Clane Yeomen
and’an unknown multitude of ruffians, chiefly armed
with pikes, came into Prosperous. ‘The sentinels gave
no alarm, and were killed,and then at once before a note
of warning had been raised the rebel bands flung them-

THE REBELLION.

selves with a wild yell upon the barracks. The door
went down. Swayne’s room was on the ground-floor.
They plunged in and stabbed him as he was spring-
ing from his bed. The soldiers, startled from their
sleep, snatched their muskets and rushed out. The
mob swung back into the street, barricaded the
doors to keep them secure, and then flung fire
into the cellars, which were filled with straw and
faggots. Beset before and behind, the miserable men
were driven from the lower rooms up the stairs.
As the flames pursued them they sprung out of the
windows, the mob below catching them as they fell
on their pikes, and as each victim writhed upon the
point receiving him with a fierce ‘Hurrah!’ The
North Cork were Irishmen and Catholics, traitors to
both creed and country, deserving no mercy and
finding none. All who were in the barracks were
killed or desperately wounded. |

The Ancient Britons were quartered in a_pri-
vate house. They, too, were hated almost equally,
for they had made themselves notorious in the
disarming of Ulster. Eight of the twenty-three
leapt out of a back window, and escaped across the
country in the darkness. The rest were killed.
Their horses, arms, and uniforms were taken by the
rebels.

As the roof of the barracks fell in, men and wo-
men flung themselves weeping in each other’s arms.
Tears only could express their joy. ‘ Ireland is ours

1 The first account which reached It is uncertain whether Swayne
Camden was, ‘that CaptainSwayne was killed or wounded in the first
had been inhumanly butchered, and attack; but if he was burnt to
afterwards put on the fire and death it was afterwards, in the con-
burnt to death.’ —‘To Portland, flagration of the barracks.

May 26.’ 8S. P.O.

362

BOOK

—-—

1798.
May 24.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

again!’ they cried. ‘ Dublin is taken—Naas is taken—
Ireland is ours!’ ‘ Whereare the heretics?’ shrieked
savage voices. ‘Down with the heretics!’ The
depression of Irish manufactures had been the first
article of Ireland’s complaints. Manufactures had come
back, finding work for the starving and food for the
hungry, but the benefactor of Prosperous was an
Englishman and a Protestant. The day was break-
ing. A shout rose, ‘'To Brewer’s house!’ A few mo-
ments later Mr. Brewer was lying in his shirt on the
pavement with his skull cloven by an axe, the
mob yelling over the body of ‘the heretic tyrant.’
The landlord’s turn followed. Mr. Stamer, the owner
of most of the town, was staying, unluckily for him-
self, with a lady at a house in the neighbourhood.
The alarm had been given. The lady concealed her
guest, and when the insurgents came to the door and
demanded him, she said that he was gone. The watch
had been too good. They knew that he was in the
house. They could not find him, and they cried for
fire to fetch him out. To save needless destruction,
Mr. Stamer, like a brave man, came out of his
hiding-place, and was instantly shot.

The work at Prosperous thus happily finished, it
was time to see how their brothers had prospered
at Clane, and to help them if Jephson was holding out,
The rebel leaders dressed and mounted themselves as
Ancient Britons with the dead men’s horses and uni-
forms, that they might be mistaken by the soldiers
for friends.

At Clane there were no barracks. The troops were
billeted about the place in twos and threes, and were
thus more dangerously exposed than at Prosperous.
The attack, however, had been delayed till dawn.
Captain Griffiths, for some reason, was uneasy and

THE REBELLION.

363

awake. Looking from his window, he saw files of cHap.

armed men coming in along the roads. He gave the
alarm in time to enable the Armagh Militia to dress
and snatch their muskets. The street wasfull as they
came out, but they fought their way towards one
another, formed into line, and charged. Having failed
in their surprise, the rebels showed their usual in-
ability to encounter disciplined men. ‘Though fifty
to one, they turned and ran out of the town. Out-
side they were joined by parties coming up from
Prosperous. Cheered by the news which «heir
friends brought, they formed again, and returned. to
the attack. They were received with a steady fire,
which they were unable to face. Falling fast, they
wavered and broke. Hsmonde had carried with him
all the Yeomanry but seventeen. These few charged
and completed the rout, and the wretches masque-
rading as Ancient Britons were every one cut down.
It was now six o’clock. Details had come in of the
frightful disaster at Prosperous. _ Pursuit with so
small a force was impossible. Griffiths recalled his
men and reviewed his losses; and unable to account
for the shortness of numbers in the Yeomanry, or-
dered them to parade. ‘Those who had been con-
cerned in the night’s work had come back expecting
to find as complete a sweep of their comrades as they
had made themselves of Swayne and the North Cork.
Finding the day gone against them, they either dis-
persed or stole into their quarters unperceived.
Esmonde, especially, contrived to reach his room, to
wash, dress, and powder himself, as a dog would do
after a midnight orgie among the sheep, and _ pre-
sented himself in his place in the ranks as if he had
never been absent.

There was no time for enquiry. A messenger

a
——
1798.
May 24.

364

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

galloped up at that moment with the news that Lord

—— Gosport was beset at Naas and required instant help.

1798.
May 24,

The men swallowed a hasty breakfast. Griffiths
was in the saddle, prepared to start, when a note was
slipped into his hand telling him that Ksmonde had
led the rebels at Prosperous. He thrust it into his
pocket and said nothing till he reached Naas, when
the treacherous gentleman was placed under arrest,
sent to Dublin to be tried by court-martial, and was
promptly hanged.

At Naas it was found that the attack had failed, as
at Clane, but not till after a sharper struggle. Gos-
port, more fortunate than Swayne or Griffiths, had
received notice to be prepared on the evening pre-
ceding. The alarm was sounded at half-past two in
the morning. The rebel columns were entering on
four sides. They forced their way to the gaol, where
they were received with grape from some field-pieces
and with a heavy musketry fire. They bore three
volleys before they gave way. Thirty of them were
found dead in the streets, and as many more
in the fields and lanes outside. The troops in turn
had suffered severely. The rebels had fought with
dangerous courage, and their evidently enormous
numbers created just and serious misgiving. [Tor in
fact they were everywhere. The same scenes had
been going on throughout the country wherever
there was a town or village held in the name of the
Government, and outside the towns wherever Protes-
tants were to be found. All day long terrified fami-
lies were streaming into Naas. All day long the
smoke of burning homesteads was seen rising from
every point of the horizon. Kildare town had been
considered secure, so many arms had been surren-

THE REBELLION.

dered there without resistance. General Walford,
who was in charge, had withdrawn on the 23rd
to join General Dundas at Kilcullen." He was no
sooner gone than Kildare was occupied by 2,000
rebels, with crosses painted on their pikes. Ge-
neral Dundas, irresolute and unequal to the sudden
call.upon him, was confounded by the sudden out-
pouring of so many nests of hornets. They were
here, they were there, they were on all sides. A few
hundreds of them showed themselves near Kilcullen.
He sent a party of Yeomen cavalry to ride them
down. They threw themselves into line; the
Yeomen rode upon the pikes only for their horses to
fall and themselves to be pierced as they rolled on
the ground. Dundas fell back on Naas, taking the
Judges with him, who were on their way to Clonmel
Assizes. Kilcullen was left to its fate. The gentry
and clergymen were deserted to shift for themselves.
Their houses were burnt. Those who failed to escape
were piked. The entire country was a scene of
ruin, terror, and confusion.

The news of Dundas’s retreat spread South. The
same night several thousand insurgents gathered in
Sir Edward Crosbie’s park, outside Carlow, led by
a farmer named Roach.? The town was held, like
Naas, by a company or two of militia. At half-past
two on the morning of the 25th the rebel force went
in upon them in the darkness, with the wild Irish howl.

1 On the Cork road, where the
bridge crosses the Liffey, seven
miles south of Naas.

2 “Crosbie was tried and exe-
cuted as an accomplice—Mr. Gor-
don says unjustly; the extent of
his fault being that he was ‘an

advanced theoretic politician.’—
TMistory of the Rebellion, p.92. The
distinction, probably, was more ap-
parent than real. The insurgents
were only endeavouring to take
what the politicians told them
England had no right to withhold.

365

CHAP.
I.

——
1798.

Thursday,
May 24.

566

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

After the defeat of the Yeomen at Kilcullen they ex-

—— pected to carry all before them, and came on with the
17

Friday,

May 25.

utmost audacity. They were bsenddvalt Part of the
garrison were drawn up in the market-place, and re-
doled them with a volley which turned the head of
their column. They swerved and flung themselves
on the gaol. Another volley from the gaol windows
was delivered into the middle of them with deadly
effect. They reeled, staggered, and then, struck
with panic, flung down their pikes and tried to fly or
hide themselves in houses. The troops had heard on
the previous evening of the treachery and cruelty at
Prosperous. Savage in turn, they chased the miser-
able wretches into the bye-lanes and passages, shoot-
ing and bayoneting every man that they found.
Four hundred bodies were taken up and buried at day-
break. Many others were carried off wounded and
died afterwards. It was supposed that the number of
those who lost their lives was at least six hundred.

The intention had been to encompass Dublin with in-
surrection, to force the Government to relax its grasp
upon thecity. On the same 25th the Meath insurgents
rose and assembled on Tara Hill, the scene of the
mythic glories of the ancient Irish kingdom, four
thousand strong. On the 26th they were attacked
by Captain Preston and Lord Fingal, with 200 Fen-
cibles and as many mounted Yeomen. Their com-
mander, distinguished by his green uniform, was
killed. Three hundred and fifty rebels fell with him.
The rest were scattered over the country, to venture
no more battles, but to confine themselves to private
murders, for which they were better fitted by expe-
rience and temper.

Finding that Dublin remained quiet, that the camp

THE REBELLION.

at Tara had been broken up, and that the attack on
Carlow had failed, the Kildare men, who were in force
at Kilcullen, thought it prudent to temporise. If the
general insurrection had missed fire, they held it better
to save and reserve themselves for another oppor-
tunity. They sent word to Dundas that they had
taken arms in self-defence, and were ready to return
to their homes if they could be assured of pardon.
Dundas, who had remained trembling at Naas, listened
only too eagerly. He was an officer probably of the
mode of thinking of Sir Ralph Abercrombie, and
believed that rebellion could be fondled into loyalty.
At any rate he welcomed the prospect of escape from
his own present situation. He was shut up in Naas
with 400 men, sufficient, if boldly handled, to have
opened a road through all the rebels in the country.
But the Yeomen were out of heart; Dundas knew
not whether he could trust them. The disaffection at
Clane had been followed by the revolt of almost an
entire corps of Yeomanry officers and men at Rath-
angar after the murder of their captain. The town
was crowded with terrified women and children, for
whose lives he was responsible. He rode over at the
rebels’ invitation to parley with them at Kilcullen.
He made a speech to them. He took off his hat to
them. With their hands red with murder and their
faces grimed with the smoke of the houses which they
had been burning, ‘ he thanked them for their good
behaviour.’ *

! Musgrave says that Camden
sanctioned this negotiation. He
was evidently imperfectly informed.
Camden writes :—

‘General Dundas has been ne-
gotiating with the rebels at Kal-

cullen, making terms with them—
treating them with civility, taking
off his hat to them, and thanking
them for their good behaviour.
There is infinite indignation among
those who have lost their families

367

CHAP.
I.

——
1798.

Saturday,
May 26.

368

BOOK

|”
1798
May 27.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

In Dublin, meanwhile, as post came in upon post
bringing accounts of the rising, the complexion of feel-
ing varied with the news. At first men drew their
breath with a sense of relief. The treason which
had hung over them for so many years as an impal-
pable spectre could at last be grappled with. ‘ Mar-
tial law,’ wrote Camden, ‘is now established. The
sword is drawn; I have kept it in the scabbard as
long as possible. It must now not be returned till
this conspiracy is put down.’’ He hoped that the
plot in Dublin having failed, the local outbreaks
would be easily crushed. The reports of the bloody
scene at Prosperous, and of the universal frenzy
which had burst over Kildare, showed that the ex-
pectation was delusive, and roused a natural and
uncontrollable indignation in the country gentlemen
which found a voice in the Parliament. The rebel-
lion might be subdued eventually, but meanwhile
throughout the whole country their families, their
friends, their Protestant tenants and dependents,
above all the Protestant clergy, were exposed to
the horrors of another 1641. The treacherous assas-
sinations of the past year showed that the Irishman
was unchanged. It was no time toconsider by whose
fault he had become what he was. They forgot their
own negligence. They forgot the intemperate ma-
jorities by which they had encouraged Grattan in his
dreams of independence. They saw only that Ireland

and their children. The rebels try, which are so exasperated as

have been guilty of the most barba-
rous and dreadful cruelties. Other
propositions of surrender have been
made, which I hope can be ac-
cepted without loss of dignity or
irritating the feelings of the coun-

scarcely to be satisfied with any-
thing short of extirpation..—‘ To
Portland, May 31. Abridged.’
se oy,

1 §To Portland, May 24.’

THE REBELLION.

was gone mad in the old fashion, and that they and
all belonging to them were to be sacrificed. The
blame might be shifted from one party to another;
but they were all guilty, the careless tyrannical land-
lord, the scheming politician, the patriotic agitator,
the uncertain, vacillating, heedless Government of
England. Ifthe guilt rested anywhere with prepon-
derating weight, the individuals most responsible
were the great Whig absentee noblemen, the Fitz-
williams, the Moiras, the Devonshires, the Shelburnes,
who, by leaving undone every duty which attached to
their properties, by consigning the peasantry to whose
thankless toil they owed their enormous rent-rolls to
the tyranny of the middlemen, and thus exasperating
them into madness, had sought to shield themselves
and recover a base popularity by advocating the
political emancipation of a people among whom Eman-
cipation could only mean civil war and revolution.

But these considerations, if they were to be heeded
at all, had to be postponed to calmer times. The pre-
sent necessity was to meet the immediate danger,
and those found readiest hearmg who had all along
foreseen the inevitable tempest, whose Protestant
prejudices were now recognised as wise conclusions
gathered from the experience of centuries. The wind
had been sown and could not now be recalled, and
the whirlwind had come, and they could think of
nothing save that those who were dearest to them
were left naked to the storm.

Lord Camden became painfully alarmed, not for
the horrors only which were hourly reported to him,
but for the etfects of the anger and fear which they
were generating.

‘There is too much reason to expect,’ he said,
VOL. III. BB

370

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘ that the war will be one in which religious animosity

_ *_ will be blended with political enthusiasm, and ren-

1798.
May.

dered more desperate from the Irish conceiving that
they are fighting for that which they believe to ‘be
their own, the estates which were forfeited by the
treason of their ancestors. The loyal part of the
country are so indignant that I almost tremble that
their zeal will drive them to acts of retaliation.’
He begged for instant and large reinforcements.
He knew the influence which would be brought to
bear upon the Ministry, the cry, which he knew to be
false, that the rebellion was the fruit of severity, .
and could be extinguished with gentleness and con-
cession. ‘ It is my decided opinion,’ he declared, with
all the emphasis which he could throw into the words,
‘that a continuance of vigorous measures can alone
save this country. There is no safety in any other
conduct than in meeting the rebellion manfully and
decidedly. When it is crushed, no man can be more
ready than myself to adopt whatever measures may
best soften prejudice and restore confidence.’ '
Dundas was half-believed to be a traitor in disguise.
The rebels at Kilcullen had replied to his speeches
with laudable promises. He dismissed them with
pardons and protections, and they dispersed to burn
and murder at their leisure, and despise the imbecility
which had trusted them. Wicklow and Wexford were
now reported to have followed suit with Kildare.
Dublin was filling with fugitives. ‘ Wicklow, Wex-
ford, and Kildare,’ Camden wrote on the 28th,
‘are in a dreadful state.’ The husbands of the
shuddering ladies who were rushing into the city with

1 ¢To Portland, May 26,’

THE REBELLION.

their little ones to tell them that their houses were

burning, and that they themselves had hardly escaped Se

with life, were swearing the extermination of the
treacherous race whom it was no longer possible to
bear with. Of all the advisers of the Crown who
surrounded Camden, Clare and Castlereagh, the latter
of whom was now acting as Camden’s secretary, alone
preserved their coolness.

‘ It is difficult to bring the rebels to action,’ Castle-
reagh wrote on the 38lst. ‘ They commit horrid
cruelties, and disperse when the troops appear. But
the spirit of the country rises with its difficulties.
The result will be to place this kingdom, and of course.

the empire, in a state of security much beyond that.

in which it has stood for years past.’ ?

Mr. Edward Hay, the Catholic historian of the

rebellion, pretends an ostentatious impartiality, and
affects to confess and deplore the atrocities committed
by the people. He confesses only what he cannot

deny, and leaves half of what is undeniable unmen-
tioned. He attributes the rebellion itself to the

harshness with which the Southern counties were
disarmed, and in every instance when there was.
marked barbarity represents it as only revenge for
barbarities still greater on the other side. When he
denies the right of the Government to deprive the
peasants and farmers of the pikes and muskets with
which they had provided themselves, he assumes that
they had a right to be armed. Tor what purpose
all Ireland had for three years turned itself into an
arsenal, and every village into a place of drill,
he does not care to enquire. He passes over in

1 ¢To Mr, Wickham, May 31.’ 8S. P. O.

BB2

371

CHAP.

1798.
May.

3% 2

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

silence the correspondence with France, and the series

ie ;
—— of savage murders which made necessary the Insur-

1798.
May.

rection Act. The Assassination Committee, the plots
for the murder of the Council, are events too insig-
nificant for him to notice; nor does he touch on the
combination of treachery and ferocity which distin-
guished the performances in Kildare on the night of
the 23rd of May. He assumes that when the Irish
took arms, and used them in the manner which has
been described, they were entitled to the courtesies
of war, and that when punished as murderers and
incendiaries they were within their rights when they
retaliated in kind. This is the burden of the defence.
‘The worth of it is recommended to the consideration
of those who have read the preceding pages. Mr.

“Gordon, a clergyman, whose history is accepted as

the most favourable to the Protestant cause which

‘truth will permit, and shows a real effort at impar-

tiality, yet wrote with the same desire to soothe the
wounded feelings of the Catholic party. He professes
to believe that the submission to Dundas at Kilcullen
‘was made in good faith; that if the policy thus begun
had been followed, the insurrection would have died
out without further violence. He attributes the
bloody scenes which have next to be related, by the
side of which the massacre at Prosperous seems tame
and colourless, to an act of outrage on the part of the
troops, by which the terms were violated which
General Dundas had granted without authority.

Sir James Duff, who was in command at Limerick,
hearing that Kildare had risen, and that Lake could
not spare a regiment from Dublin, came across the
country by forced marches to Dundas’s assistance.
He was in Kildare in forty-eight hours.. There was

THE REBELLION.

a large rebel camp on the Curragh, at a place called
Gibbet Rath, where the insurgents were said to be
willing to lay down their arms on the terms which
had been allowed at Kilcullen. When Duff advanced
to receive the surrender a shot or shots were fired
in the rebel lines. One account! says that the shots
were aimed at the troops, that one man was killed
and three others wounded. Another account says
that a musket was fired in the air in foolish bravado.
Whichever of these stories be true, the scene which
ensued is too easily intelligible. The treacherous
massacre of the North Cork Militiamen at Pros-
perous had created such deep distrust and such
savage indignation that the troops believed that they
were betrayed. ‘They rushed upon the rebels with
their bayonets, and after a sharp fight drove them
from the Curragh, leaving three hundred and fifty
men dead upon the grass.

The intention of surrender may have been serious
for the moment. It will hardly be pretended that it
was offered in good faith, or that the men who were
then willing to promise obedience for the future would
have observed their engagements one hour beyond
the time when it had ceased to be dangerous to break
them. [Even with this reservation the misfortune was
serious, yet it was a misfortune only, for which the
troops did not deserve to be blamed. If a people
choose to arm with the avowed purpose of making a
bloody rebellion, if their rising is no sudden move-
ment, but has been deliberately prepared, and has
been attended in all its stages by murders, house-
breaking, domestic treason, and the forcible disarming

1 Musgrave’s History of the Rebellion, vol. i. p. 328,

373

CHAP.
a

1798.
May.

Ot4.

BOOK
X.

——
1798.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of loyal subjects, their advocates have no right to
complain that the police are over-rough in handling
them. A more serious cause for regret is that the
victims were not the men whose guilt was deepest.
The forces which set in motion the Irish rebellion
had worked in the dark or behind the shield of the
Constitution. Of those who took arms, the noisiest
in council were the most careful of their safety in
the field. Those who fell were those who fought,
and those who fought were the ignorant, the simple,
and the brave.

THE REBELLION.

SECTION II.

Tue action at Gibbet Rath may have been an ill-timed
accident, but whether accident or wanton cruelty it
was not the cause of the insurrection of Wexford.
That insurrection had already assumed its bloody
and desperate character, and the flying rumours of
murder and incendiarism beyond the Barrow were
among the probable causes which had exasperated
and infuriated the troops.

Of all the counties in Ireland Wexford had the
fewest grounds for taking arms, and. betrayed out-
wardly the fewest symptoms of intending it. With a
fertile soil, a gentry and clergy generally resident,
its towns thriving, and a population made un-

usually dense by the more advanced civilisation

of its inhabitants, it had escaped contact by its
situation with the revolutionary elements at work in
the rest of the island. Bounded on the east by the
sea, on the north and north-west by the Wicklow
and Carlow hills, and on the west and south by the
Barrow, which divides it from Kilkenny and Water-
ford, it forms a long parallelogram, cut in two by
the Slaney, which, rising in the mountains behind
Glendalough, pursues its way through a series of rich
pasture land past New Town Barry and Enniscorthy
to Wexford city, where it runs into the sea. Ennis-
corthy, to which the tide flows, was, in 1798, a
prosperous and growing town, with four thousand
inhabitants ; barges, lighters, and small coasting craft
coming up to it and unloading at its quays. New Ross,

CHAP,
ie

ee
1798.

May.

376

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

on the Barrow, was still more considerable, and was

a ate
—-— already a place of historic fame, having been be-

1798
May.

sieged by Cromwell. The population of the whole
county was a hundred and thirty thousand. There
were no Whiteboys among them, and no Orangemen.
The landlords, if not superior to the rest of their
class, were at least to be found on their estates.
Arthur Young describes the land as better cultivated,
the cabins and food of the Wexford peasantry as of
a higher class, than what he had seen in most other
parts of Ireland. He observed what was, perhaps,
connected with this superiority, the unusually large
Protestant congregations which were to be found
in the Wexford churches. The Bishop of Ferns, Dr.
Euseby Cleaver, was eminent above all his brethren
on the bench for piety and learning, and especially
for his kindness and generosity to the Catholic poor.
Wexford city contained a population of ten thousand.
The harbour was already crowded with shipping ;
and as a sign of the growing wealth of the merchants
there, a splendid bridge had just been erected over
the wide estuary on which the town was built.

The county had not escaped the tithe agitation of
1793. A mob of two thousand men had then attempted
to capture the gaol and let loose the prisoners. But
they had been defeated and dispersed by five-and-
thirty local police; and so little was the state of Wex-
ford a cause of alarm to the Government, that the
troops stationed there had been withdrawn for service
elsewhere, and the county was left to three hundred
militia and the protection of its own Yeomanry.
Over-confidence had encouraged disaffection. To-
wards the end of 1797 Wexford was discovered, like
the rest of Ireland, to be secretly arming. The

THE REBELLION.

lagoons on the coast swarmed with wild fowl. In
the cabins adjoining them were generally to be found
duck-guns, and the fishermen in winter time made
their living by shooting. But besides the fowling-
pieces, many muskets had crept in; pikes had been
manufactured and distributed in tens of thousands.
Those who had guns for lawful purposes were not in-
terfered with; but near Gorey, a town at the north end
of the county, on the Arklow road, where the Protes-
tants were most numerous, nineteen parishes were
placed in December under the Insurrection Act. The
priests of these parishes complained of the precaution
as an unnecessary insult to a harmless and loyal people.
They swore in the presence of Lord Mountmorris
that they were not United Irishmen, and that they
never would be; that they would use their best en-
deavouxs to prevent or discover any conspiracy which
might arise in the neighbourhood; and on the repre-
sentations of these men, among whom were the two
Murphies, John and Michael, who were about to be-
come historical personages, the enforcement of the Act
was suspended and the people left undisturbed, until
the seizure of Lord Edward Fitzgerald’s papers, in
which Wexford was mentioned as a place where the
French could land with the greatest assurance of
welcome.

The extent to which the inhabitants had by this

time armed themselves was too notorious to be any

longer denied. The magistrates of the Northern ba-
ronies met at Gorey on the 27th of April. The
county was proclaimed. Orders were issued for the
arms to be brought in ; and other means failing, the
whip was resorted to in a few instances in Wexford
as well as elsewhere. Enough was done to exasperate

Ot7

CHAP.
ne

engtaagecneet
1798.

May.

378

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the people, too little to frighten them into submission.

—*_ On the 23rd of May, after Lord Edward’s arrest, when

1798.
May.

it was known that a rising was intended, the magis-
trates issued a notice that unless the pikes were given
up, companies of soldiers would be sent among the vil-
lages on free quarter ; and three gentlemen of family
and fortune who had made themselves notorious for
the violence of their political opinions—Mr. Bagenal -
Harvey, Mr. John Colclough, of Ballyteigue, and Mr.
Edward Fitzgerald, of New Park—were arrested and
confined in Wexford Gaol. On the 25th came the
news that Kildare and Carlow were in arms, and it fell
like sparks on tinder lying ready to kindle. On the
26th began the month of horrors, which has left one
more indelible stain on the history of the Catholics
of Ireland.

On that Saturday evening, the long May-day
falling to twilight, a beacon was seen to blaze into
flame on Corrigrua Hill, ten miles west of Ferns. A
fire answering to it was seen immediately after on
Boolavogue, between Corrigrua and the sea, and by
an instinct easily explicable the inhabitants of Wex-
ford felt that the hour was come, and prepared to
meet it. If there had been doubt before of the cha-
racter and aims of the rebellion, that doubt was no
longer to exist. Conceived originally by Jacobins, it
had become by this time a struggle of the Irish
Catholics to get possession of the county. Father John
Murphy, of Boolavogue, was the son of a peasant at
Ferns, and had been educated for the priesthood at
Seville. He had been settled in his own country a
few miles from his birthplace, and there he had re-
mained waiting for the salvation of Israel, and had
erown into a big, coarse, powerful man of forty, when

THE REBELLION.

his country called upon him for his services. It is to
be hoped that his action was unpremeditated, for he
had recently taken an oath of allegiance and made
solemn protests of loyalty. The arrest of Lord
Edward had perhaps absolved him.

This man it was that lighted the signal-fire on Cor-
riorua Hill. The next day was Whit-Sunday, and
Father John was about his work betimes. His first
move was against his Protestant rival pastor, Mr.
Burrows. The Protestant families in the neighbour-
hood, seeing the fire, had crowded for shelter into
the parsonage of the adjoining parish of MKilmuck-
ridge. |

Father John, with an army of pikemen, appeared
soon after daybreak on the lawn before the door. He
demanded arms, and when the arms were refused set
fire to the outhouses. F'rom the outhouses the flames
spread to the parsonage itself. Mr. Burrows, a harm-
less gentleman, appeared at a window and begged
for mercy for his family and flock. He was told
that if they would come out their lives should be
spared. He obeyed, and was instantly piked, with his
son, a lad of sixteen, and seven of his male parish-
ioners. The women were mercifully spared. Father
John was swift, for he had a long day’s work before
him. Gathering up the muskets and fowling-pieces
which had belonged to the house, he was soon in mo-
tion again, leaving Mrs. Burrows, with her niece and
four children, sitting among the bleeding bodies, be-
side her dead husband and her dying boy, in front
of her blazing home.

Having destroyed the heretic clergyman, the next
object was the heretic Bishop. The Palace was at
Ferns; and Ferns being Father John’s native place,

379

CHAP.
IP

———
1798.

May 27.

380

BOOK

ad
1798.
May 27.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the purgation of it was of special consequence to
him. While the day was still early he marched across
country, pausing only to fire such Protestants’ dwell-.
ing houses as lay in his way. Perhaps, too, having
begun the Holy War, he was anxious for a blessing on
it, and halted to say mass. Arrived at Ferns, he ap-
plied the torch in like manner to heretic residences,
but his special object was the Palace. Dr. and Mrs.
Cleaver with their children had happily escaped.
Their servants and their labourers, many of whom
the Bishop supported out of charity, gave Father John
a hearty welcome. An orphan lad, whom the Bishop
had found starving, and had fed and brought up and
educated, displayed his gratitude by singular eager-
ness to assist in the injury of his benefactor. The
Palace was plundered. The valuable library was torn
to pieces. The vellum bindings of the books of divi-
nity were stripped off and used for saddle-covers.
When the spoils were all secured the shell of the
house was set on fire, and all that would burn was
consumed.

Father John was no longer alone. He found a
brother in spirit and in arms in Father Michael Mur-
phy, his neighbour, who now hastened to join him.
Father Michael also was the son of a Wexford pea-
sant. He had learnt his Latin grammar at a hedge-
school on Oulart Hill. Thence, growing into pro-
mising boyhood, he was transferred to the Irish Col-
lege at Bordeaux ; and finding favour with Dr.
Caulfield, the Catholic Bishop of Ferns, he had been
appointed curate of Ballycanew, a hamlet adjoining
Kilmuckridge. ‘The holocaust at Kilmuckridge par-
sonage had brought him at once to the standard of
the Cross. Having finished work at Ferns, the two

THE REBELLION.

priests, their army now swollen to several thousand
men, spread over the adjoining district, sacking houses
and burning them, and killing every heretic man that
they were able to identify. By mid-day they had
drifted to Oulart,) and encamped on the hill, for
dinner, five thousand strong.

The news that the people were out had been
brought early in the day into Wexford city. All the
morning messengers were coming in bringing accounts
of the murdering and burning, and praying for help
to those who were left exposed. The garrison in the
town was scanty, but Colonel Foote was despatched
after breakfast with a hundred and ten of the North
Cork men and thirty or forty mounted Yeomen, a
force considered amply sufficient to subdue any re-
sistance which they were likely to meet with. At
four o’clock the same afternoon Mr. Perceval, the
High Sheriff, galloped wildly in over the bridge to
say that all was lost—that I oote and his entire party
had been totally destroyed. Supposing that he had
to deal only with a contemptible mob, Colonel Foote
had flung himself on a body of men who fifty times
outnumbered him, mad with the excitement of a
religious war, and armed with a weapon which in
determined hands was gradually discovered to be
formidable. Father John, seeing that he was to
be attacked, had divided his force with extem-
porised generalship. Finding the rebels stand better
than they expected, the troops recoiled, to reform,
when they found that they were surrounded and
their retreat cut off. Most of the Yeomen deserted.

' Midway between Enniscorthy six miles south-east of Ferns, and
and the sea, five miles from each, eleven north of Wexford.

381

CHAP.
he

_—_—_———
1798.

May 27.

382

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Panic set in among the North Cork. They broke

down almost toa man. ‘There were no wounded in
these battles. Everyone who fell was despatched.
The report that Colonel Foote had himself fallen was
untrue. The Colonel only, with a sergeant and three
privates, made his way back to Wexford. Major
Lombard, Captain De Courcy, and four other officers
had been killed.

The battle over, Father John rested from his la-
bours, entering in his diary a brief epitome of the
first day’s work :—

‘Began the Republic of Ireland in Boulavogue, in
the county of Wexford ; commanded by the Rev.
Doctor Murphy, parish priest of the said parish,
where all the Protestants of the said parish were dis-
armed, and a bigot named Bookey lost his life by
his rashness. Then came to a country village ad-
joining, where the Republic attacked a minister’s
house for arms, and was denied. Laid siege to it, and
killed him and all his forces. The same day burned
his house and all the Orangemen’s houses in that
and all adjoining parishes in that part of the country.
The same day a part of the army attacked ‘the
Republic on Oulart Hill, when the military were re-
pulsed, with the lossof 112 men. And the same day
took another town and sate of a bishop.’ *

The effect of Foote’s defeat was frightful. The
widows and children of the North Cork men who
had fallen rushed about the streets of Wexford
wringing their hands and shrieking. Their comrades
threatened to break into the gaol and retaliate on

1 Father Murphy's Journal—Musgrave. Appendix, 18, 1.

THE REBELLION.

Bagenal Harvey and his two companions. Hdward
Hay, the historian of the rebellion, gave a hint to
the gaoler, and the gaoler supplied the prisoners with
arms for self-defence. The inhabitants of the city
generally were four-fifths of them Catholics, and dis-
affected. Fierce, gloomy knots of men began to ga-
ther about the quays, while the Protestant ladies and
clergy took refuge in the ships in the harbour, offer-
ing high prices for a passage to Wales. The panic
spread through the country. The exposed Protes-
tant families crowded on all sides into the nearest
towns; while Father John, reposing for the night on
his field of glory, sent out his scouts, calling on the
peasants to shoulder their pikes and join him on the
following morning.

If the reader will turn to a map of the county he
will see on the Slaney, twelve miles above Wexford,
the town, which has been already mentioned, of
Enniscorthy. The river is here crossed by a bridge.
The town itself stands on the west side. On the east,
immediately opposite, rises a rounded eminence, known
as Vinegar Hill, about four hundred feet high. The
summit was then open grass, surmounted by a ruined
windmill. The sides toward the river were enclosed
in gardens and small fields. Below the town the river
could only be crossed at low tide, and made its way
to the sea between rich meadows and woods, just
bursting at the time of the rebellion into their early
summer foliage.

The station, as commanding the passage between
the two divisions of the county, was important enough
to have retained a tolerable garrison, composed of
eighty men of the unfortunate North Cork—so
many of whose comrades had fallen at Oulart and

384

BOOK
X.
———
1798.
May 28.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Prosperous—a hundred and sixty Yeomen belonging
to Enniscorthy itself, and sixty more from [Terns
and the adjoining baronies. Captain Snowe, of the
North Cork, was in command. Captain Drury, a
local officer of Yeomanry, who commanded under him,
had seen service in the American war. Father John’s
performances had sent every Protestant in the neigh-
bourhood who had escaped his pikemen into Ennis-
corthy for shelter. Several hundred, the greater
part of them women, children, and old men, had
crowded into the town in the course of Sunday, where,
if their property was destroyed, they believed that
their lives would be safe. So it would have been,
had the insurrection been no more than a common
riot. But Father John, after his victory over Foote,
aspired to be the liberator of his country. He re-
quired possession of Enniscorthy Bridge, that he
might open his way to New Ross and Kilkenny.
Oulart was but five miles distant, and Snowe was not
long in learning that he must prepare to be attacked
in the morning.

The townspeople, with the exception of the few
who were enlisted as Yeomen, were all on the rebel
side. He had the Yeomen’s families to protect, as
well as the fugitives from the country. In these
hard circumstances he made the best dispositions in
his power. He arrested the most dangerous of the
inhabitants, and locked them up in the gaol and
market-house. The North Cork were posted on the
bridge, on the direct road from Oulart. The Yeo-
men were placed at the back, where the roads entered
from the north and west. In this position they lay
under arms through the night of Whit-Sunday.

Father John was early astir on the morning of

THE REBELLION.

Whit-Sunday. His call had been well answered. The

385

CHAP.

news of his first triumph had rung a peal through every et

parish in the neighbourhood. Among the recruits
who had come in to him before daybreak were a few
score of duck-shooters from the marshes—experienced
shots, armed with their long fowling-pieces. He had
secured the muskets and pouches of the dead sol-
diers, and he found himself with 800 men possessed
of firearms of one kind or another, besides 5,000
pikemen. ‘To use his numbers to advantage he ma-
neuvred as on the previous day. The Slaney was
fordable a few miles above Enniscorthy. Leaving
a division to move direct upon the bridge, he marched
at dawn with the main body, crossed the river, and
gained the road which descends the west bank from
New Town Barry. It was now eleven o'clock. He
halted for half-an-hour to say mass, and then ad-
vanced along the road at the head of his men, while
the other division was approaching to attack the
bridge. It was a hot, brilliant summer morning.
Father John was a born general. The country out:
side the town was intersected with walls and fences.

He threw out skirmishers on either side of him, who.

availed themselves of the natural cover, and pressed on
from bank to bank. According to ancient Irish custom
he drove along the road in front of him a herd of
wild cattle, goaded into madness, who rushed into the.
Yeomen’s lines. The duck-shooters fired steadily.
Captain Drury said that in all his American expe-
rience he had never seen guns better handled; the
soldiers were raw hands, caught up but a few weeks
before, and scarcely better disciplined than the rebels.
Outnumbered twenty to one, with the cattle plunging
upon them, and losing men fast, the Yeomen sent to
VOL. III. CC

1798.
May 28.

Whit-
Monday.

386

BOOK
X.
ase merece”
1798.
May 28.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Snowe for assistance. Snowe had by this time his own
hands full at the river, and needed rather help himself
than was able to spare support to others. They gave
way, but very slowly, fighting desperately inch by
inch. A Yeoman named Thompson was struck in
the neck by a ball. He cut it out, loaded his mus-
ket with it, and returned it. Still numbers told.
As the rebels advanced they kindled the houses on
each side of the street, and the battle went on under
an arch of flame. The inhabitants, seeing the sol-
diers retreating, fired upon them from the windows.
Women rushed out among the bullets with whisky-
bottles and glasses to cheer the patriots’ hearts. The
streets were strewed with dead and dying, five rebels
falling for each Yeoman; but the rebels still daunt-
lessly pressed on, till the troops were driven back
upon the market-place. ‘There, among stone houses,
which would not burn, they recovered their advan-
tage. Themselves under shelter, they sent their
volleys with destructive effect into the exposed mass
of men who were struggling within ten paces of their
guns; and in the afternoon Father John, seeing he
could make no further progress, and was throwing
away lives unnecessarily, fell back to the fields out-
side, and prepared to try again at nightfall.

Captain Snowe had held his ground with less diffi-
culty. He had been assailed with equal determina-
tion, but his men were better protected by situation.
Foiled at the bridge, the rebels had twice attempted
to force a passage above and below. They were
beaten back at both poimts. By two o’clock the
town was cleared, and Enniscorthy was still in pos-
session of the loyalists.

But in what condition was it left? Half the town

THE REBELLION.

was burning. Five hundred rebels lay about the

387

CHAP.

; I.
streets, dead and dying. ‘The prisons were crowded —~—

with desperate men, whom there was no force to
guard. The Catholic inhabitants were furious. Of
the scanty garrison a third had been killed, besides
the wounded; and an unknown number of Protestant
gentlemen and tradesmen who had given their ser-
vices had fallen also. Outside was the fast-increas-
ing insurgent army, savage for revenge; within
were several hundred unfortunate bemgs—families of
tradesmen and farmers, households of gentry and
clergy—all now on a common level of misery. The
garrison might maintain themselves in the gaol,
but these forlorn creatures, when the rebels broke in
again, must inevitably be sacrificed. ‘To prevent a
scene which would have rivalled the worst infamies
of 1641, Snowe decided on evacuating the town and
escorting his charge to Wexford.

It was a frightful alternative. The distance was
but twelve miles, and the weather was dry and warm;
but there were no carriages, no horses, save the few
belonging to the mounted Yeomen, and these, though
cheerfully surrendered, were altogether inadequate.
There were wounded men to be. transported, and
delicate ladies and little children, too young to walk,
too old for their mothers to carry them; and the
infirm and aged, and the sick and impotent.

Yet to leave them behind was to leave them to
certain death. Late in the afternoon the miserable
march began. The insurgents rushed in as the
troops filed out. Women, unable to reach the bridge,
waded the river to escape them, with their babies on
their backs. The march was rapid. Two miles below,

on the Wexford road, they passed a wood, known as
co2

1798.
May 28.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the Wood of St. John, or Ringwood ; and many poor
creatures, struggling painfully on, were tempted to
fling themselves down among the brushwood, hoping
to lie concealed there till morning. The rest, of
stronger limb or stouter spirit, pushed on, and soon
after nightfall found a brief respite from their suffer-
ings within Wexford gates.

Had the rebels followed they might all have been
destroyed. Happily that evening they attempted no
pursuit. They were busy in Enniscorthy sacking the
Protestants’ houses, piking such obnoxious wretches
as were found loitering, burying their dead, or in the
wild revel of their second victory.

Father John’s fast-expanding mind was engaged
upon another project, which with the morning he
hastened to execute. He conceived it would be de-
sirable to have a standing camp as a rallying-point
for the county. For such a purpose no place was
more central, more convenient, more appropriate in
every way, than the crest of Vinegar Hill.

The insurgents were increasing with marvellous
rapidity, and their numbers soon amounted to many
thousands. Men in good position in society came—
John Hay, of Newcastle, a so-called gentleman ; Hd-
ward Roche, a wealthy yeoman ; Father Roche, his
kinsman, and twenty other priests. With men came
women, some vagrants, some whisky-selling, some
to dress their husbands’ or brothers’ food, some for
the wild enjoyment of the strife. With such organi-
sation as he could extemporise I’ather John made his
preparations for their entertainment. The weather
was warm and dry, and well suited for an out-door
encampment. The Protestant houses in Enniscorthy
and for many miles round were searched and relieved

THE REBELLION.

389

of their contents. Before the evening of Whit-Tuesday cmap.
the slopes and brow of Vinegar Hill were dotted over Chae

with hundreds of booths, of motley colour, shape, and
material. Carpets, window-curtains, sheets, blankets,
whatever came first to hand, were stretched on poles
and made into rude tents. The women appropriated
the ladies’ wardrobes, and fluttered in silks and
feathers. Barrels of wine and ale were rolled up out
of the cellars of squire and parson, and mounted on
tressels, for all who pleased to help themselves.
Pianos were brought for such as had skill in music.
Blind minstrels were gathered from far and near, and
sounded out the old airs of Ireland on harps which
but a few days before were touched by delicate fingers
in gilded drawing-rooms. In curious contrast the
manners and habits were revived spontaneously of
the great days of Erin’s ancient chiefs. Cattle were
driven in from neighbouring farms and parks. At
feeding-times cows and oxen were knocked down, and
slices were cut from the unflayed and fresh-bleeding
earcases and toasted on the points of pikes.

All sorts were gathered together—men of good con-
dition, traders, farmers, shopkeepers, interspersed with
plundering ruffians; all ranks blended harmoniously
together in the uprising of the true Irish nature such
as when left to itself it tended to become. So little
trust had they in each other’s honesty that they slept
on their faces, with their hats and shoes under them,
lest they should wake and find them gone. Two ex-
ercises only were discharged with regularity and punc-
tuality on Vinegar Hill. Law might be forgotten,
but religion was remembered. ‘T'wenty priests said
mass each day at different points of the camp. Each
day a holocaust of Protestants was offered to the

1798.
May.

390

BOOK
X.
ee name
1793.

May.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

national divinities. The windmill on the brow of
the hill and a barn at the bottom were appropriated
as prisons, and gangs of ruffians were sent out to
scour the country and bring in every Protestant that
could be found. Ringwood, where the feeblest of the
Enniscorthy fugitives had taken refuge for the night,
was drawn in the morning, as hounds draw a fox-cover.
Many poor creatures, and those perhaps the hap-
piest, were piked upon the spot. Others were carried
captive to the hill, where a council of leaders was
held to determine on the treatment of them. Some
were for an instant and undiscriminating massacre ;
others, Father Roche especially, were against murder
in cold blood altogether.’ It was decided finally that
those only should be put to death who could be proved
to have been actively traitors to the Irish cause. A
court-martial was established in permanent session
outside the windmill. The prisoners were brought be-
fore it in batches, like the aristocrats before Fouquier
Tinville, and on receiving sentence were passed out to
instant execution on the pikes of the rebel guard in
waiting. On the first day, as an inauguration cere-
monial for the camp, twenty-four victims were con-
demned, and were stabbed or shot. As the windmill
prison was emptied it was refilled from the barn.
The barn was kept supplied from the country.
Every day, so long as the camp continued, the bloody
work went forward—the crimson blossoming of the
tree of liberty which had been planted by Grattan
in ’82. <A large tub of water was daily blessed to

1 See the depositions—Mus- The difference is only as to the
grave, vol. ii, Appendix,19. The number murdered there. Mus-
general character of the proceedings _grave’s estimate is 500. Gordon
on Vinegar Hill is not disputed. reduces it to 400.

THE REBELLION.

sprinkle the miserable assassins and persuade them
that they were Christ’s soldiers. It is expressly
recorded that those most ready with their services
on these occasions were not the peasantry, but men
who had received what is now called education.

392

BOOK
:¢

tne
1798.

May 29.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION III.

F'atuEeR JOHN was too enterprising a general to rest
upon his laurels. Others could superintend execu-
tions of Protestants. Father John’s place was in pur-
suing the campaign which he had so auspiciously

commenced. On Whit-Sunday he had murdered a

clergyman and his parishioners. He had burnt a’

Bishop’s palace, and had fought and won a battle. On
Whit-Monday he had fought another and more des-
perate battle, and had taken Enniscorthy. On Whit-
Tuesday, having established his camp and left ten
thousand men there, he marched the same afternoon
to Wexford. Flood, Grattan, Wolfe Tone, O’Connor,
Edward Fitzgerald, these all in their way had seemed
to pass for representative Irish patriots. But here was
the real thing. The politicians were but shadows,
Father John was the substance. With pistols in his
holsters, his sword at his side, and a large crucifix in
his arms, he rode at the head of his army, the true and
perfect representative of Catholic and Celtic Ireland.
His object now was Wexford city. He encamped that
night four miles from it, at a place called Three
Rocks, under Mount Forth, on the road from Wex-
ford to Taghmon. When the news spread of the
defeat at Oulart, General Fawcett, who commanded
at Duncannon, guessing that Wexford might be in
danger, sent Colonel Maxwell thither in haste, with
200 men of a Donegal regiment. They arrived on
Whit-Tuesday morning, to find the town in a confu-
sion approaching close on panic. Half the garrison

/

THE REBELLION.

had been killed at Oulart, and that first disaster had
been followed in less than thirty hours by the news
of the battle at Enniscorthy, and the appearance of
Snowe with the remnant of his Yeomen and the
miserable beings under his charge. Ladies, and
such of their husbands and brothers as were un-
willing or afraid to fight, were hurrying on board
vessels with redoubled speed, offering half their for-
tunes for a safe conduct to England, the boatmen
making a harvest of their fears. Shortly after Max-
well’s arrival a report came in that Father John was
advancing. Maxwell, finding matters so much worse
than he expected, sent a mounted messenger in all
haste back to Duncannon, to bid Fawcett come up
himself with all the force that he had.  Jitzgerald,
of New Park, and Mr. Colclough were released and
sent to meet Father John and persuade him to leave
Wexford alone. Fitzgerald remained with the rebels.
Colclough returned to report that they were close to
the city, and might be looked for with certainty on
the following morning. The fate of the city depended
on Faweett. He started from Duncannon with two
regiments, the 13th and the Meath Militia, immedi-
ately on receiving Maxwell’s message. ‘’wo companies
of the Meath, which were most speedily in marching
order, were sent in advance, with some artillerymen
and a couple of guns, Fawcett promising to overtake
them ai Taghmon. Fawcett loitered on the way. The
officer in command of the advanced party, hearing
that Wexford was threatened, resolved, after waiting
some hours, to push forward; and in total ignorance
that Father John now lay on his road, at the foot of
the Forth Mountain, went on about midnight. All
was quiet till he reached Three Rocks, and was almost

293

CHAP.
Ii

a
1798.

May 30.

394

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

within sight of Wexford, when the darkness was

eae lighted by the flashes of five hundred muskets. Above,

1798.
May 30.

below, before, behind, the rebels were everywhere,
yelling like packs:' of hyenas. Surprised and sur-
rounded, the half-trained Meath men lost coherence.
They had to do with an enemy whose policy was to
treat the Irish militia as traitors to their country, and
to refuse all quarter, and the savage character of the
war added to the weight of the terror. They were
killed toa man. The guns were taken. A few of
the artillerymen were kept alive, to serve them. One
single officer alone survived to carry the tale to Max-
well. Notwithstanding this disaster Wexford might
have been saved had Fawcett possessed conduct or
courage; but the evil spirit of Abercrombie had un-
nerved the spiritof too many of the English generals.
Fawcett, who had:reached Taghmon in the morning,
at once turned back and retreated on Duncannon.
Maxwell pushed out from the town, hoping to meet
him on the road. He arrived at Three Rocks, only
to find Father John too strongly posted for his small
force to dislodge. The mounted Yeomanry were
unsteady and fled. His infantry were driven back
with loss; and he was obliged to retreat precipitately.

Wexford, too, like Enniscorthy, had now become
untenable. The bulk of the inhabitants were at
heart with the rebels, and were kept quiet only by
fear. If Father John advanced they would certainly
rise and assist him.. The troops could no longer be
relied upon; and the citizens, Catholic and Protestant,
who had property to lose, and feared that the place
would be set on fire, entreated Maxwell not to
defend it."

1 Mr. Hay accuses Maxwell of habitants were loyal, and would
cowardice. He insists that the in- have supported him, and that the

THE REBELLION.

‘I refused to consent,’ Maxwell wrote in his report
to General Eustace. ‘I ordered the troops to their
posts; but when I visited the barriers, to my astonish-
ment and concern, I found that the Yeomanry corps!
had quitted their places. At one post, where I ex-
pected sixty or seventy men, there were not three
privates. At another, a like number. The men of
the North Cork refused to obey their officers, or take
further part against the rebels. I could not further
oppose or take on myself the responsibility of sub-
jecting the loyal part of the garrison to’the resent-
ment of a numerous and sanguinary rabble.’ ”

The North Cork were scarcely to be blamed. Being
Catholics, they were reproached as deserters from the
national cause. One detachment of them had been
destroyed at Prosperous, another at Oulart. At
Enniscorthy they had fought splendidly, and had re-
treated only before numbers enormously superior.
The Meath corps had been destroyed.’ Fawcett had
deserted them. Maxwell himself had been beaten in
a Skirmish, which proved that Father John was too
strong for him. The enemy was without and traitors
were within. Their own wives and their comrades’
widows were shrieking round them. ‘The last virtue
which has been honoured and rewarded in Ireland
by her English masters is excess of loyalty. The
rule has been to conciliate traitors and leave fidelity
to be its own compensation.

At midnight, on the 30th of May, Maxwell marched
out of Wexford, thirty-six hours after he had entered,

’
unnecessary evacuation of the town 1 Raised in Wexford itself from
was the sole cause of the horrors among the inhabitants.
which ensued. As in an image in * ¢Colonel Maxwell to General

a looking-glass, every feature in Eustace, June 1,1798.’ 8. P.O.
the story is thus precisely reversed.

396

BOOK
X.
++’
1798.
May 31.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and retreated by the sea-road which was still open,
to Duncannon. His soldiers are charged with having
been guilty of some outrages on the way—burning
houses and flogging men. It may have been so ;
discipline is rarely sustained in the wreck of a beaten
army ; and the road lay through the Barony of Forth,
which had supplied Father John with the duck-
shooters, from whose long guns they had suffered at
Enniscorthy. Maxwell himself merely says that he
reached Duncannon without interruption.

On the morning of the 31st the rebels from Three
Rocks moved on to Wexford. They halted outside
the barriers for the whole line to kneel and pray; and
they then rushed in upon the spoils. For three days
there was a saturnalia of madness; the houses of the
Protestants were sacked, the gaol was thrown open;
the prisoners, Bagenal Harvey among them, were
released in triumph, and loyal Protestants were thrust

in to take their places. Wild Amazons rode about the

streets, with plumed hats and pikes in hand. A man
named Keogh, once a captain in the army and a
magistrate, was appointed governor, and the green
flag of Ireland floated over the barracks. The ships
which had been hired to carry the fugitives to
England were still in the harbour. Among the
largest shipowners at Wexford was a man named
Dixon, a tavern and billiard-room keeper on the
Quay. This person, having extorted enormous sums
for the use of his yessels, had contrived under various
pretexts to delay their sailing. When the English
flag was hauled down and the Irish harp was blowing
out in its place, the Protestants on board prayed the
captains to cut their cables and depart. ‘The same
sacred emblem of liberty was run up for answer to

THE REBELLION.

307

the mastheads. Boats came off from the quays, led CHAP.
by Dixon in person. The fugitives were invited with —~—

ra t

° . 17 e
mocking courtesy to disembark and return. Some May 31.

were carried to the crowded gaol, some were forced
on board a miserable hulk below the bridge, which
was converted into a prison-ship.

To maintain the fiction of a united’ Ireland, Pro-
testant gentlemen of liberal sympathies were offered
the alternative of joining the patriot army. Corne-
lius Grogan, a gentleman of large fortune in the
neighbourhood, took the United Irish oath, as he
represented afterwards, ‘to save his property.’ Mr.
Colclough and Bagenal Harvey, who had been im-
prisoned by order of Government for their revolu-
tionary sentiments, were released and promoted to
honour. Colclough drove through the town with his
wife, with green ribands flying. Bagenal Harvey
accepted high command in the rebel army. At
Vinegar Hill the spirit was savage from the first, in
consequence of the fight at Enniscorthy. At Wex-
ford, where there had been no resistance, the thirst
for blood had not yet been awakened. A few obnoxious
gentlemen were piked and shot under special provo-
cation: others were sent out to receive their deserts
on Vinegar Hill. The feeling in Wexford for the
first few days was chiefly of triumph and exultation.
Victorious Ireland desired rather to show her zeal for
saving souls than destroying bodies, and frightened
heretics were dragged or led in batches to the
Catholic chapels, to be converted into Christians.

Father John meanwhile had his eyes on larger
objects. Wexford was now secured, but a local
rising could not hope for permanent success. If the
insurrection was to triumph, it must spread: it must

398

BOOK
X.

<

1798.
May 31,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

envelope Ireland. Nothing had really been done till
Dublin especially had Been wrested from the invader.
The effect was now showing itself of the organisation
of past years. The people everywhere were prepared
to rise, and the rebel army had only to show itself
to be swollen by the local levies. More extended

operations had now become necessary. The object was

the deliverance of Dublin. The number of armed men
who could be counted upon was practically unlimited.
A second permanent camp was established at Three
Rocks, and the movable forces were divided into
three great bodies. I'he first, under Bagenal Harvey,

with F ather Roche as second in command, was
directed to take New Ross, force the passage ae the

- Barrow, and raise Kilkenny and Waterford. The

second division was ordered to move up the Slaney
from Enniscorthy, take New Town Barry, sweep the

loyalists out of the north of the county; and then,

advancing through Carlow into Kildare, threaten
Dublin on the west. The third division Father John
reserved for himself and his friend, Father Michael.
His intention was to march north through his own
county, where his force would grow like an ava-
lanche. After taking Gorey he proposed to force Ark-
low, and make his way along the sea-road into Wick-
low, where the levies of the county were waiting to
join him. With Wicklow in their hands on one side,
Kildare on the other, and the central plain of Ireland
on fire behind them, the rebels calculated, not with-
out reason, that Dublin could not long hold out
against them.

THE REBELLION.

SECTION IV.

Hiturerto the defence of Ireland had fallen almost
entirely on her own people. Camden had applied
repeatedly for reinforcements. ‘The Government had
sent a regiment of cavalry, which was comparatively
useless. Portland said, in reply to remonstrances,
that he understood the insurrection to be too incon-
siderable to require a large addition to the number of
the troops. He had been taught to believe that the
danger was from the North. So long as Ulster was
quiet he attached little consequence to disturbances in
the rest of the island. The mistake was inexcusable,
for Abercrombie had told him that ten thousand
British troops would be required if the South was
to be disarmed, and now the South was in the field.
Lord Camden’s position was thus cruelly difficult.
He might hear at any moment that a French army
had landed. The Dublin mob were only held in
check by the presence of an overwhelming garrison,
which by its concentration left the country exposed.
At any moment also he might hear of what he
dreaded even more than the French—the rising of
the Presbyterians. From 1791 to 1797 Ulster had
been the chief seat of political discontent. It was at
Belfast that the taking of the Bastille had been cele-
brated with such passionate sympathy. It was among
the Scotch-Irish artisans that Jacobin principles had
taken earliest root. Down and Antrim had furnished
the emigrants who fought at Bunker's Hill and Lex-
ington. It seemed incredible that when the long-

CHAP.
18
a ee?

June.

400 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book talked-of crisis had come Ulster would take no part
——— in it. The Viceroy’s friends in the revolutionary
‘Shae committee continued to apprise him of its secret
workings. A week had passed since the fatal 23rd.
‘The bleach-greens were still strewed with linen,’ ‘ the
artisans were still at their looms.’ The informers
reported that the friends of liberty were less enthu-
siastic. The doings of France in Switzerland were
giving dissatisfaction. There were murmurs at
French tyranny in the West Indies. The Orange-
men were an alarming feature to the rebel mind.
Though the Viceroy had not employed them hitherto,
he might be less scrupulous if there was open insur-
rection, and they confessed to serious fear of the
Orangemen. Most of all, ‘an alteration had been
worked in their minds by the Popish tinge of the
rebellion, the Catholics in the South making the
rising a matter of religion.’?

Still, entire quiet in a part of the country which
had been so violently demonstrative was ‘ unaccount-
able.’ The Ulster men, who were naturally more
deliberate and determined than the Southerners, were
the less likely to have changed their minds completely
and suddenly. Camden could not yet venture to
withdraw or even weaken the Northern garrisons.
When the news arrived of the capture of Wexford
either he or General Lake divined the course which
the rebels were likely to take afterwards. It was
essential, if possible, to enclose and trample out the
insurrection within the limits of the county where it
was for the present victorious; and, shorthanded as
he was, the Viceroy immediately made such efforts

1 ¢ Camden to Portland, June 2.’ ‘Cooke to Wickham, June 2, 1798.
SA gs

THE REBELLION.

as his resources allowed. Fresh regiments were
enrolled out of the Dublin loyalists to take charge of
the city. A portion of the garrison was thus released.
General Loftus was sent with 250 additional men to
join the garrison of Arklow. Colonel L’Estrange was
sent to New Town Barry, with 400 militia and a
couple of field-guns, to block the road from Ennis-
corthy to Carlow. Colonel Walpole was directed
to take up a position, with 500 men from Naas
and Kilcullen, at a place called Carnew, half-way
between the position of L’Estrange at New Town
Barry, and that of Loftus at Arklow. The three
columns were then to advance in parallel lines towards
Wexford. Such a force, the Viceroy calculated,
would overwhelm all resistance.’ The strength, the
skill, the resolution of the rebels were still far under-
estimated, as Camden was bitterly to find. It
was too much to expect that a thousand _half-
drilled militia, men taken hastily from desk and
plough, could encounter fifty times their number.
L’Estrange was in time to save New Town Barry.
He reached the place by forced marches a few hours
only before it was attacked. The rebels came up
on the 1st of June from Vinegar Hill, on both sides
of the river. Their leader was a priest, a huge
savage named Father Kern.? Other priests acted
as officers of their own parishioners. ‘The victories
over the troops: had by this time furnished the insur-
gents with artillery; they had a brass six-pounder
with them, a howitzer, and some swivel-guns. They
came on with the usual Irish howl. L’Estrange

1 Camden to Portland, June 4, strength, stature, and ferocity.’—

1798.’ Gordon’s History of the Rebellion,
2¢ A man of extraordinary p. 130,

VOL. III. DD

401

CHAP.
I.
——”

1798.

June,

402

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

allowed them to enter the streets, when they begun

_*_ at once to burn and plunder.!_ He then opened upon

1798.

June,

them with grape and musketry. When they turned
to fly they were pursued and cut up by the Yeomanry.
Four hundred fell. Among the bodies were found
two priests, in their vestments.

Loftus and Walpole reached their posts on the
same day, and so far without accident. Loftus, on
the 3rd of June, finding no enemy in front of him,
felt his way cautiously out of Arklow, along the
Wexford road. Lord Ancram, on the same day, des-
cended the Slaney from New Town Barry. Wal-
pole advanced simultaneously, as ‘he was ordered,
from Carnew, parallel to both of them. Had all gone
well he would have joined Ancram at Ferns. To-
gether they would have attacked Enniscorthy and
Vinegar Hill, and after carrying them have com-
bined with Loftus in recovering Wexford. Walpole,
to his misfortune, was confronted by Father John,
and Father John proved himself once more a dange-
rous antagonist. The body of rebels under his com-
mand had been moving leisurely, according to the
plan which had been concerted, towards Arklow. His
camp on that day was on Ballymore Hill, between
Ferns and the sea; and as Walpole and Loftus marched
on their several ways Father John was at last between
them. Bent simply on their object, they were wholly
ignorant that he was so near. Walpole had been
warned to be careful, but he had neglected the most
simple precautions. He had no advanced guard, and

1 Mr. Gordon,who, thougha Pro- mode of the King’s officers,’ ad-
testant clergyman, shows a strong vised a retreat, and was only
prejudice in particular directions, brought back into action by the re-

declares that L’Estrange, ‘accord- monstrances of Colonel Westenra,
ing to the too commonly practised —Gordon, p. 180.

THE REBELLION,

40:

had sent out no skirmishing parties on either side of cHap.
oa 2
him. His line of march was among lanes and hedges ——~—_

and wooded enclosures, thick with the newly-opened
leaves. Suddenly, at a narrow pass, he found the
road blocked, and shot poured in upon him on all
sides from invisible enemies. He himself, being in
full uniform, and conspicuous on a tall grey horse,
was killed early in the action. His men fell into
confusion. They were in a position where they could
neither advance nor retreat, nor reach their enemies.
After three-quarters of an hour of hopeless effort, in
which more than half of them were killed and their
guns taken, the wreck of the detachment contrived to
extricate itself, and made its escape to Gorey. The
news of their defeat preceded them. In Gorey the
houses were lined with sharpshooters, who fired on
them from the windows. They were driven through
the town; and mingling with a crowd of flying Pro-
testants, struggled on till they reached Arklow.

Loftus was now exposed to a similar fate. The
fugitives from Walpole’s force had passed behind him,
along the road on which he had advanced in the
morning. He now had Father John in his rear.
Wexford was in his front, but he could not venture
upon Wexford single and unsupported. By a dexterous
cross-march over Slievebuoy Mountain he contrived
to reach Carnew, on which Lord Ancram also had
found himself obliged to fall back. The first com-
bined effort to recover Wexford had thus utterly
failed ; and a yet more serious consideration was,
that the Arklow garrison was so weakened by the loss
of the force with Loftus as to be incapable of present
resistance. Father John, if he used his opportunity,
might march to Dublin unfought with.

Dp2

1798.

June 3.

3

404

BOOK
>.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Camden was now for the first time really alarmed.

—_~— The reports from the North were less favourable, and

1798.

June.

Walpole’s defeat might decisively turn the scale. He
felt that he had been unjustly neglected. He was
left alone with the Irish Yeomen and militia, a third
of whom were unfaithful. The cruelties towards the
Irish which he had been accused of encouraging or
permitting might too easily become realities, when
the scenes which were now recurring daily on Vine-
gar Hill became generally known. He could now
neither oppose the rebels nor restrain the Protes-
tants from savage retaliation, and under the weight
of the last blow he addressed a letter of earnest
remonstrance to Portland:—

‘The aspect of the rebellion becomes most alarm-
ing. The North will rise, unless the rebels near Dublin
can be crushed. The salvation of Ireland, on which
(qreat Britain as an empire eventually depends, requires
that this rebellion should be instantly suppressed.
No event but instant extinction can prevent it from
becoming general, as it is notorious that the whole
country is organised. The Chancellor, the Speaker,
all the friends of his Majesty’s Government whom |
am in the habit of consulting, have this day given
it as their solemn opinion, and have required me to

- state it as such, that the salvation of Ireland depends

on immediate and very considerable succours—that
a few regiments will perhaps only be sent to slaughter
or to loss. This opinion is perfectly well-founded.
General Lake agrees. I make this appeal to your
Grace in the most solemn manner. My services can-
not be useful to his Majesty unless I can restore the
confidence of the kingdom, and immediately and
effectually suppress the rebellion.’ ?
' Camden to Portland, June 5, 1798.’ 8S. P. O,

THE REBELLION. 405

It was quite certain that at this particular moment cuHApP.
Father John could, if he had pleased, have reached ¥
Dublin with ease. He had twenty thousand men
with him at Ballymore. He would have doubled his
numbers before he had arrived at Bray, and at Bray
he would have been but a day’s march from the city.
Happily for the country, he had been rendered care-
less by his extraordinary successes, and for the first
time allowed an opportunity to escape him. |

a
1798.

June,

406

BOOK

satiate 5
1798.

June 4,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

Two of the great divisions of the rebels were thus
accounted for—one had been defeated at Carnew, the
other victorious at Ballymore. The third, under
Bagenal Harvey and Father Roche, had meanwhile
made leisurely approaches upon New Ross. The un-
dertaking was not an easy one, for New Ross was better
defended than Enniscorthy. When it was known
to be in danger General Johnstone had been sent
to take charge of it with several companies of militia,
some English artillerymen, a squadron of dragoons,
and part of a Midlothian Fencible regiment. <A
County Dublin regiment, which was pushed forward
after Walpole’s overthrow, commanded by Lord
Mountjoy, arrived late on the 4th of June, and raised
Johnstone’s force to 1,400 men. The rebels on their
side had commenced by making a camp, six miles off,
at Carrickbyrne Hill, from which they plundered
the adjoining baronies. Having taken many Protes-
tants, they availed themselves for their safe keeping,
of Scullabogue, a place belonging to a Captain King,
at the hill-foot. They turned the barn into a prison,
and they quartered the guard in the dwelling-house.
After being thus occupied for a week they pushed
forward, and arrived at Corbet Hill, overhanging
the Barrow Valley, on the afternoon of the same day
on which Mountjoy arrived.

New Ross stands on the slope which rises on the
Wexford bank of the river. It was then surrounded
by a wall, which had once resisted Cromwell. There

THE REBELLION.

407

were four gates, two at the bottom of the town, by cap.
the water-side, through which the high road passed et)

from Dublin to Waterford, and two above. Large
vessels of four hundred tons could le alongside of the
quay. Cross-streets and lanes ran up the hill-side
to the market-place and the barracks. The En-
niscorthy road entered at the top of the town, at
the market-gate, at the north-east angle. From
the market a long broad street ran parallel to the
river half way up the hill, and issued at the Three
Bullet Gate, to which the road descended from
Corbet Hill and Wexford. The rebel camp was
a mile and a half distant. The troops were under
arms all night. They were paraded at two in
the morning, and as day began to break the peculiar
Irish cry was heard rising in gathering waves of
sound in the direction of the camp. Nearer and
clearer it came through the morning air. The rebels
came on slowly and in enormous numbers. Scouts
said they were not less than thirty thousand, and
General Johnstone considered that, ‘ from the myriads
which came down, they could not be much less.’
They marched in order by parishes and by baronies.
The Dublin regiment under Mountjoy, the dragoons,
and other companies were drawn up outside the
Three Bullet Gate, on open ground. The rebel masses
bore down the hill towards them.

When a rifle-shot off they halted. Priests were
seen moving up and down the lines in their vest-
ments and carrying crucifixes. Mass was said at
the head of every column, the men kneeling, with
marked and earnest devotion. For the moment John-
stone thought that they were hesitating, but he
was swiftly undeceived. It was now a little after

1798.
June 6.

408

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK three o'clock, daylight being scarcely yet fully estab-
ae, lished. They rose from their knees; the lines opened,

1798.

June 6.

and between them came herds of wild cattle rushing
on, amidst shouts and yells which burst from the enor-
mous multitude, the rebels pricking them forward with
their pikes. ‘A fourth part of the rebel army had fire-—
arms, but their main strength was in the pikemen, who
formed in column behind the cattle and charged with
a fierceness of resolution for which the English and
Scotch officers present were unprepared.t They rushed
upon the Dublin regiment, which was in some confu-
sion, and drove it back through the gate. Mountjoy
fell wounded, and was carried off into the insurgent
lines. ‘The dragoons charged, but without effect, and
recoiled with loss. A gun was taken, and the rebel pike-
men poured into the town after the retreating troops.
According to their usual tactics they instantly fired
the houses. Cannon had been placed in the long
straight street which leads from the market-place to the
Bullet Gate, and poured round-shotand grape intotheir
dense masses. Multitudes fell. An entire column was
annihilated—not a man escaped out of it. Brave
as they were, so terrible a reception startled them.
They fell back for a while, and the troops had time

to rally and re-form. But soon they came on again

through smoke and flame, their courage and their
overwhelming numbers compensating for want of dis-
cipline and inferiority of arms. Nor was the pike in

1 Colonel Crawford, writing from my opinion. I never saw any

Ross on the 9th of June, stated that
before the action he had the most
contemptible opinion of the rebels.
He expected that they would be
easily hunted together by small
columns, and then disposed of. ‘I
have now,’ he said, ‘ totally changed

troops attack with more enthusiasm
and bravery than the rebels did on
the 5th. We must proceed against
them with caution as well as vi-
gour, and with a much larger
force.’ 58. P.O.

THE REBELLION.

the hands of a strong bold man a weapon to be lightly
regarded. With a shaft twelve or fifteen feet in length,
a long taper point, with a hook at times attached,
which would drag a horseman from his saddle, it was
an overmatch under some conditions for the bayonet.
Johnstone’s advantage was in his heavy guns. The
rebels had no artillerymen, and such cannon as they
captured they were unable to use. But the daring
of the Irish on that day defied even artillery. A
spectator from a window close to the spot from whence
a gun was strewing the street with piles of dead
saw a man rush straight upon it, and thrust his hat
into the smoking nozzle, crying, ‘ Come on, boys; her
mouth is stopped!’ In another second he was blown
to atoms. Careless in their desperate fanaticism,}
the Irish showed for once in rebellion the contempt
of danger which, as soldiers in the army of their sove-
reign, they never fail to show. Four guns were
taken. They forced the troops backwards and down-
wards to the river, part into the market-place, where,
as at Enniscorthy, the stone buildings became a
fortress which they could neither burn nor penetrate ;
part down over the bridge and into Kilkenny.

At one time they seemed to have won the day,
and they would have won it, could their leaders have
restrained them in victory. But they turned un-
controllably to plunder and incendiarism and whisky,
and discipline resumed its superiority. Behind the
river the broken troops again formed. Johnstone led
them back to the charge; and the rebels, now scattered,

1 Musgrave says that they had who suffered for us on the Cross,
taken the following oath before and by the Blessed Virgin Mary,
starting, and that copies of it were that I will burn, destroy, and mur-

found on the bodies of the slain:— der all heretics, up to my knees in
‘I swexr by our Lord Jesus Christ, blood.’

409

CHAP.
A 4

ne”
L798:

June 5.

410

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK were driven back in turn at the bayonet’s point. The
——— guns were recovered, and again began to work havoc

1798.
June 6.

in the disordered crowds. The carnage was now
dreadful. No quarter had been given by the rebels at
the beginning of the engagement-—none was allowed
them at the end of it. They were driven’ out
through the gate at which they had entered. They
attempted a stand within the lines where they first
appeared in the morning. Johnstone stormed in
upon them and broke them. There Lord Mountjoy’s
body was found, far from the place where he had
fallen, ‘mangled and butchered in the most horrid
manner. Mountjoy was the Luke Gardiner of ’82,
who had wrung from the Protestant Parliament the
first concessions to the Catholics, and this was his
reward.’ ‘The sight of their commander thus bar-
barously mutilated drove the Dublin regiment to
fury. Three gentlemen had been murdered near
Ross the day before with peculiar brutality. The
militia generally had behaved excellently in action,
but when the fighting was over could no longer be
restrained. Major Vesey says, ‘The carnage was
now shocking ; the troops were exasperated, and could
not be stopped.’ The scene became too hideous ‘ to
be represented.’ The battle had raged for eleven
hours. It began at four in the morning. At three
in the afternoon, when it was at last over, Vesey

t The usual story is that Mount-
joy was killed at Three Bullet
Gate. Major Vesey, who was pre-
sent, and whose account of the
battle I chiefly follow, says that
Mountjoy was wounded and taken
prisoner early in the morning, and
that he himself saw the body,
‘mangled’ as I have described, a

mile from the gate where he fell,
when the rebels’ last position was
stormed. He was fifty-three years
old when killed ; his name attaching
itself to living memories through
his son, or rather through his son’s
second wife, Lady Blessington, of
West-End notoriety.

THE REBELLION. 411

estimated the rebel bodies which lay strewed round ouap.
him as at least two thousand. Musgrave, on further —*
enquiry, placed the number of those who were killed
in the fight and after it at two thousand six
hundred.!

—"
1798.

June 5.

1 Compare the accounts of the neral Johnstone, Major Vesey, and
battle in Musgrave, Gordon, and Colonel Crawford, in the State Pa-
Hay with the despatches of Ge- per Office.

412

BOOK
X.

—++-_—_’
1798.

June 6.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

Mayor VESEY, gazing on the field at Ross, enquired
‘if there could be a curse too heavy for the wretches
who had brought on Ireland so horrible awar?’ Six
miles distant there was at that moment another spec-
tacle, of which he was as yet ignorant, still more
dreadful than the scene which he was witnessing.

It will be remembered that when encamped at
Carrickbyrne the rebels had seized many of the Pro-
testants of the neighbourhood, and had shut them
up in Captain King’s house, at Scullabogue. A hun-
dred and eighty-four of them, chiefly old men, women,
and children, who had been taken because they were
too helpless to escape, were confined ina barn thirty-
four feet long and fifteen wide.’ Froin thirty to forty
others were kept in the dwelling-house. With the
party in the barn were sixteen Catholics, wives and
children of the hated North Cork men, who had fallen
somewhere into the insurgents’ hands. When the
rebel army advanced from Carrickbyrne to Corbet
Hill, the day before the battle, the prisoners were left
under charge of John Murphy, of Loughnageer, with
a guard of three hundred men. At the first check in
the street of New Ross a party of rebels, who were
cowards as well as savages, turned their backs and

1 Mr. Hay gives the dimensions. the evidence of persons present,
He shows that there was barely and reduces the number to eighty.
standing-room for a hundred and It willbe seen that he has involun-
eighty-four persons in such aspace, _ tarily established the fact which he
und therefore boldly throws aside believed he was disproving.

THE REBELLION.

ran. Before nine in the morning‘! they came panting
to the door of Scullabogue, declaring that the day was
lost, and that they had brought orders for the pri-
soners to be put to death, as they might otherwise be
dangerous. ‘The officer of the guard hesitated, but a
commission was produced, signed by a priest,” which
was accepted at last as sufficient authority. Those who
were in the house were at once brought out and shot
on the lawn.’ The standers-by stabbed them as they
fell with their pikes, and licked the blood from the
points.* Captain Murphy interpreted his orders to
extend only to his male prisoners. The savage rabble
who surrounded him were not so easily satisfied. While
the bodies on the lawn were being stripped for burial
a party of the wretches rushed for the barn. The
miserable beings who had been pent up there through
a summer’s afternoon and night must have been in a

1 «The massacre began in the fore-
noon. See Richard Grandy’s evi-
dence.’— Musgrave, Appendix, xx. 7.
The hour is important; for Hay,
while he affects to deplore and con-
demn the atrocities at Scullabogue,
attributes them, as usual, to the
carnage which followed the battle at
Ross. ‘The fugitives from Ross,’
he says, ‘communicating accounts
of the tortures practised there, and
that no quarter would be given to
the people, an infinite multitude of
men and women rushed to Sculla-
bogue and forced the guards. Ge-
neral Johnstone was blamed, for he
was warned to spare the people, or
they would resort to retaliation.
If giving quarter would have pre-
vented the fatality at Scullabogue,
humanity excites a wish it had been
given.’ Mr. Hay claims more than
the permitted license of a partisan
when he explains what happened

at nine in the morning at Sculla-
bogue as the result.of the behaviour
of the troops at Ross at three in
the afternoon.

* ¢ Father Murphy, of Taghmon.’
—Musgrave, vol. i. p. 530.

8 ¢Thirty-four were killed in
this way. . . Two brothers were
among them, one of whom was
married. The wife knelt between
her husband and her brother-in-law,
holding a hand of each, and pray-
ing to be allowed to share their
fate. Captain Murphy’s scruples
obliged him to refuse. “Such a
horrid deed,” he said, “ would
make the Virgin Mary blush.” ’—
Musgrave, vol. i. p. 529,

4 *OQne witness, who was present,
swore to this.’— Musgrave, Appen-
dix, xx. 7, Another, who had
himself a narrow escape of death,
confirmed it privately to Musgrave.

413

CHAP.
I.

~~ ee
1798.

June 5.

414

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

condition in which death would be a relief to most of

fone them Humanity may perhaps hope that till their

a7 0.

June 6.

murder was resolved on they were allowed the range
of the yard. In the barn they were, at any rate, at
that moment crushed so close together that their
bodies supported each other, and they could neither
sit nor lie on the ground. The doors were barred on
the outside, and the rebels with their pikes thrust blaz-
ing faggots into the thatch. The majority must have
been instantly suffocated. Those who were near the
walls sought chinks and ‘cracks for air, but were
driven back by pike-points thrust into the openings.
One little child crawled under the door and was escap-
ing; a rebel ran a pike into it as a peasant runs a
pitchfork into a cornsheaf, and tossed it back into the
flames. A woman who came four days later to look
for the remains of her husband and son found the
ruins of the barn full of blackened bodies, ‘all in a
standing posture ’—an unintended confirmation of the
received estimate of the number of those who perished
there.

For this act the Irish Catholics have affected the
same inadequate penitence with which they at once
deny and excuse the massacre of 1641. They cut
down the dimensions of their crime in defiance of evi-
dence, and explain what remains as the consequence
of the cruelties of their adversaries. They fail to re-
cognise that, alike in 1641 and in 1798, no injury
had been done to them, and no hurt had been designed
against them, till they had either taken arms in re-
bellion or were preparing for it so openly that the
Government was compelled to take their weapons
from them. The burglar who kills a policeman is
none the less held guilty of murder because the

THE REBELLION.

policeman began the quarrel by laying his hand upon
his shoulder.

Bagenal Harvey, the nominal commander of the
detachment which fought at New Ross, received the
“news of the massacre at Scullabogue with horror and
indignation. He swore that he would shoot any man
in future who murdered a prisoner. It was seen in-
stantly that he was not the man to be a leader in an
Irish rebellion. The rebels assured him with a howl
that they would bear no dictation from a Protestant and
a landowner. - Father Roche, his lieutenant, preach-
ing a sermon on the defeat at Ross, and endeavour-
ing to explain it, said they would have neither grace
nor luck while there was a Protestant in their ranks.
Bagenal Harvey was deposed for his interference, and
returned to Wexford, better enlightened as to the
nature of the people whom he had been so eager to
emancipate.

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VII.

AFTER the disaster which befel Walpole, Dublin be-

_*_ came with difficulty manageable. Father John pro-

1798.

June.

mised to be at Bray, with 50,000 men, by the 12th or
13th of June at latest. Letters from the North were
less and less assuring, and there was still the same ap-
pearance of apathy in England. Though the rebels
had been defeated at New Ross, they had shown fight-
ing qualities entirely unexpected. There was no sign
and no promise of the so anxiously demanded rein-
forcements ; and so dark was the prospect, that Lady
Camden and many other ladies were sent off to
Holyhead, to be out of the way of the scenes which
were now probably imminent.

On the 9th of June Camden again endeavoured to
open Portland’s eyes. ‘ You will be much deceived,’
he said, ‘if you imagine a rebellion which has been so
long in preparing, which is fomented by party spirit
and religious animosity, can be speedily put down.
The struggle will be violent and bloody, and will shake
the connection between the two countries.’! Cam-
den thought the Ministry infatuated. The Ministry
knew by this time the extent of the danger, but they
were in greater difficulties than Camden was aware of.
The Irish Protestants since ’82 had not deserved the
confidence of England, and they did not possess it.
O’Connor’s acquittal had created an impression in
England that the story of the conspiracy was untrue.

1 ¢ Camden to Portland, June 9.’ 8. P. O.

THE REBELLION.

The impression which prevailed on the state of Ire-
land was that a bitterly wronged peasantry had
attempted by constitutional means to rescue them-
selves from their oppressors. In return they had
been lashed, pitch-capped, tortured, till they had been
driven into arms to protect themselves from atrocious
tyranny, and England was now called on to send
troops and shoot down those who resisted, and restore
the rest to their taskmasters. Livery charge against
the Protestant Yeomanry received ready credit; every
cruel act which was really committed, and a hundred
others which were never committed, were trumpeted
abroad till nothing else could be heard. The Protes-
tant gentry were doubtless not innocent. They had
been careless and dissipated as landlords. They had
behaved in Parliament like an assembly of idiots.
England, too, had her share of guilt for the condition
to which Ireland had fallen, though in her impatience
it pleased her not to remember it. She saw the
faults of the Protestant gentry: she forgot her own.
Nor could the Engiish mind comprehend how a
Jacobin conspiracy could have converted itself into a
Popish insurrection. Protestant bigotry might please
to call the rebellion Catholic. So far as it was real,
it originated in an attempt to assert the great prin-
ciples of the sovereignty of the people. Ifthe means
were too violent, the object was laudable. The great
Whig statesmen had for years described the disorders
of Ireland as the aggravated results of despotism. In
consequence every difficulty was thrown in the way
of sending assistance to Camden. The Cabinet might
know that Camden was right, but they were still
unable to produce evidence which would convince the
world, and the world remained stubbornly incredulous.
VOL. III. EE

417

CHAP.
Ny
Se

June.

418

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘I do not wonder,’ wrote Wickham to Edward

_*— Cooke, on the 1st of J uly, ‘that the indignation you

1798.

June.

speak of in Dublin should have increased and be in-
creasing. ‘The conduct of certain individuals on this
occasion’ is most extraordinary and unaccountable.
They will live to be sorry for. what they have done.’?

Every day was bringing to the private knowledge
of the Cabinet how widely the mischief had spread,
as the correspondence which continued with Lord
Downshire’s friend added to the list of accomplices.
Lord Cloncurry’s son was no sooner arrested than
Stewart of Acton, a young Agar, a young Tranent,
young Curran, McGuchin, Dowdall, and twenty others
whose names never came before the public, were
found to be as deeply compromised as he.

‘We know by our private accounts,’ said Portland,
‘that all these persons are more or less implicated.
There are papers found in Mr. Lawless’s possession
that tend directly to show his connection with some
of the most desperate of the Republican party in
England, as well as with those who are in habitual
cémmunication with the French agents at Ham-
burgh ;’ ‘and yet,’ he continued, ‘under present cir-
cumstances, and with evidence of the nature of that of
which the Government here is in possession, strong and
decisive as it is, none of these persons can be brought
to trial without exposing secrets of the last wmportance
to the State, the revealing of which may implicate the
safety of the two kingdoms.’ ®

Meanwhile the explanation of the difficulties of the

1 He was perhaps referring to more troops to Ireland.
Abercrombie, who had told Port- * Irish MSS. 8. P. O.
land, after his’ return to England, $ «Portland to Camden, June 8.’
that there was no occasion to send 8S. P. 0.

THE gREBELLION.

Government did not help Camden. The check at
Ross had for the present saved Waterford and Kil-
kenny. Colonel L’Estrange had blocked the road
into Kildare, but Arklow was ungarrisoned ; on that
side the approaches to Dublin were uncovered ; and
if Father John reached Bray with as large a force as
he promised, it was quite certain that a bloody and
desperate insurrection would break out in Dublin
itself.

At all hazards it was necessary to defend the pas-
sage at Arklow. The handful of men who were left
there when Loftus advanced had retired, with a crowd
of Gorey Protestants, to Wicklow. Major Hardy, who
was in command in Wicklow, sent them back to their
post, without so much as allowing them to rest and
eat. The Dublin loyalists raised four thousand ad-
ditional Yeomanry among themselves, that the rest
of the troops might be made available. General
Needham reached Arklow on the 6th of June, with
a regiment of Cavan Militia. He gathered up the
wreck of Walpole’s men, which were drifting about
unowned, reorganised the rest of the garrison, and
armed a few additional volunteers and Yeomen.
With all Needham’s efforts, however, the force in
Arklow remained inferior to that which had so hardly
defended New Ross; while Father John’s rebel divi-
sion was equal, if not superior, to that under Bagenal
Harvey and Father Roche, and Father John had as
yet succeeded in all that he had tried. Had he come
on to Arklow at once, with as much promptitude as
he had shown at Enniscorthy and Wexford, he would
easily have overwhelmed Needham. Happily, he lin-
gered on the road, burning Protestants’ houses; and
at midnight, between the 8th and 9th of June, three

ERE?

419

CHAP.
I

Ss ba SORELY
1798.

June.

420

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

hundred men belonging to the Durham Fencibles

_*_ arrived under Colonel Skerritt. The Durham was

1798.
June 9.

the most distinguished regiment in Ireland. When it
was called out of Ulster for service in Wexford the
rebels were so conscious of its value that they placed
an ambush of 7,000 men at Balbriggan, in Meath,
to intercept and destroy it. Skerritt brought his
men safely through. They reached Dublin on the
Sth, and were dispatched to Arklow at once on
jaunting-cars, carts, and carriages, to gain time and
bring them fresh to the scene.

With the addition of the Durham, Needham’s force
was raised to 1,600 men; of these a hundred and
twenty were the survivors of Sir Watkin Wynn’s
Ancient Britons; the rest consisted of eight hundred
Irish Militiamen, three hundred Arklow Yeomanry,
a hundred Scotch regulars, and the Durham.

Arklow stands at the mouth of the Avoca, which
runs down out of the Wicklow hills and there
falls into the sea. At Arklow the river is crossed
by a bridge, over which passed the only road available
for a large body of men from Wexford into Wicklow
county.

The Avoca was fordable higher up, but the tracks
were bad, the hills steep, the route in that direc-
tion practically impossible. Over Arklow bridge lay
Father John’s way, if he meant to reach Dublin. He
had loitered about Carnew, and it was not till the
morning of the 9th that he again set out in earnest.
Strategy would have suggested the dispatch of a
certain number of men by the mountain-road to turn
Needham’s position, while he himself attacked in
front. Hitherto Father John had been skilful with
operations of this kind ; but he was confident in his

THE REBELLION.

numbers. Success, perhaps, persuaded him that in a

42]

CHAP.

A I.
holy war the supernatural powers were on his side. ——~_—

He believed that he had a charmed life, and the
extraordinary career of a Catholic curate starting up
suddenly as the general of a victorious army had
intoxicated him. According to the moderate esti-
mate of Mr. Gordon he had twenty-seven thousand
men with him (Musgrave says thirty-one thousand).
Of these five thousand had muskets and fowling-
pieces. He had the guns which he took at Three
Rocks, and the artillerymen whom he had saved to
serve them. His huge masses had already shown
that, under the double inspiration of religion and
patriotism, they were more than an armed mob, and
had taught experienced officers to respect their re-
solution.

They approached Arklow on the afternoon of the
9th of June. They formed at the, outskirts, in three
large columns, each company with its own green
flag, with the harp in the centre. The right wing
advanced along the shore road, which enters the
town by the sands at the mouth of the river. The
left swung round upon the road from Gorey, which,
striking the Avoca above the town, passes through
the middle of it to the bridge. ‘The centre poured
down into the gardens, fields, and wooded enclosures
which cover the slope at the back of the houses be-
tween the two roads, the whole body thus forming
one vast semicircle.

So earnest were the rebels in their religious obser-
vances that they had halted at every mile of their
march to hear mass. It was five in the afternoon
before scouts brought word that they were coming
on in earnest. But at midsummer there were still

1798.

June 9.

422

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK five hours of daylight, and on the use made of those
woe =houns depended the present fate of Dublin.

1798.
June 9.

Needham’s position was simple. Skerritt and the
Durhams, with a party of Antrim Militia, under
Colonel O’Hara, and three six-pounders, held the
Gorey road. <A barricade of carts and cars had been
extemporised in the street, and the men were thrown
out on either side of it, sheltered among the hedges
and cabins. The Yeomanry and remaining militia
were divided. ‘’'wo companies, with another gun,
covered the back of the town. The rest, with a fifth
gun, were posted at the angle between the bridge
and the sea. A squadron of dragoons was across
the bridge, out of shot-range, on the Wicklow side
of the river, to be used as occasion might serve. The
fight began on the sea side. The right column of
the rebels came plunging along the sands; the green
banners waving, the priests with pistols and cruci-
fixes; the Irish cry rising and falling in fitful ca-
dences like the swell and scream of an A“olian harp.
They had no cattle with them, but trusted to their own
courage ; and, as at Ross, with their first rush they
drove the soldiers back. They fired a row of fisher-
men’s cabins at the end of the street. A piquet of
Ancient Britons had to gallop through the flames in re-
treating; and, unable to reach the bridge, swam their
horses through the river. The road turns at a right
anole as it reaches the town. As the rebels rounded
the corner they were received with a fire, which
staggered them and drove them back. They formed
again and again. They fought their way desperately
to the bridge-foot, recoiled, and again advanced, but
could never pass that point. On their last retreat

THE REBELLION. 423

the dragoons were let loose on them, and cut them CHAP.
down as they scattered among the sand hills. A as

The attack on the Gorey road was more determined, bak
and the fighting far more severe. Father Michael
Murphy and his brother priests here distinguished
themselves. Political lay conspirators in Ireland
have been magnificent on the platform, but have been
uniformly found wanting in the field. The courage
of their opinions was in the Catholic peasantry, and
their natural chiefs the clergy. The battery behind
the barricade completely swept the road. ‘Twice the
priests led on their followers, over the bodies of their
falling comrades, through musket-shot and round-
shot and grape, to the very mouths of the guns, the
priests coming so close that they shot the gunners at
their posts with their pistols. Twice they failed;
the second time with such desperate loss, that they
wavered and sought shelter among the walls. Father
Michael seized a standard with a blazoned cross upon
it and a motto of ‘ Liberty or death.’ Conspicuous on
horseback, he dashed out amidst the shot, and dragged
from his pocket a handful of balls which he swore
that he had caught as they reached him. ‘Come on,
boys,’ he cried, ‘the heretic bullets can never hurt
you. You are fighting for your God and Holy
Church.’

A third time they charged till they again touched
the barricade. With acontempt of death which was
really admirable, they seemed determined to take
the guns, though every other man might fall in doing
it, when a round-shot, against which Father Michael’s
spells could not avail, caught him and his horse and
hurled them into ruin. Sullenly and slowly the rebels

424 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK then drew back, leaving the ground covered with their
~—-— dead. Even yet they might have tried once more ;
eee but 1t grew dark, and night rather than defeat ended

an engagement more desperate than even the battle
of New Ross.

THE REBELLION.

SECTION VIII.

NerEpuAM reported that he had held his ground. He

425

CHAP.

could say no more; and he added that he expected to be ss

attacked again with thrice the number of assailants.1
At the same moment Camden learnt that the blow
which he most feared had fallen, and that the North
was in arms. The insurrection in Ulster was in fact
confined to the heated centres of philosophical repub-
licanism, where the united Irish spirit had been grafted
on the discontent generated by landlord evictions and
the long injustice to the Presbyterians. That it would
be limited to this area Camden could not possibly
foresee. In the eyes of the Established Church, Dis-
senters still remained the enemy which Ireland had
most cause to fear ; and the absurd prejudice which
might have gone far to realise the Churchmen’s
alarms, had the Catholics been more prudent in con-
cealing their real purpose, still powerfully influenced
the atmosphere of Dublin Castle. A meeting of ma-
gistrates was called at Antrim, on the 7th of June,
to devise measures for the security of the county.
The United Irish Committee saw an opportunity of
destroying the leading country gentlemen at a single
blow, and, under the impulse of Samuel Orr, the
brother of Orr who had been hanged, concluded that
Antrim should rise when the magistrates were in
session there.

The plot was formed, and was executed. Lord

1 ¢General Needham to General Lake, June 10.’ 8S. P. O.

1798.
June 10.

426 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sook O’Neil, who had made himself peculiarly hated by
—*_ the Jacobin zealots, was killed, and a squadron of

ri’ dragoons was nlmosieannihilated) .wBacaahe: ame
success ended. Another regiment which had been
sent for arrived opportunely, and the Antrim insur-
rection was quelled at its first appearance.

The example spread. On Thursday, the 10th, a
party of rebels attacked and carried Newtown Ardes.
Colonel Stapleton was driven out with severe loss, and
was obliged to take refuge in Belfast.1 The detached
companies which lay in exposed situations were called
in and concentrated. The utmost hope of General
Nugent, whom Lake had left in command, was to
confine the movement to the two counties of Antrim
and Down.

General Nugent was agreeably disappointed. The
massacre at Scullabogue was worth fifty regiments
for the pacification of Ulster. It was not for an Irish
nationality headed by the priests, for another 1641,
for a war of creeds and races in which the Catholics
of the South were to pike and shoot and burn till
every Protestant had been destroyed out of the land,
that the Presbyterians of the North had joined in a
conspiracy for Irish independence. Thousands who
had hung back and hesitated now joined the Orange
ranks. Thousands followed of those who had quafted
toasts to the heroes of the Bastille at the revolutionary
banquets of Belfast. Rebellion in Ulster drifted
away to its special home and nursery—the estate of
Lord Moira at Ballinahinch. Distrust spread among
the remaining adherents of the cause. Two thousand

1 ¢Colonel Stapleton’s loss has ‘General Nugent to General Lake,

been very severe. Many officers June 10.’ §S. P.O
and men killed and wounded.’—

THE REBELLION.

Catholics discovered the companionship of heretics

427

CHAP.

to be sacrilege, and deserted, and the remnant of the abuses,
17

once so dangerous Jacobin combination fought and
lost their last battle in Lord Moira’s park, on the
13th. Five hundred insurgents were killed, and the
Presbyterians of Ulster, whose wrongs at bottom
were more cruel than those of any other section of
the Irish nation, fell back into the place which befitted
the descendants of the defenders of Derry, the worst
rewarded but the most loyal to the connection be-

tween the two islands of all branches of the Irish _

community.

This happy consequence could not have been an-
ticipated when Lord Nugent reported the loss of
Newtown Ardes, and Lord Camden felt deeply in-
dignant at the want of support from England. The
Irish Protestant gentry were suspected of desiring
to exterminate the Catholics. Innocent before the

agitation for Emancipation commenced of the faintest

emotion of animosity against them, the Irish gentry
were being fast taught that in extermination lay
their only hope of preserving their own lives. On
them, so long as the Presbyterians held aloof, the
weight had fallen of encountering the rebellion.
They were called on to defend Ireland. ‘They were
doing their duty gallantly, and were abused and
maligned for doing it. Well-intending, but with a
profound ignorance of the nature of the Irish people,
Mr. Pitt and Dundas had excited hopes which they
were unable to realise. The Catholics had seen
their expected ascendency taken from them when it
was almost their own. In revenge they had con-
spired an insurrection which was following step for
step the pattern of 1641. The Irish gentry, after

June 13.

428 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book braving assassination for seven years, were now set

oa upon with the ferocious instincts of Phelim O’Neil

abe and Roger Moore. They forgot the share of their
own foolish Parliament in provoking the crisis.
They saw only that England was the immediate cause
of it, and that England was now leaving them to
defend themselves and their families from murder,
and to preserve Ireland to the British connection.

The war was in consequence becoming savage.
When asmall minority are contending with the over-
whelming numbers of an enemy which is aiming at
their annihilation, war is always savage. A hundred
men fighting against a thousand cannot afford to make
prisoners. Those who find no quarter give no quarter.
The Irish Yeomanry were accused of confounding
the innocent with the guilty. When the innocent
will take no part against the guilty, when eyewit-
nesses will give no evidence against murderers, when
juries will not convict, when an entire population—to
the very groom and valet of the magistrate who is
marked for assassination—are in league either to assist
at his death or to conceal the actors in it, at such a
time it is impossible that the gradations of crime
should be accurately measured by men so harassed,
so excited, so cruelly judged, so unjustly dealt with,
and that severity should never be in excess.

After hearing of the loss of Newtown Ardes, Cam-
den felt that unless the state of Ireland was to become
a disgrace to the civilised world the Cabinet must be
compelled to exert themselves. He sent over his
private secretary, Mr. Elliott, to explain the cir-
cumstances of a situation which might resolve itself
any day into some appalling catastrophe. A letter of

THE REBELLION.

which Elliott was the bearer shows how honourably and
how profoundly Camden felt his own responsibilities:

‘Unless a fresh force is sent immediately you may be
assured the country will be lost, and will not be gained again
to his Majesty’s Crown except by a re-conquest. I cannot
conceive from what circumstances his Majesty’s Ministers
can have imagined that this rebellion can be easily crushed.
Mr. Elliott will communicate to you the religious frenzy
which agitates the rebels in Wexford: that they are headed
by their priests, that they halt every half-mile to pray, that
they are taught to consider that they are fighting for their
religion, that their enthusiasm is most alarming. He will
inform your Grace how viclently agitated Protestant feel-
ing is in Ireland at this moment, and with how rapid strides
the war is becoming one of the most cruel and bloody that
has ever disgraced or been imposed upon a country. He
will explain to your Grace how impolitic and unwise it
would be to refuse the offer of Protestants to enter into
Yeomanry and other corps, and yet how dangerous any
encouragement to the Orange spirit is while the army is
composed of Catholics, as the militia almost generally is.
Neither present and most imminent danger, nor further em-
barrassment, can be removed but by an immediate landing
of very large bodies of troops from England. Every portion
of the kingdom is infected with the poison of disaffection.
If the rebels, assisted by the French, possess themselves of
it, the immediate danger to England will be obvious. The
rebel force at Wexford is too strong to be attacked at pre-
sent. The North has risen. Dublin is in immediate danger
of insurrection, and the troops cannot be moved.’?

Equally interesting and equally instructive is a
letter from Lord Castlereagh to Mr. Wickham, written
on the following day. The Cabinet had not waited
for Elliott, and had roused themselves at last. The
mail, on the evening of the 11th, brought word that

a

1 ¢ Camden to Portland, June 11, Abridged.’ S. P. O.

——-~-—---—"*
1798.

June ll.

430

BOOK
X.
———, ——’

1798.

June 12.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the Guards were on their way, and that other regi-
ments were preparing to follow.

‘ The intelligence,’ Castlereagh said, ‘is most welcome.
It is of importance that the authority of England should
decide this contest, as well with a view to British influence
in Ireland as to make it unnecessary for the Government to
lend itself too much to a party in this country—a_ party
highly exasperated by the religious persecution to which the
Protestants in Wexford have been exposed. In that county
it is perfectly a religious frenzy. The priests lead the rebels
to battle. As they march they kneel and pray, and show
the most desperate resolution in their attacks. The enclosed
certificate is curious,’ as marking the complexion of the re-
bellion in that quarter. They put such Protestants as are re-
ported to be Orangemen to death, saving others on condition
of their embracing the Catholic faith. It is a Jacobinical con-
spiracy throughout the country, pursuing its objects with
Popish instruments, the heated bigotry of their sect being -
better suited to the purpose of the Republican leaders than the
cold reasoning disaffection of the Northern Presbyterians.
The number of the insurgents is immense—so great as to make
it prudent to assemble in very considerable force before an
attempt is made to penetrate that very difficult and en-
closed county. The conduct of the militia and Yeomanry
has exceeded our most sanguine expectations. A very few
of the Yeomanry have been corrupted, but in no instance
have the militia failed to show the most determined spirit.’ ?

1 ¢T recommend to your protec- thereof, who is no Orangeman.—
tion, for Christ’s sake, the bearer Lachen, June 1.
hereof, who has voluntarily em- ‘Raymonpd Rocug, P.P.’
braced the Roman Catholic reli- 2 “Castlereagh to Wickham, June
gion, and received the sacraments 12. Abridged’ S. P.O.

THE REBELLION.

SECTION IX.

Some days had yet to elapse before the troops could
arrive, and the Protestants of Wexford were mean-
while at the mercy of the insurgents. The reverse
at New Ross put an end to the good humour which
at first had prevailed in the city. Scenes of blood
now became frequent. Each day bands of rebels
paraded the streets with drums and bagpipes, re-
covering heretics to the faith, and piking and shooting
those who refused to be converted ; Protestant pri-
soners being told off to be the executioners of their
fellows, as a preparation for their own deaths. The
desire to convert was perfectly sincere—no less deter-
mined the resolution to punish the obstinate unbe-
lievers. The Catholic clergy in the town did not
encourage ferocity ; the Catholic bishop, so far as
was consistent with his own security, opposed the
bloody method of working conviction. One priest,
in a scene to be presently described, succeeded in
preventing murder by risking boldly his own life.
What one could do others might have done, had they
been equally brave, and the reproach cast upon their
order by the doings of Father John and his com-
panions might have been redeemed or washed away.
It was, perhaps, too much to expect. The bishops
and clergy of the Catholic Church would have been
more than mortal had they not desired the success of
a rebellion which would have restored Ireland to the
faith, and they did not care to come to an open

431

CHAP.
1

——
1798.

June 12,

432 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND. ©

BOOK rupture with men whose fault was but excess of

—*_ zeal. When the penitents were brought to their

then chapels they received them with enthusiasm, ex-

hibited them to their congregations in triumph, and

exulted from their pulpits over the victory of truth.

The 3rd of June was Trinity Sunday. Father Roche,

the bishop’s chaplain, preached on the enormity of

heresy. On the 10th the same reverend gentleman

dilated on the penal laws. He condemned the murder

of their oppressors, but he exhorted his hearers to be

bold in the field of battle, as became the soldiers of

Christ. The rebels took such part of his advice as

pleased them, and forgot the rest. Keogh, whom they

had made governor, was powerless. He was a Protes-

tant, and himself in hourly danger. The hero of the

hour in Wexford was Dixon, the shipowner, who had

brought back the escaping heretics. Another pri-

soner had been since captured of unexpected conse-

quence. Lord Kingsborough, Earl of Kingston after-

wards, was colonel of the North Cork Militia. He

was in Dublin when the insurrection broke out, and

he hurried off to join his regiment. Finding when

he arrived at Arklow that he could not approach

Wexford by land, he took a boat, with two of his

officers, and went down the coast to enter from the

sea. The town had risen meanwhile. Lord Kings-

borough was taken at the mouth of the river, and

was detained for the present as a hostage should
fortune turn.

It was at Vinegar Hill that ‘ Irish ideas’ were to
be seen completely in the ascendant. There, although
converts were made, it was not always to save life in
this world. To be a Protestant was to be an
Orangeman. ‘T’o be an Orangeman was to be an

THE REBELLION.

433

enemy of Ireland. The day after the battle of New CHAP,
Ross a batch of prisoners was carried out from ~——~

Wexford Gaol to Vinegar Hill, and piked in front of
the windmill. Day by day other gangs of victims
were dragged out of their hiding-places in the neigh-
bourhood, carried before the permanent tribunal, and
by them handed over to the pikemen. From the
29th of May and onwards these bloody scenes con-
tinued without intermittence. Every day saw its al-
lotment of prisoners before the judges. Every day saw
its half-dozen or dozen of them delivered over to the
assassins who sprinkled with holy water executed the
sentence on the enemies of Ireland and the Church.
One poor wretch who was piked imperfectly, survived
to describe the scene. He was brought out with
thirteen others after half-an-hour’s confinement in the
windmill. He was asked in what religion he would
die. He said he would die a Protestant, as he was
born. ‘ You bloody Orange thief,’ said one of the
executioners, ‘ you are damned, and will go to hell
when we put the life out of you.’ He was stabbed
in the body and the neck, his clothes were torn from
him, and he lay in a pile of bleeding bodies till
consciousness returned, when he contrived to crawl
into a ditch, where he lay till dusk, and then escaped.’

Father John, while he remained on the hill, had
his intervals of compunction. After a scene of this
kind he called some of the prisoners not yet con-
demned before him to harangue them into penitence.
‘You sons of Belial,’ he said, cracking his fingers
at them, ‘ will you withstand our holy religion, which
existed eight hundred years before yours began?’

1 Musgrave, Appendix, xix.
VOL, III. FF
*

1798,

June.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘You see how our pikemen will treat you, unless
there is great reformation in you.’

‘This is the handiwork of God,’ said a Catholic of
Knniscorthy, attempting to console the wife of a
Protestant clergyman whose husband had been mur-
dered. ‘ There must be but one religion on the face
of the earth. Father John catches red-hot bullets in
his hand.’ A rebel named Beaghan, who was one of
the executioners on Vinegar Hill, and was executed a
year later, on the scene of his crimes, declared that
what he had done had been by order of his superiors.
He said that before the rebellion Catholics and
Protestants had lived peaceably together, and for
himself he had always found the Protestants better
masters and more indulgent landlords than those of
his own religion. But after the insurrection broke out
every Protestant was called an Orangeman, and every
one of them was to be killed, to the poorest man in the
country.’ Even when the people were put down he de-
clared that he never heard one of them express sorrow
for what they had done. If they were sorry at all, it
was because when the power was in their hands they
had not made cleaner work. ‘ Remember what I
tell you,’ he said, as his last word before he was
hanged. ‘If you Protestants are ever in the power
of the Catholics again, as they are now in yours, they
will not leave any of you alive. Even those who
campaigned with them, if things had gone well, would
in the end have been killed. I have heard them say
so many times.’ ”

Thus through the first weeks of June, the rebels

1 ‘Deposition of Richard Sterne.’ executed on Vinegar Hill, August
— Musgrave, Appendix, xix. 24, 1799.’ — Musgrave, Appendix,
2 ‘Confession of James Beaghan, xix, 8.

THE REBELLION.

after their manner were fighting the battle of Christ.

435

CHAP.

To have killed three Protestants was counted a pass- ide adhe

port into heaven. One day after an execution there
was a thunderstorm ; and a humorous spectator ob-
served that ‘ God was sounding his horn because an
Orangeman was killed.’ The victims were generally
men, but wives were allowed to support their husbands
at their death, and more than one poor woman went
mad at what she had witnessed.’

All things have their appointed times, and so had
the horrors of Vinegar Hill. For a hundred years
the English and Ivish Protestants had been affecting
to govern Ireland. They had not governed Ireland.
They had left it to ignorance and misery. The funds
which should have provided schools had been squan-
dered on royal mistresses and bastards. The Church
had been sacrificed to political corruption. The Cal-
vinist colonies of the South had dwindled and dis-
appeared for want of teachers. The Presbyterians
and Wesleyans, who would have supplied them with
ministers, had been frowned on by the gentry and

1 Women were sometimes killed
by their own sex. A Protestant,
named Joseph Dale, lived with his
wife in the town of Kildare. On
the rebellion breaking out there, on
the 24th of May, Patrick Dowling,
the insurgent leader, sent for Dale,
and told him that he and his
wife should die unless they went
with the people. Dale was fright-
ened, joined Dowling’s band, and
marched to Athy. As soon as he
was gone, Mary Dowling, Patrick’s
wife, gathered the women of the
place about her, and proposed ‘ to go
and kill Catherine Dale, the Orange
whore.’ Two of her daughters,
another woman, named Elizabeth

Byrne, James Byrne, Elizabeth’s
son, a lad of sixteen, and some other
boys, went off to Dale’s house.
They found the poor woman with
a Prayer-book in her hand. They
knocked her down with the han-~
dle of a churn. Elizabeth Byrne
dragged her out into the road.
The women collected pebbles in
their aprons, and the boys stoned
her to death. These women were
tried and convicted at the Spring
Assizes at Naas, 1801. Two of
the boys gave evidence ; and being
asked by the Judge why they had
joined in the murder, answered
quietly, ‘Because she was a Pro-
testant.’

FF2

1798.

June.

436

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

persecuted by the Bishops, and now the bill was pre-

—*_ sented for payment, and the debt had to be washed

1798.
June.

out in the blood of innocents. For three weeks the
murdering continued, and then deliverance came.
The Guards arrived in the middle of June, and Lake
found himself able to advance without risk of further
failure. A combined movement was again arranged.
Additional troops were sent to Dundas, at Naas ; to
Needham, at Arklow; to Johnstone, at New Ross; to
Loftus, at Carlow, to which he had retired. On the
16th of June Dundas was ordered to cross the Slaney
at Tullowand advance to Carnew, where on the 18th he
was to be joined by Loftus. On the 19th, at three
in the morning, Needham was directed to push for-
ward from Arklow to Gorey, when he would be on a
level with Dundas and Loftus. On the same 19th
the orders to Johnstone were to drive the rebels in
from Carrickbyrne, sending parties out north to see
that none of them doubled back between New Ross
and Carnew. ‘These officers would thus be moving
in from different points in a circle of which Vinegar
Hill was the centre. ‘To prevent an escape south
into Waterford, General Moore was directed at the
same time to advance from Duncannon, cross Water-
ford Harbour at Ballyhack Passage, and proceed
thence along the Wexford road as far as Foulk’s
Mill, at the back of Forth Mountain. Father John
had returned, after the defeat at Arklow, to Vinegar
Hill. The rebel force was between Carrickbyrne, Vine-
gar Hill, and Three Rocks. Moore would hold the
road to Waterford; Johnstone the road to Kilkenny ;
Loftus, Dundas, and Needham the roads into Carlow
and Wicklow. Wexford Harbour was blockaded,
and escape by sea was impossible. The five columns

THE REBELLION.

gradually converging, would force the rebels into a
mass, and thus it might be hoped extinguish them.

The orders were executed without mistake and
without resistance. Lake himself accompanied Dun-
das as Commander-in-Chief, the entire force at his
disposition amounting to 13,000 men. On the 20th
the circle was to be contracted further. Dundas
and Lake were to descend on both sides of the Slaney
to a point three miles above Enniscorthy, Loftus to
make for the same point from Carnew. Needham
was to advance to Oulart, Johnstone to Ballymackerey,
half-way between Enniscorthy and Carrickbyrne, and
Moore to Taghmon. Vinegar Hill could then be
attacked on three sides at daybreak on the 21st. The
Wexford road only would be left open for the rebels’
retreat, and at Wexford they would be surrounded,
and must surrender at discretion.

The insurgent chiefs had misinterpreted the in-
action of the Government. The failure of the first
attempt to penetrate the county had _ persuaded
them that at home they were irresistible, and they
were almost surrounded before they were aware of
their danger. Johnstone’s advance on Carrickbyrne
first opened their eyes. ‘The last hope for them was
to stop Moore, sweep round from Three Rocks in
Johnstone’s rear, and seize New Ross in his absence.
On the 19th of June, when Johnstone’s column was
seen approaching Carrickbyrne, Father Roche mounted
his horse and rode at full speed to Wexford. He called
on every man who could handle a pike to follow hin,
and with the force at Three Rocks marched through
the night to look for Moore. He fell in with him
on the afternoon of the 20th, as he was coming
out of Foulk’s Mill. father Roche’s men fought

437 —

CHAP.
ab Sl A,
1798.
June 20.

' 438

BOOK
X.

———$———”
1798.

June 20,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

gallantly, and with real discipline and skill. They dis-
played in excess the same singular religious passion
which had throughout distinguished the movement.
They knelt so often in the action to pray, that even
the priests at last swore at them and used their horse-
whips. It was not cowardice, however, but the pro-
found superstition which is the master-spirit of the
Irish peasant’s heart, and is the source alike of his
crimes and his virtues. The rebels behaved none the
worse for their prayers, nor for the prayers of the
thousands of old men and women who on their knees
along the roads and in the village streets were en-
treating the Virgin Mary to help them. At one
time they had almost gained the day. They gave
way only at eight in the evening, when their powder
failed them. ‘They had then inflicted more loss than
they had sustained, and they fell back to Three Rocks
in good order. Moore had fought the battle with but
a part of his force. The remaining division coming up
after the action, he pushed on at once to Taghmon,
where he learnt news which led him to press forward
to Wexford without waiting for further instructions.
It would have been well for the Catholic cause had
Father Roche succeeded in carrying the town rabble
with him, as he had intended. A few only obeyed the
call. Dixon and the crew of scoundrels who followed
him hung back and kept out of sight. They had other
work in view. ‘The news that the army was advanc-
ing had made them savage, like wolves at bay. On the
same 20th of June, when Lake was coming down the
Slaney, and Roche was engaged with Moore at Foulk’s
Mill, a column of pikemen crossed Wexford Bridge
into the town, carrying a black banner, with a red
cross upon it, which they planted on the Custom-

THE REBELLION.

House Quay. Drink was there served out to them, and
the cry was then ‘ To the gaol!’ where three hundred
Protestant prisoners had been lying for three weeks.
A court of justice was extemporised in a public bil-
liard-room, where Dixon, the shipowner, presided.
The prisoners were brought one by one before him.
Only a single question was asked—Could it be shown
that any one act, which in the estimation of the court
could be called good, had been done by the person
at the bar? If no witness came forward the sentence
was immediate death. The prisoner was passed over
to the rebels outside, and surrounded by a yelling mob,
in which there were more women than men, he was
led out upon the bridge. There, stripped naked, he
was placed on his knees in the middle of the road.
Two pikemen stood in front of him and two behind.
They knelt, said a prayer, then levelling their pikes,

rose and ran upon him, held him aloft for a moment.

writhing on their points, and pitched him over the
parapet into the stream. In this way through that
midsummer-day ninety-seven men, whose crime was
to be of the Protestant religion—country gentlemen,
magistrates, tradesmen, merchants, clergymen—were
ceremoniously and deliberately murdered. During
the afternoon Dixon, weary of his functions in the
billiard-room, left the judicial work to others, and
sate on horseback with his wife watching the execu-
tions. ‘The day wore on. At seven in the evening
a fresh batch of victims had been brought out,
and were in position waiting their turn for death,
when Father Corrin, a Catholic priest, but none
the less a noble-minded man, threw himself in the
way of the murderers, denounced their infernal work,
and insisted that it.should end. Throughout the

439

CHAP.
eldip lane
1798.
June 20,

440

iy

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

day the Catholic clergy had been invisible. Dr.

—*_ Caulfield, the Bishop, declared afterwards that he

1798

June 20.

was ignorant of what was going forward till it was
over. Ifthe Bishop was ignorant, other priests must
have been too well informed ; yet none of them
interfered but Father Corrin, and he, perhaps, would
have failed and been thrust aside. But at that in-
stant an express came in to say that the battle was
going ill at Foulk’s Mill, that Vinegar Hill was beset,
and that every man who was able to fight was needed
in the field. Panic-struck, the mob scattered to their
dens, as if they already saw the bayonets of the
avengers. ‘lhe prisoners on the bridge, who had taken

leave of life, remained on their knees, unconscious of

what was passing round them. The guard by-and-
bye returned and carried them back to gaol, telling
them that they were respited for the night ; the
next day neither man, woman, nor child among the
Protestants should be spared.

As night fell the town began to fill with fugitives
from Foulk’s Mill, who brought word that Moore was
behind them. Just a hundred and fifty years before
Wexford had witnessed a too similar scene. Then,
as now, a hulk in the river had been converted intoa
prison for heretics. The hulk had been scuttled
without the ceremony of a trial, and all its inmates
had perished. In recompense for that deed Crom-
well had stormed over the walls of the guilty city,
and every rebel found in arms had been put to the
sword. General Moore, when he heard of that day’s
work on the bridge, might prove a second Oliver.
Not an instant was to be lost. Lord Kingsborough

1 Narrative of one of the prisoners, named Jackson, quoted by
Musgrave, vol, i. p. 24.

THE REBELLION.

was taken from the room where he had been con-
fined and made governor of the town. The bloody
wretches gathered at his feet and implored him to
save them from the doom which they had provoked.
Two emissaries were sent at daybreak to Needham,
at Oulart, with‘a promise of surrender, if their lives
and properties might be secured; and the leaders in
the town undertook to use their influence to persuade
the rebels in the country to submit. Lord Kingsbo-
rough added a letter, which he could not. refuse to
write, though he must have known that it could
‘not be listened to, expressing a hope that, for the
sake of the surviving prisoners, who were very nu-
merous ‘and of the first respectability,’ the offer
of the townsmen might be accepted.

44]

CHAP.
iy

———
1798.

June 20.

442

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION X.

So passed the night of the 20th of June in Wexford.

—*— General Lake, meanwhile, had completed his last

1798.
June 21.

dispositions, and Vinegar Hill was to be stormed at
daybreak. It was creditable to the skill and spirit
of the Irish that preparations so elaborate had been
found necessary. The rebels of ’98 were at least
in earnest. They did not, like their degenerate mo-
dern representatives, dissolve like a mist at the touch
of the policeman’s staff. The different divisions
arrived duly at their allotted stations. Dundas and
Loftus lay that evening at Solsborough, on the
Slaney, two miles above Enniscorthy. Needham
had reached Oulart Hill. Johnstone was on Ballyma-
kessy Bridge. At dawn they severally advanced; and
if the professed design had been carried out, Need-
ham would have occupied the road to Wexford, and
the net would have been closed on every side. From
an unexplained cause the orders of the day in this
one direction were not carried out, and one opening,
called afterwards Needham’s Gap, was left. It was
whispered afterwards that the mistake was intentional,
lest too terrible a vengeance might fall on the wretched
beings who had been guilty of crimes so atrocious. If
this was the reason, it was misplaced leniency. Nothing
but some decisive and overwhelming evidence of the
consequences of a rebellion carried out in the spirit
which had been shown in Wexford would ever con-
vince the Irish of the hopelessness of measuring

THE REBELLION.

443

strength with England, or prevent a repetition of wee

the same folly when opportunity seemed again to

———_——’
798

offer itself. Never had the villanous elements of Juno 21.

the Irish population gathered themselves into form
with more deliberation, or could have been taken
at a time when the nature of their crimes would
have made acknowledgment of sympathy with them
impossible. Justice would, in the long run, have
been found equivalent to mercy, and a stern ex-
ample made them on Vinegar Hill might have spared
Ireland the scenes of barbarity which for two years
continued to disgrace her population, and might have
extinguished possibly for centuries or for ever the in-
fatuated dreams of an impossible independence which
still work like poison in her veins. Subordinate
officers, however, cannot be expected to discharge
duties as painful as they are serious and stern when
they are uncertain of support from authority. Gene-
ral Lake was well aware of the irresolution of the
Cabinet, and, with the natural humanity of a brave
man, he was perhaps glad to be spared the necessity
of adding fresh horrors to a war already savage
beyond modern experience.

At sunrise on the 21st the columns closed in upon

the Irish camp. Dundas’s and Loftus’s divisions —

came down the east bank of the Slaney, spread over
a front of almost a mile, and as they approached the
hill formed round it at various points from the north
to the south-east. Johnstone came up simultane-
ously from Ballymakessy. The rebels held Ennis-
corthy in force, and Johnstone’s duty was to drive
them out and take possession of the bridge before the
general attack commenced. A second time within
three weeks the little town of Enniscorthy became the

A44

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

scene of a desperate and bloody engagement. Only

@ » pe ata
——— after two hours of severe fighting, Enniscorthy was

1798.
June 21.

taken, the bridge secured, and the rebel garrison
forced back over it to their friends on the hill. It
was now seven in the morning. The rebel army,

_ sixteen thousand strong, was drawn up on the open

ground on the brow. ‘Their guns, thirteen in all, of
various sorts and calibre, were at the windmill. Ge-
neral Lake, with Dundas, attacked on the east side;
Sir James Duff, with part of Loftus’s division, on the
north-west, from the bank of the river; Loftus himself
was between them. On these three sides they forced
their way simultaneously up the slope. The rebels
held their ground for an hour and a half with moderate
firmness. Lake’s horse was killed under him early in
the action. Father Clinch, of Enniscorthy, an enor-
mous man, on a tall white horse, specially distinguished
himself. But successive defeats had cooled the cou-
rage which had been so eminent at Arklow and New
Ross. There was no longer the contempt of death
which will make even the least disciplined enemy
formidable. Lord Roden singled out Father Clinch
and killed him. The rebels were afraid of being sur-
rounded; and seeing the southern side of the hill still
open, they fled down it, and escaped through Need-
ham’s gap to Wexford, from the scene of their brief
and wild supremacy.

The army rested for the day on the ground,
burying the dead and examining, with ever-gather-
ing indignation, the traces of the butcheries which
had been perpetrated there. The rebels, with
their surviving generals, Father John, once invin-
cible, now twice beaten, and savage in his despair,

John Hay, Edward Fitzgerald, and Father Kerne,

THE REBELLION.

streamed away down the east side of the Slaney.

445

CHAP.

I.
Some crossed the river at Carrick Ferry, three miles —~—~

1798.

above Wexford; some went on to the bridge, and jun¢ 93.

rushed mad and furious into the town, threatening
vengeance on every Protestant still in their hands.
It would have gone hard with the prisoners there;
but on the other side General Moore was coming on
from Taghmon. ‘Two hours at most would bring
him to the gates. Bishop Caulfield and his priests
were energetic enough now to prevent a renewal of
the murders. If Moore came up when such work was
going forward, the town might pay for it as it paid
before. They turned out into the streets, exhorting,
praying, threatening, imploring the armed insurgents
to leave the town while there was time, and to give
no fresh provocation to the soldiers. The cause, they
said, was plainly lost for the present. Lord Kings-
borough had promised that life and property should
be respected, if no more blood was shed. For the
sake of Ireland, for the sake of their holy religion,
for the sake of all they held dear in earth or heaven,
they besought the rebels to spare the city the risk of
being stormed and sacked by the bloody Orangemen.

Their prayers prevailed, and in prevailing left them
with the less excuse for their apathy on the preceding
day. ‘Towards sunset part of the rebels filed back
over the bridge out of the town. Dixon and his
wife, on horseback, threw themselves in their way,
praying them to stay at least till they had despatched
the remaining prisoners. ‘They were borne away in
the crowd, the woman screaming, ‘ We shall conquer
yet: my Saviour tells me we must conquer.’ These
wretches went north to Gorey, where they committed
a frightful massacre on the unfortunate Protestant

446 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book inhabitants who, imagining themselves safe in the rear
Sc. opie army, had returned to their homes. Thence,
See breaking into smaller parties, they made for the

Wicklow mountains. The rest, the remainder mainly
of the army which had fought at Vinegar Hill, rally-
ing under the indefatigable Father John, slipped
away behind General Moore, who had halted two
miles from the town, and made their way over the
Barrow into Kilkenny, carrying havoc and destruc-
tion along with them. Moore, in the twilight, entered
Wexford after they had all left it. The scene was
described ‘as most affecting.’ ‘The windows were
crowded with women who had been expecting mas-
sacre. The prisoners in the gaol heard, in the noise
of the approaching troops, the summons as they sup-
posed to death upon the bridge. When the door
was thrown open they saw the King’s uniform, and
knew that they were saved.

At three o’clock the following morning (June
22nd) the trumpet sounded in Lake’s camp on
Vinegar Hill. Before the army began its march for
Wexford, Edward Hay’ and Captain Macmanus,
the bearers of the proposals of the townsmen to
submit on conditions, were brought into Lake’s pre-
sence. ‘They had failed to find Needham, to whom
they were commissioned. ‘They had gone on to
Enniscorthy, and were carried before the Com-
mander-in-Chief. It was not then known that Moore
was in the town. They delivered their message.
Lake replied briefly that he would make no terms
with rebels in arms against their Sovereign. He
required instant and unconditional surrender. If

1 The historian of the Rebellion.

THE REBELLION.

they hesitated, he said he would use the force en-
trusted to him with the utmost energy for their de-
struction; and the utmost which he held out in the
way of hope was, that he would spare the ignorant
masses if they would give up their leaders and their
weapons and return to their allegiance.

Mr. Hay, unconscious of a difference between
honourable enemies and murdering rebels, and consi-
dering that both were equally entitled to the courtesies
of war, pleaded the promise of Lord Kingsborough.
Kingsborough, if he had given a promise, had ex-
ceeded his powers, and Lake refused to be bound by
it. He marched at once to Wexford, entered it, re-
established authority, and proceeded to the hard but
necessary duty of searching for and punishing those on
whom rested the chief responsibility for the crimes of
the past month. Father Roche, who had commanded
at Foulk’s Mill, had remained in the town, on the
faith, it is pretended, of the conditions of surrender.
Father Roche could not have been ignorant that a
person in the position of Lord Kingsborough could
grant no conditions. Had Lord Kingsborough pos-
sessed sufficient authority, there would have been no
occasion to send a deputation to General Lake.
Father Roche was taken, tried by court-martial, and
hanged at the scene of the massacre on the bridge.
John Hay, Father John’s brother general on Vinegar
Hill, was hanged beside him. Special care was taken
to make no distinctions on the score of religion. The
Protestants concerned in the rebellion, though guilt-
less of a share in the murders, were more criminal
in principle. Cornelius Grogan had an estate worth
ten thousand pounds a year. He had misjudged
events, and had joined the insurgents to save it. He

447

CHAP.
Ls
a
L798,
June 22,

448

BOOK
aie

ee?
1798.

June,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

was found at his own house, brought in, tried by the
same tribunal, and hanged ase

Bagenal Harvéd and Colclough had disairesoiel
They’ had gone off in a boat to the larger of the Saltee
Islands,! Grogan’s property, which Coldlotehi rented
of him, and they hoped to lie concealed there till the
storm was over. Some one betrayed their secret; and
on the 23rd of June Captain Willoughby was sent in
the ‘ Rutland’ cutter to find them and bring them
back. ‘There was but one house in the island, and
there were unmistakable signs of their recent pre-
sence, in the sheets upon the bed and the clothes
which were lying about the room. The cabin was
searched; the island was searched. ‘They were not
to be found. A boat had been seen. stealing away
when the cutter was approaching, and it was showeli
that they had escaped. As a last chance the cutter’s
cig was rowed round the island under the cliffs. One
of the crew, watching narrowly, observed a place
where the earth seemed to have been recently dis-
turbed. They landed and discovered a cave, where
the two gentlemen, with Colclough’s wife, were lying
concealed. They were carried back to Wexford,
and sentenced to immediate death. Bagenal Harvey,
Cornelius Grogan, and a wealthy citizen of Wexford,
named Prendergast, were hanged on the 27th. Col-
clough suffered the same fate on the following day.

On the 27th General Lake put out a proclamation
that, to prevent further bloodshed, every man who
had been a leader in the insurrection and would give
up his arms should receive a free pardon. If the
offer was not accepted, and the late outrages were

1 Small islands off the coast, half-way between Wexford and
Waterford Harbours.

THE REBELLION.

renewed or continued, every village, cottage, and

449

CHAP,

farm-house found unoccupied would be destroyed, SSD

and every man found with arms in his hands would
be put to the sword. The next day he returned to
Dublin, where his presence was immediately required,
leaving General Hunter to investigate the massacre on
the bridge, and to punish as they deserved the chief
actors in so horrible a crime.

The insurgents who escaped with Father John
over the Barrow, after ravaging part of Kilkenny,
and finding the peasants, contrary to their expectation,
disinclined to join them, doubled back into Wexford,
and thence into the Wicklow mountains, where,
divided into roving gangs of murderous  banditti,
they protracted through the summer the bloody and
miserable struggle. Father John, either separated
from his companions by accident, or having designedly
withdrawn from them, found his way in disguise to
Taghmon, where he was recognised and arrested.
When seized he struggled like a wild beast, but
vengeance had overtaken him. After forty-five years
of hitherto inoffensive life, he had become possessed
with the ‘ Irish idea ;’ and after one desperate month of
murder, triumph, defeat, and ruin, he closed his career
on the gallows on the 26th of June.

VOL. Lit. G&G

1798.
June 26.

450

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER II.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.
SECTION 1.

Tue delay in sending reinforcements to Ireland was

_*_ due, as has been already said, to other causes than

1798.

the carelessness of the Cabinet. The persevering
disloyalty of the Liberal party in both Houses of the
English Legislature had created a condition of public
feeling which could be affected only by the publica-
tion of secrets which Pitt was forbidden to reveal.
Defeated in the Irish Parliament, Mr. Grattan, the
Duke of Leinster, and the Ponsonbies had transferred
their agitation to Great Britain, where they found
ardent allies in the new school of politicians, who
believed that the overthrow of authority was the con-
dition of human improvement. After the reproof
which he had received from Clare, Lord Moira re-
turned to Westminster, where ignorance of Ireland
procured him a more sympathising audience. In
March 1797 he introduced a motion for the recall of
Lord Camden, and the replacement of Fitzwilliam in
the Viceroyalty. Could a glass have been held up
to Moira which would have reflected his true image,
he would have seen that he and Lord Fitzwilliam
and their brother-absentees were the persons chiefly
responsible for the condition to which Ireland was

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

reduced. There was an ironical appropriateness in
non-resident Irish proprietors putting themselves for-
ward as the advocates of political concessions which
were but spurious substitutes for measures of genuine
reform. Moira insisted that Fitzwilliam must return
to the Castle. Fitzwilliam himself declared that had
he been allowed to carry out his policy, the Irish would
have returned to their allegiance. The great English
Whigs echoed the idle cry. ‘Give back to the Irish,’
said the Duke of Bedford, ‘the man whom they ad-
mire. Act on the principles on which he acted, and
discontent will cease.’ ‘Let the people have their
rights,’ said Lord Lansdowne, ‘and they will require
neither fleets nor armies to protect them.’ ‘The more
Ireland is under Irish government,’ said Fox, for-
getting his own experience in ’82, ‘ the more she will

be bound to English interest.’ The Cabinet, tied to

secrecy, could give but feeble answers. The Opposi-
tion had the best of the debate, and their printed
speeches were circulated throughout the two islands,
addressing themselves in England to a generous people,

ready to believe in freedom and to suspect authority

which was compelled to be severe ; persuading the
Irish conspirators that their treason was undiscovered,

that they had no thing to fear from English inter-

ference, and that they would be left alone, as Dundas
had threatened Westmoreland, to settle accounts with
the Castle by themselves.

In the absence of evidence to the contrary, Eng-
land continued to believe Lord Moira’s rhetoric, and
to regard Camden, Clare, and Carhampton as a trium-
virate of tyrants. ‘The papers contained their daily
anecdotes of picketing and flogging, one instance,
by trifling alterations, expanding itself into many.

qra.g

452

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK The goodwill of the English nation towards the
— ~~~ Irish was only equalled by its ignorance of them.

1798.

June.

After the arrest of the Revolutionary Committee at
Oliver Bond’s house, on the 12th of March, 1798,
the Duke of Bedford again moved for an address to
the King to change his Irish Ministers. He told the
Lords that if he was to dwell in detail on the con-
duct of the Irish Administration, the picture would
appal the stoutest heart. Lord Holland demanded
especially the dismissal of the Viceroy and the Chan-
cellor. The speeches of both these eminent men con-
tained indignant denials either that any treasonable
conspiracy existed in Ireland or any desire for sepa-
ration from Great Britain, and were interspersed with
appropriate commendations of Arthur O’Connor, the
advocate of political assassination.

Lord Grenville defended the Government as far as
he was able. The lives of magistrates must be de-
fended, he said, and the laws must be maintained.
Lord Downshire, fresh from Ulster and his own
estates, reproached the Liberals for their heedless en-
couragement of a spirit which they did not under-
stand. Their ‘conciliation,’ he told them, might con-
vert Ireland into a province of France, but would
never save it to Great Britain. In excited times
those orators alone gain the public ear who appeal
to sentiment. The motion for dismissal was lost, but
a protest was entered in the Journals of the House of
Lords, bearing the weighty names of the Duke of
Bedford, the Duke of Norfolk, and Lord Holland;
and popular clamour, well-intending but utterly un-
informed, continued to grow.

The unfavourable opinion was confirmed by the ac-
quittal of Arthur O’Connor at Maidstone. The failure

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

of the Government was accepted as a proof that they
had no evidence which they could produce, and there-
fore that the conspiracy was a dream. O’Connor’s
second arrest on another charge was indignantly de-
nounced. Lord Holland called it inhuman and
atrocious. Tierney and Sheridan commented with all
their eloquence on the breakdown of the prosecution,
and the Cabinet was unable to clear itself. Finally,
when Lord Edward Fitzgerald was shot and the re-
bellion burnt out, and the horrid work of murder
and incendiarism had begun, the eloquence of the
Opposition rose to the greatness of the occasion.
They found in Ireland a second America, and they
called on England to support them in refusing to the
Government the means of continuing their oppression.
The Irish, they said, were not in arms against Great
Britain, but against the insupportable tyranny of a
detested faction. If, instead of sending armies to
crush them, they had redressed the complaints of the
American colonists, the American colonies would
have remained attached to the empire. As America
had been in 1776, so Ireland was in 1798—lost, if
the war was persevered in; recovered to a more
sure allegiance, if the claim to self-government was
acknowledged.

The Whigs had been proved right about America.
The English people concluded that they might be
right about Ireland. Public opinion went with them,
and the Parliamentary orators redoubled their ex-
ertions.

On the 14th of June, when Lord Camden was
writing that without instant reinforcements all Ire-
land would be in a flame, Sheridan interposed
with a motion for a Committee of Enquiry, and

1798.

June.

454

BOOK
X,

——’"
1798.

June.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

out of two hundred members found forty-three to
support him. Defeated, he moved once more for an
address to the King to dismiss Camden and his Irish
advisers, whom he charged with having produced
the insurrection. This motion was negatived also,
but the speech was published, and did its work; and
the next day the Duke of Leinster renewed the accu-
sation in the House of Lords. Lord Edward was just
known to be dead. The Duke’s appearance in deep
mourning gave sensational credibility to his invec-
tives. He too denied that any disloyal spirit ex-
isted in Ireland beyond the brain of the Viceroy and

Council, who were driving the people to madness.
The outside world not unnaturally believed him.

The Duke of Norfolk followed with a demand for
the removal from office ‘of those persons to whom
the afflicted people of Ireland could feel no senti-
ments save those of anger and revenge.’ An unfa-
vourable division was again followed by a protest to
which were attached the names of six peers—the

Dukes of Devonshire, Leinster, and Norfolk, Lords
Moira, Fitzwilliam, and Ponsonby—five of them Irish
absentees, who were discharging thus their duties to
the poor country which supported their idle magni-
ficence.

_ Three days later, when Dundas applied to Parlia-
ment for permission to send over English militia regi-
ments which had volunteered for the Irish war, these
same wise noblemen and gentlemen renewed an oppo-
sition as cruel as it was absurd. If their object was
to repress the cruelties of the Irish loyalists, it could
only be obtained by the presence of English regi-
ments. If they wished the rebels to succeed, they
were making themselves parties to high treason.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

Yet Lord William Russell was not ashamed to say
that English troops should not be sent to subjugate
a neighbouring people to a Government which nine-
tenths of them abhorred. Sheridan said ‘the Irish
had been duped, insulted, fooled, disappointed in
their dearest hopes. No wonder they were discon-
tented, no wonder they were indignant.’ ‘ If,’ said
Tierney, ‘I could be convinced that the Irish leaders
had invited the French into the island, I would con-
sent to send troops to resist them, but I deny that
they have invited the French. Lord Fitzwilliam
says it is untrue, and | believe Lord Fitzwilliam
more than I believe the Government. The Irish
people are in arms—no doubt of it. After having
been scourged, burnt, and massacred, they are not
likely to be in love with their rulers. But I for one
will not agree to place the militia of England at the
disposition of a desperate Irish faction. The cure for
Trish rebellion is to gain the affections of the people.
I will vote neither a man nor a guinea till the cause
of the rebellion is known.’

Wilberforce came to the help of the Cabinet. To
refuse troops, he said justly, would but increase the
misery of the people. The force at present in Ire-
land might subdue the rebellion at last, but only after
a bloody and furious struggle. Humanity as well as
policy required that the insurgents should perceive
the hopelessness of prolonged resistance in arms. The
rebellion was not created by Lord Camden’s Adminis-
tration, it was the consequence of long-standing and
varied misconduct and neglect. ‘ I cannot help,’ he
said, with a bitter glance at the motives of the
Liberal faction, ‘ protesting against the kind of sen-
sibility I see in some gentlemen, who seem not to

456

BOOK
el,
1798.

June.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

begin to feel for he wretched condition of the lower
Irish until it becomes for party purposes a convenient
subject of lamentation in this House.’

Wilberforce could not be suspected of sympathy
with tyranny or indifference to human suffering.
Leave was given for the militia to go, and regi-
ment after regiment was poured across the Chan-
nel as fast as they could be moved to the coast. But
the Opposition speeches had their effect notwith-
standing. The public did not choose to obstruct the
Government in measures necessary to restore peace,
but they shared the suspicions which the inexplicable
reserve of the Ministers could not fail to generate; and
in sending the troops the Cabinet felt compelled to
show a certain deference to the general misgiving,
and to place a nobleman at the head of the Irish Ad-
ministration in whose rectitude the nation had confi-
dence. To recall Camden was to admit, at least in
appearance, that the charges against his Administration
were just, and the Cabinet knew well that he acted
throughout with their fullest approbation; but the
outcry was too strong to be resisted. Camden’s
position had long been intolerable to him, and only
the highest principle had induced him to endure so
long the ungrateful and dangerous burden. An
excuse was found to cover the change in the pro-
bability of a French invasion, and in the desira-
bleness at such a crisis of the presence of a soldier
at the Castle. In justice to a nobleman who had
carried himself in his high position with signal up-
rightness, Mr. Pitt ought to have assumed the re-
sponsibility for the parts of Lord Camden’s conduct
which the public condemned, but which Pitt knew to
have been necessary. Portland ought to have con-

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION. 457

fessed that he had recommended the acceptance of cuHap.
the services of the Orangemen, and that Camden had —~~—
refused on grounds supremely honourable to him. vba
But Cabinet Ministers dependent on Parliamentary
majorities are rarely capable of acts of heroic virtue.
Enough that Camden was removed, that Cornwallis
re-considered his refusal of the past year and con-

sented to be named as his successor.

458

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

Book THE nomination of Lord Cornwallis to the Vice-
ae royalty of Ireland was generally approved in Eng-

1798.

land, as well on account of his reputation as a soldier
and a statesman, as because he was known to have
disapproved the coercive policy of Lord Camden’s
Government. He was a nobleman of stainless honour,
excellent intention, and commonplace intelligence.
He had shared the popular impression that Ireland
ought to be conciliated by Catholic Emancipation and
Reform. The secret information which the Cabinet
laid before him on entering upon his office satisfied
him that it was vain to attempt to remodel the
existing Irish Legislature. If the Catholics were to
be emancipated he saw that the Irish Parliament must
come to an end. But Emancipation itself, he was
as much convinced as ever, would recall the Catholic
population to its allegiance; and he disapproved the
existing Constitution, not because it was incompatible
with a firm and honest Government, but because it
was the instrument and the representative of Pro-
testant ascendency.

Lord Cornwallis’s Irish despatches are characteristic
of the attitude which English common-sense assumes
instinctively towards the Irish problem. They betray
a total ignorance of Irish history —an ignorance
almost as complete of the country and of the temper
of its inhabitants; and at the same time a confidence
no less remarkable, which no experience of his mis-
takes appeared to affect, that the problem itself was

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

perfectly simple, and that the Irish statesmen, by whom

459

CHAP.

the Viceroy found himself surrounded, were blinded ——
17

by prejudice and passion.

The combination of unacquaintance with the facts
and unhesitating trust in his own judgment revealed
themselves in a series of errors, which, inasmuch as
Lord Cornwallis’s opinions affected so materially the
subsequent policy of England, it is worth while to
notice more particularly.

First, he misunderstood the nature of the rebellion.
He found on his arrival that it was generally spoken
of as Catholic. He called this account of it ‘ folly.’
He insisted that it was Jacolin. Cornwallis might
eall it Jacobin, but could not make it so. Jacobin
doctrines had been industriously sown among the
Irish Catholic peasantry, but the soil was unfavour-
able to their growth. The taint was confined to the
clubs at Dublin and Belfast, and had but a faint
existence among the rebel bands of Wexford and
Kildare. The rebellion was neither Jacobin nor Ca-
tholic; it was the revival of Irish nationality: and
because the religion of the Irish was connected so
closely with the national spirit, the rebellion, like
every other Irish rising since the Reformation, as-
sumed a Catholic aspect, and was regarded as a holy
war. The aspirations of the native race had been
quickened into life by the fantastic pretensions of the
Protestant colony to independence. The English
Cabinet had played with them in an ignorant dream
that they might form a check on the revolutionary
temper of the Northern reformers. They had been
led on from concession to concession till they had
believed, as in Tyrconnell’s time, that Ireland was to
be their own again—restored to them by the forms of

,]

460

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book the Constitution. Their hopes had been raised too high
—*_. to allow them to bear disappointment. ‘he political

1798.

June.

agitators of Belfast and Dublin, dangerous nowhere
but in the press or in debating committees—brave in
recommending assassinations, and leaving others to
execute them—had cowered down when they had to
yield or to fight. The native race had risen from the
sleep of a century, and furiously, savagely, and des-
perately were struggling to break their chains.

Not less Lord Cornwallis had mistaken the cha-
racter of the Protestant gentry. Their Parliament
had been absurd and corrupt. Their Volunteer move-
ment had been ridiculous, their attitude towards
England unwise and unbecoming; the conduct of
many of them, in private life and towards their de-
pendents, had been reckless and negligent. But they
were not, as Cornwallis supposed them, a sanguinary
oligarchy overtaken by a judgment on their crimes,
and bent on the extirpation of the miserable people
whom they were no longer able to oppress. Their
faults might be many, but they were due as much to
their position as to themselves. The kingdom of
Oude is of the same size as Ireland. Seventeen
years ago it rose in rebellion, and the entire popula-
tion was then as bitterly hostile to British rule as
Ireland in 1641 or 1798. Thirty Englishmen now
govern Oude with perfect ease, and administer its
affairs in perfect order. Their salaries are paid by the
Government. They have no interest in the country
beyond discharging their immediate duties to it. If,
after the rebellion in 1857, the estates of the Zemindars
had been confiscated ; if the soil had been made over
to English settlers, who had been left to govern as they
could out of their own resources, surrounded by a

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

461

swarming population who hated them as aliens and  cHap.
plunderers, they would have found their situation or.
1798.

even then more easy in many ways than that of the
English colony in Ireland. The descendants of the
Scotch and English settlers planted by Elizabeth, and
James, and Cromwell, were a garrison in a hostile
country. Had they been permitted to develope their
resources they might have thriven and grown strong:
but England for her own purposes condemned the
country to barrenness, and its inhabitants to misery
and want. She rejected them when they petitioned
to be incorporated in the Empire. She extinguished
their manufactures and their shipping, and discou-
raged them long even from cultivating their estates,
lest the value of her own lands should suffer from the
rivalry. The settlers were essentially an army of
occupation, of which the gentry were the officers ; yet
half of them were allowed unlimited leave of absence,
deserting their special charge, and handing over the
people committed to them to be plundered and
vround to wretchedness. If those who remained be-
came negligent and careless, England had set them
the example and had pointed out the road. If they
were politically corrupt, England had begun with
prostituting their patronage and misappropriating
their revenues. If they were discontented and muti-
nous, never in the history of the world had any subjects
more just ground for complaint. Cornwallis knew
nothing of their history. He knew but little of what
they actually were. On the roll of the Irish Parlia-
ment are long lists of honourable men, untainted by
-corrupt transactions with the officials at the Castle,
landowners who remained on their estates, and
fought to the best of their ability their ever-losing
battle against vice and misery. ‘To them and their

June.

462

BOOK
Gs
Ce

1798

June.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

exertions Ireland owed all that she possessed in the
form of order and decency. They had given her a
language and laws at least better than her own ; and
even the yoke of the worst of them was lighter on the
peasantry than the little finger of their own chiefs.
Where the peasantry suffered most, it was under the
middlemen and agents of the absentees—under men
who were for the most part of their own blood, and
those chiefs’ lineal representatives. England, not the
gentry, was most to blame for the condition of Irish
society. The clamours of the colony for self-govern-
ment, their rant of patriotism, the applauding shouts
with which they greeted their Grattans and their
Floods become intelligible, and almost pardonable,
when studied by the light of England’s accursed legis-
lation and yet more unpardonable policy. It would
have been better and happier by far had England
never confiscated the lands of the Irish, had she
governed Ireland as she governs India, and never at-
tempted to force upon her a landed gentry of alien
blood. Having chosen the second alternative, having
given the land and the Constitution into the hands
of men of her own race and creed, principle as well
as prudence should have taught her to remember
their difficulties, and to encourage them in introduc-
ing habits of order and industry, which would have
reconciled the people through prosperity to the im-
posed presence of the stranger among them. The
wisdom of England had been to weaken her gar-
rison instead of strengthening it, to make it useless
for purposes of government, to saturate it with the
elements of disorder, and when it broke into discon-
tent and complaint to hold it in check by elevating
and arming as a counterpoise the wronged and resent-
ful race whom it was planted in the island to keep in

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

463

awe. Ingenuity could not have invented a line of cnap.

action more certain to precipitate rebellion. When
the Protestants at the last moment felt the knife at
their throats, when they found themselves threatened
with a second 1641, when they found England, which
had provoked the insurrection, turn round and charge
it upon themselves, and refuse to help them, Corn-
wallis should neither have been shocked nor surprised
when desperate men turned to desperate remedies;
and being too few in number to hold in subjection
the poor frenzied wretches who had begun a war of
extermination, were being driven to write upon their
memories a lesson which it should be impossible for
them to forget. The Yeomanry were strong enough
to destroy the rebels. They were not strong enough
to pardon them. Irresistible power alone can afford
to be merciful. The Protestants of Ireland, like the
scanty English garrisons of earlier times, having to
deal with an irreconcileable foe, as fierce as a wolf and
as untameable, were being taught, in spite of them-
selves, that if England declined to stand by them,
they and the Irish could not live side by side, and
that if they would sleep in peace thenceforward they
must give no quarter to enemiesin arms. Cornwallis
saw the feeling, and was shocked at it. He did not
care to enquire into the grounds in which it origi-
nated; although, had he cared to reflect, his Indian
experience might have enlightened him. In study-
ing Ireland he was thinking, not of India, which would
have been full of instruction for him, but of America,
which was fatally misleading. He regarded the dis-
pésition of the Parliament and Privy Council as
a confirmation of the accusations which had been
levelled against them by Lord Moira ; and, with an
insight into Irish history which, if his letters were

A;

464

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK not unjust to him, extended no further than the pre-
Sone ceding year, he attributed the rebellion to the whips

1798. .

June.

and Hitehe -caps of the Yeomanry, and as such deter-
mined to deal with it.

Again, and more fatally, Cornwallis mistook - the
character of the native Irish. Like every Englishman
who becomes first acquainted with them, he found
much in their character that interested and attached
him. From the impurity which disgraced other nations
they were singularly free. To one another they were
affectionate and charitable. In the army he had himself
experienced the fine qualities of courage and fidelity
which reveal themselves invariably when the Irish-
man is under military discipline. He looked upon
them as an innocent, cruelly injured people, who had
been driven mad by tyranny, and required nothing
but gentleness and kindness to bring them back to
their allegiance.

Gentleness and kindness the Irish indeed needed,
but the gentleness of inflexible authority and the
kindness of even-handed justice. Cromwell had
landed in Ireland under circumstances not unlike
those of Lord Cornwallis. Cromwell insisted first
on absolute submission, and when submission was
refused dealt two blows so resolutely, so sternly,
and with so clear a meaning, that rebellion turned
sick, lay down and died, and peace was restored to
Ireland with a loss of life which was as nothing com-
pared to the waste and ruin of a protracted war.

If Cromwell’s hand was heavy on the enemy on
the field, he was as severely just in repressing disorder
in his own army. Two soldiers stole a fowl from an
old woman. Cromwell immediately hanged them. He
had come to Ireland to enforce respect for the laws.
The army was made to set an example of obedience.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

Cornwallis found his troops in disorder, living” at
free-quarters among the peasantry, and making the
rebellion a plea for plunder. He was indignant. He
wrote despatches and reprimands. but neither on
one side nor the other did he venture to imitate
Cromwell. He checked indiscipline by combin-
ing rebukes which were just in themselves with re-
flections on the conduct of the Yeomanry in the
field, which, after Ross and Enniscorthy, he ought
to have spared them. In dealing with the insurrec-
tion his chief thought was to win the rebels by for-
giveness, to supersede martial law while they were
still everywhere in arms, to restore the jurisdiction
of the civil courts when it implied impunity for
the most horrible crimes, and to conciliate them at
the earliest possible moment, by placing them on a
political equality with the Protestants. The Irish
people had many fine qualities, but they had a lesson
yet to learn, that the laws of the land must be obeyed.
Cornwallis believed that he could persuade them into
it by what he called clemency, and confessed to a
foolish pleasure when he had brought the mob to
cheer him in the streets... Many times he thought
that he had succeeded. As often some fresh spurt of
ferocity, some village burnt, some family murdered,
checked his ardent expectations. His letters confess
his disappointment, but they show no abatement of
confidence in the correctness of his own insight; and
when he recorded his failures, it was only to reassert
with more emphasis that he failed only because the
Catholics were not in Parliament.

1 When I passed the people ‘Marquis Cornwallis to General
cried, ‘God bless him! That’she! Ross, August 16, 1800.’
There he is!” Not unpleasant.’—

VOL, III. HH

466

BOOK

*

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

And as Cornwallis had misconceived the character

__*:._ of the people with whom he had to deal, so his des-

1798.

June.

patches are searched in vain for a sign that he under-
stood the remedies for the condition in which he found
them. Always, when there is anything to be done,
the indispensable preliminary is to understand the
facts of the case. The facts with which Cornwallis
had to deal were these :—

1. The Irish were a conquered people. Had their
votes been taken, four-fifths of them would have
desired separation from Great Britain. They re-
mained attached to the British Crown by force, and
by force only. Cornwallis supposed that if the
Catholics were admitted into the Constitution, dis-
affection would disappear, and that they would become
loyal subjects. Nothing but the most complete un-
acquaintance with the historv of the country could
have misled him into so perfect a misapprehension.
If Ireland was to be incorporated into the empire, the
Constitution might be incomplete without a represen-
tation of the hostile Irish element; but Emancipation
by itself would have as little tendency to remove or
qualify the hostility as Home Rule to cure the
potato-blight.

2. Had Ireland been a thousand miles distant in mid-
ocean, and her connection with the British Crown no
longer essential, therefore, to the security of the empire,
the Protestant colonists left to themselves would long
since have asserted their natural superiority. Either by
penal laws they would have compelled the Celtic Catho-
lics to conform, with the alternative of exile, or if the
native inhabitants had remained and persisted in rebel-
lion they would have gradually destroyed them. Lord

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

467

Camden had refused the assistance of the Orangemen, CHAP.
Il.
yet without the Orangemen, and with a large part of ——~—

the Presbyterians neutral, the Irish Yeomanry were
able to stem the first rush of the insurrection in 1798.
Had Ireland been unconnected with the English
Government, the Protestants would necessarily have
formed one united body, and there can be no serious
question how the insurrection must then have ended.

England could not permit a war of extermination
at her own door. If the past conduct of the Irish
gentry had been as blameless as under too many
aspects it had been reprehensible—if the rebellion of
the native race had been as gratuitous and wanton as
it had been in fact provoked by the neglect and op-
pression of centuries—the continuance of a ruthless
and desperate conflict would have been a reproach to
her own civilisation. In honour, conscience, and
even from mere instincts of humanity, she was bound
to interpose her hand. Having interposed, she re-
assumed her responsibilities for the condition of the
Irish people. The one compensation which a con-
quered people has a right to claim for the loss of
liberty is a just and steady government. England
had long excused herself for the disregard of her
obligations by pretending that Ireland was _ self-
administered, like herself. The fiction had disappeared;
the scandal and mismanagement had issued at last in
a bloody convulsion. The immediate duty of the
superior nation was at once to look to the causes
which had brought the country to so miserable a pass,
and to set itself in earnest to a task which had been
left undischarged from the day of the conquest.

Having taken the conduct of the war out of the
HH2

1798.

June.

468

BOOK
ot:
a
E798.

June,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

hands of the Irish Council, Cornwallis ought first to
have compelled the rebels to lay down their arms.
Insurrection under Elizabeth had been patched with
compromises, always to burst out afresh. Cromwell
laid rebellion prostrate. Charles the Second undid
Cromwell’s work by concessions, and the battle had
again to be fought. William the Third, in false mercy,
consented to a conditional peace, and the broken
treaty of Limerick had remained as a splinter in the
wound. It was essential to convince the Irish that
they were part of the British Empire, that they were
not to be allowed to separate from it, and that if
they persisted in attempts to free themselves Eng-
land had both power and resolution to crush them.
Cromwell refused an amnesty so long as a rebel force
remained in the field. He insisted on unconditional
surrender, and to Cromwell the Irish submitted as
they never submitted to any English ruler. They
were not constituted so differently from other men as
to refuse to recognise the inevitable.

Rebellion being suppressed, the next necessity was
obedience to the law. The most elementary condition
of human society is respect for life and person, and not
one step could be taken towards improvement so long as
soldiers could be houghed and women ravished with.
impunity, and secret societies could supersede the au-
thority of the Crown, and enforce their orders by mid-
night assassinations. The landed gentry had proved
unable to maintain order by the old-fashioned ma-
chinery. Ifthe magistrate was to become a reality, and
be feared and obeyed, an effective disciplined con-
stabulary was required in every part of the island.
The patriots in Parliament knew instinctively that
with the establishment of a police their power would

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE: UNION.

be gone, and they had fought against it with an energy
which hitherto had been too successful. A wise
governor of Ireland would have seen that without
this every other remedy would be a jest.

Among the many institutions which England had
attempted unsuccessfully to naturalise in Ireland was
trial by jury. To arrest criminals and bring them to
the bar was of little use so long as jurymen and wit-
nesses were not afraid of perjury. Where the offences
had been of a kind which was regarded as part of the
war against the national enemy, Irish criminal trials
had been a jest. The protection of a police would
deprive witnesses of the excuse which they might at
present plead, that if they told the truth they would
be murdered. If jurymen continued to play with
their consciences, the law should have been modified,
unanimity dispensed with, and the Scotch practice
substituted for the English.

To check crime was but half the work. The other
half was to prevent the wrongs which provoked it.
The Irish gentry as a body were not fulfilling the
purpose for which a gentry is designed. It was not
that he might plunder his tenants to feed his appetite
for luxuries that an individual man was allowed to
call himself owner of the homesteads of a thousand
families. Over half Ireland the relation between land-
lord and tenant was a money relation only, the land-
lord using the large discretionary powers which the
law allowed him to extort the last penny which could
be wrung from the miserable ‘earth-tiller’—the peasant
worse housed and fed than the master’s cattle—the
master spending the spoils of the peasant’s labour in
waste and dissipation. The difficulty was not new.
It had been successfully encountered before, and might

469

CHAP.
bay

——— $a”
1798.

June.

470

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

be successfully encountered again. The villeins under

2 the -feadal system held their lands at their lords’

1798.

June.

pleasure. According to the law the lord could strip
them of all that they possessed, and make slaves of
themselves and their children. ‘ But,’ says Black-
stone, ‘ the good-nature and benevolence of lords of
manors having time out of mind permitted their
villeins and their children to enjoy their possessions
without interruption, the common law, of which cus-
tom is the life, gave them title to hold their lands in
spite of their lord. They were still said to hold their
estates at the will of the lord, but it was such a will
as was agreeable to the custom of the manors.’ The
Irish peasants, if Great Britain chose to hold them as
her subjects, were entitled to at least as much pro-
tection as the serfs of the Norman barons. The custom
of the well-managed estates in Ireland might justly
have been made the law for the whole. Courts might
have been established where an injured tenant could
have applied for protection, and the people might have
been led to see a friend rather than an enemy in the
government which they had been taught to detest.
Once more, it was not enough that England had
been compelled against her will to remove the mon-
strous laws which had condemned Irish soil to barren-
ness, and Irish hands to inactivity. She had created
artificially a condition of misery and poverty; she
was now called upon to repair artificially the wrong
which she had inflicted, and, at any cost to her-
self, to apply her intelligence, her capital, and her
industry, to restore to the Irish what she had taken
from them. Materials of prosperity lay undeveloped
in the Irish soil and on the Irish coasts. Capabilities
of industry lay in the Irish people. But having

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

471

been nurtured so long in anarchy and idleness, the cHap.
acid IL.
native inhabitants of the Southern provinces were —~—~

unable to recover themselves. They required active
help, and the help ought to have been given. Crom-
well’s first step on the completion of his conquest was
to order an accurate survey of the area and capacities
of the desolated island, and to settle it with colonies
of vigorous and enterprising Englishmen. When the
rebellion of 98 had been finally subdued, an English
Minister aware of his responsibilities would have
sent a skilled commission to examine everywhere the
neglected wilderness, to which a country where Nature
had been prodigal of ber gifts had been reduced by
the misgovernment of twenty generations; to ex-
amine by what means its morasses could be turned to
meadow and cornfield; the haunts of smugglers and
privateers be opened to lawful commerce; its fisheries
in sea and river be made to yield their harvest ; its
manufactures be enabled to thrive by English capital ;
and penury and barrenness be exchanged for order
and prosperity.

The public service of Ireland had been conducted
hitherto on the principle of rewarding the unworthy,
and neglecting and throwing aside the loyal and the
able. From the Peerage downwards, through all
branches of the State, promotion had been the recom-
pense of dishonesty. Employments under the Crown
had been either bought and sold in open market, bar-
tered away for political support, flung as bribes to
scandalous agitators, or bestowed on some unworthy
member of a powerful family who could not decently
be provided for in England. The effect had been
universal demoralisation, the encouragement of every
tendency which an honest government would most

1798.
June.

472

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK desire to repress, and the ruin of every public de-
——— partment. Almost forty years before, George the

1798.

June.

Third had protested in vain against the continuance
of a system of which he, if no one else, perceived
the natural outcome. |

The time had come at last when the experiment
ought to have been tried of providing Ireland with
officials in Church and State whose loyalty could be
depended upon, and who were qualified by character
and ability for the duties of the post which they were
chosen to fill. |

A government strong, just, and impartial, with
honest men to administer it, was [reland’s sovereign
necessity. It was the one remedy which, except during
the nine years of the Commonwealth, had never been
applied. Lord Cornwallis’s Correspondence shows
disgust with the tone of public policy in Ireland, and
indignation at the wretchedness of the people. He
nowhere seems to have recognised the only measures
which could elevate the one or relieve the other. He
could think of nothing but the extension of political
liberty. Had he looked below the surface, he would
have seen that political liberty was the cause of the
corruption which he abhorred; and that to lead the
Irish people to look to political reform as a cure for
poverty and disorder was to teach them over again
the fatal lesson which had plunged them into their
existing misery.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

SECTION III.

Wiru his mind preoccupied by false impressions, and
fortified against a possible correction of them by the
conviction that he, with his English common-sense, un-
derstood the country better than those who had lived in
it from their childhood, Lord Cornwallis landed at
Dublin on the 20th of June. On the following morn-
ing the rebel camp on Vinegar Hill was stormed by
General Lake. Wexford was occupied by Moore. The
insurgent force was broken up, and from that moment
made no more attempts to encounter the troops in
the field. The rebellion, however, did not cease to
be dangerous. Rather it became more dangerous, for
it assumed a form with which it was infinitely more
difficult todeal. From being concentrated it became
dispersed ; from being local it became universal.
Wexford, Wicklow, and the midland counties were
overspread with detached parties of banditti, who no
longer showed an open front, but appeared in their
more congenial character, as ‘cruel robbers, house-
breakers, and murderers.’* In every direction, on a
reduced scale, the atrocities of Wexford were re-
peated. Houses of Protestants were set on fire.
The inhabitants, the men at least, were piked or
shot. The perpetrators of these infernal deeds were
savagely slaughtered in revenge; and Cornwallis
found himself in a scene of horror the like of
which he had never witnessed in America, in India,

1 ¢ Cornwallis to General Ross, July 13.’— Cornwallis Correspondence.

473

CHAP.
II.
Seren yee”

1

June 20.

474

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

or anywhere. His pity was for the rebels; his

——— indignation was for the severity with which they

1798.
June.

were treated by the Yeomanry.’ With the support
of Lord Clare, whom, to his confessed astonishment,
he found ‘by far the most moderate and right-
headed man in the country,’ he endeavoured to arrest
the spirit which was manifesting itself, by an act of
amnesty. In a general proclamation he promised
pardon, protection, and free permission to return
to his home, to every insurgent who would lay
down his arms, and had not been guilty of delibe-
rate murder in cold blood. To the originators
and organisers of the political conspiracy he refused,
and so far most properly, to allow the excuses which
he could imagine for the Catholic Celts. There was
still a want of evidence against the Committee who
had been arrested on the 12th of March. Addys
Emmett, Arthur O’Connor, and MacNeven, the most
guilty of the whole party, were protected by the un-
willingness of the informers to appear against them.
With others who had been seized on the eve of the
outbreak there was not the same difficulty. On the
12th of July John and Henry Sheares were brought
to the bar to take their trial for high treason. Cap-
tain Armstrong swore to their conversations with him.
The address to the people of Ireland found in Henry
Sheares’s desk, and in the handwriting of his brother,
was fatally corroborative. When sentence was pro-
nounced they fell into each other’s arms in court.

1 Yet Cornwallis admitted that still wandering about in consider-
the atrocities committed by the re- able bodies, and are committing
bels were greater than the retalia- still greater cruelties than they
tion inflicted upon them. ‘The themselves suffer.’—‘ To Portland,
deluded wretches,’ he wrote, ‘are June 28, 1798,’

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

Henry, the younger, said he had a wife and six chil-
dren, and prayed for a respite, to arrange his affairs
and provide for them. His sobs choked him as he
spoke. John Sheares endeavoured gallantly to shield
him by taking the blame upon himself. But the
pleading of neither could avail. Their guilt was as
plain as it was gratuitous. Rebellion in Ireland was
too terrible a thing for theoretic politicians to be
allowed to play with it with impunity. They were
both executed on the 14th.’

The next to be tried was John MacCann, a gen-
tleman of private fortune in Dublin. He had been
a member of the Revolutionary Committee. Reynolds,
the informer, appeared in evidence against him. A
treasonable paper was found in his handwriting when
he was taken. Curran used his skill in torturing
Reynolds; but though he could display his own
power as an advocate, he could not obtain a verdict

1 Henry Sheares, after his sen-
tence, wrote an agonised letter to
Jonah Barrington, imploring him
to save his life. The Chancellor
whom he had wished to murder
was now his only hope.

‘Tell the Chancellor,’ he said,
‘that I will pray for him for ever,
and that Government shall ever
find me what they wish. Oh! my
family! my wife! my children!
my mother! Gotothem. Let them
throw themselves at the Chan-
cellor’s and Lord Shannon’s feet. I
have been duped, misled, deceived,
but with all the wishes and inten-
tion to do good.’

‘It is only justice to Lord Clare,’
writes Barrington, in relating the
story, ‘ to record an incident which
proves that he was susceptible of
human feelings. By some unfor-

tunate delay the letter was not de-
livered to me till eleven o’clock of
the morning after the trial. I
waited on Lord Clare. He read it
with great attention. I saw he
was moved. He said, “ What a
coward he is! But what can we
do?” Hepaused. “John Sheares
cannot be spared,” he said. “ Do
you think Henry can say anything,
or make any discovery which can
authorise the Viceroy in making a
distinction? If so, Henry may be
reprieved. Go to the prison. See
him. Ask him this question, and
return to me.” I hastened to New~
gate, and arrived at the moment
when the executioner was holding
up the head of my friend and
saying, “Here is the head of a
traitor.” ’—Historic Memours, vol.
il, p. 266-7,

476

BOOK

ahe

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

for his client. MacCann was found guilty, and suf-

—— fered five days after the brothers Sheares.

1798.
July,

William Byrne, a Wicklow gentleman, was tried
and convicted on the 20th. On the 28rd, Oliver
Bond, at whose house the Committee sate, was con-
victed and sentenced also. The rapidity of the pro-
ceedings, and the unexpected readiness of the juries
to find verdicts for the Crown, began to startle the
remaining prisoners. They knew their guilt. They
knew that the Government was aware of it, and they
could not tell what evidence might not now be pro-
ducible against them. Samuel Neilson, who had
been taken outside Newgate, had reason to expect
the worst. Arthur O’Connor remembered his near
escape at Maidstone, and feared that another time he
might not be saved by evidence to character. Byrne
and Oliver Bond were to have been hanged on the 25th
and 26th of July. Life was usually granted in return
for valuable information, and the prisoners in a body
—there were seventy of them in all—sent word to
Cornwallis that if their own lives and the lives of their
two friends might be spared they would make a full
and free confession. Cornwallis had been in the deepest
embarrassment about these men. He had no desire
to show them mercy.’ The leaders among them he
was well aware were the persons really responsible
for the rebellion, and deserved the severest penalties
which the law could inflict. Public witnesses, how-
ever, were not to be found, and to try them would
end probably in their acquittal. On the other hand,
a confession of the circumstances of the conspiracy, of
which the existence had been so fiercely denied, an

1 ¢He says this pointedly. See Letter to the Duke of Portland,
October 29, 1798.’

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION. AT7

acknowledgment from Arthur O’Connor himself of cap.
his negociation with General Hoche, of which so many are ?.,.
eminent Whig statesmen had appeared in court to ie
declare him incapable, would not only be a political
triumph, but would be materially useful in tranquil-

lising English opinion. It was not that the Govern-

ment wanted information. They already knew as

much, perhaps, as the prisoners could tell them. They
wanted to be able to satisfy the world; and no ques-

tion could any more be raised when the chief actors

had admitted their guilt.

The Chancellor was in the country. Cornwallis
consulted the Chief Justices and the Attorney and
Solicitor-General. They were unanimous in objecting
to a compromise with men whose guilt was of so dark
adye. They said that if Byrne and Bond were not
executed no Irish juries would find again for the Crown
in a trial for treason. When the Viceroy objected that
under no circumstances was there a hope of a verdict
against O’Connor and his companions, he was answered
that more than one might perhaps be convicted, and
that others could be proceeded against in Parliament.

An attainder had much torecommend it. If the pro-
ceeding was exceptional, the circumstances were excep-
tional which called for it. It was extremely desirable
to show Irish traitors that the cowardice of witnesses
and the perjury of jurymen could not always secure
them from the consequences of their crimes. But
such a measure could be ventured only by a body
whose purity of purpose was above possibility of sus-

1 ¢ Lord Carleton said that seve- that others might be liable to pains
ral of those who signed the papers, and penalties by proceeding against
and particularly Dr. MacNeven, them in Parliament.’—‘ Cornwal-
might possibly be convicted, and lis to Portland, July 26, 1798.’

478

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

picion. The reputation of the Irish Parliament was

—*_ not of this unblemished kind, and any high-handed

1798.
July.

overriding of the forms of justice would only confirm
the suspicions already too prevalent in England.
Cornwallis consented that the law should take
effect on Byrne, who was hanged on the day ap-
pointed. The execution, however, instead of inducing
the prisoners to withdraw their proposal, led them to
renew it with increased eagerness. The Chancellor
came back at the moment to Dublin. His opinion
coincided with that of the Viceroy, and on the ap-
proval of Lord Clare the Judges withdrew their oppo-
sition. O’Connor and MacNeven were informed that
the offer would be accepted ; and Cornwallis, before
he knew what they intended to write, could scarcely
contain his satisfaction. ‘ What,’ he wrote, ‘ will the
gentlemen who appeared at Maidstone say to this?
It is the most complete triumph, both in England and

Treland.’! His exultation was diminished when the

confession was placed in his hands. The prisoners
had stipulated for the publication of it. The compo-
sition was O’Connor’s. Secure behind a promise of
life, they had paraded their treasons before Ireland and
the world in a tone of bold bravado. They admitted
that they had conspired to raise a rebellion and to
introduce a French army, and they declared that
they were justified in what they had done. They
threatened the British Government with the perpe-
tual enmity of the Irish race, and informed Govern-
ment and the public either that Ireland must be
allowed her own way, or that they must extirpate
the population. Cornwallis treated this remark-

1 ¢To General Ross, July 30, 1798.’

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

able production as a deliberate insult. He sent a

479

CHAP.

copy of it to the Cabinet. He told the prisoners that gif tha

they must alter it, or it would not be received as a
discharge of their engagement. They refused to make
any changes, anticipating that it would be published
as it stood. But a Committee of the House of Lords
was sitting to enquire into the causes of the rebel-
lion, and as an alternative they agreed to give evi-
dence before it. They answered every question which
was put to them with adequate frankness. The tone
of insolence remained, but the rhetorical declamation
was escaped. The publication of the Committee’s re-
port answered the end which Cornwallis desired, and
at least exposed with sufficient completeness the
value of the insight of the English Liberals into Irish
character and Irish affairs.

The Cabinet meanwhile had considered the docu-
ment which Cornwallis had sent over to them, and
on the perusal of it were so justly indignant, that
before they were aware that the Viceroy had allowed
the prisoners to appear before the Committee they had
resolved to refuse their sanction to negociation in any
form whatever. Even Cornwallis himself they were
inclined to blame for his excess of anxiety to excuse
and pardon traitors.

‘ Weconsider,’ the Duke of Portland wrote to him,! ‘ that
the proposal should not be listened to. The memoir, beyond
admission of the writers’ criminality, contributes nothing to
what we already knew. On the contrary, an air of pre-
sumption, arrogance, Insolence, and superiority so pervades
the whole, that I cannot but feel their conduct to be a great

1 ¢Portland to Cornwallis, Au- dential.’ 8. P.O. Endorsed ‘ Not
gust 15, 1798, Secret and confi-

1798.
July.

480

BOOK
X.

a’
1798.
August.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

ageravation of their former crime. I ought not perhaps to
wonder that men who, in the act of expiating the greatest of
all crimes, permit themselves to tell you that you must ex-
tirpate or reform, should not see the behaviour of which I
complain in the light in which it strikes me. But I cannot
but observe that such an opinion, uttered at such a moment,
if it is to be received as a testimony of honesty and good
faith, is not less so of those dangerous and destructive prin-
ciples to which the present convulsion of Europe is to be
attributed. And so much I fear that nothing but a system
of continued unremitting and active opposition can over-
come it, that I cannot believe it can be softened by any con-
cession or operated upon by any lenity, unless it is exercised
under a conviction on the part of those who experience its
benefits that those who use it are able to crush and an-
nihilate the objects on whom it is bestowed. Your Excel-
lency, therefore, must excuse me if I doubt the advantages
which your natural disposition inclines you to hope for, from
the establishment of a character for extraordinary lenity. I
must, though I am sorry to say it, give it you as my opinion
that the most desirable idea to establish in Ireland, and that
which will lead most readily and surely to the object we
have all in view, is that you are possessed of an overwhelm-
ing and irresistible power, which can neither be overturned
nor shaken, and which is able and ready to punish impar-
tially alike, all offenders against the law. Then I think you
may show mercy, and indulge the feelings which are so well
known to be congenial to your nature. But till then I
fear that acts of lenity must be done with a sparing and
distinguishing hand. In the temper which unhappily pre-
vails in Ireland the most amiable motives will be misrepre-
sented and misunderstood, and a conduct suggested by the
finest and best of feelings will be attributed to pusillanimity
and fear, and be productive of contempt and licentiousness
instead of gratitude and attachment. Such,I fear, is human
nature in the state of civilisation which it has acquired in
Ireland, and such, I fear, it will remain until it is forced to
conform itself to a more rigorous and austere observance of
civil institutions and the laws of the country.’

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

Had the resolution of the Cabinet been formed

481

CHAP.

more expeditiously, Cornwallis would probably have pt tae,

resigned, and the policy of conciliation would have
been suspended. But before the despatch could leave
London the faith of the Government had been pledged
to the prisoners. Their evidence had been given and
printed ; it remained only to abide by the agreement,
and to inform O’Connor and his friends that if they
published their manifesto they would be considered,
one and all, as parties to a fresh crime, and be
excluded from the benefit of the pardon. The ori-
ginal intention was to allow them to emigrate to
America. Mr. Rufus King, the American Minister,
after reading the report of the Secret Committee, pro-
tested, in the name of the United States, against the
introduction there of such pernicious and dangerous
miscreants... They were sent to Fort St. George, in
Scotland, where they were detained till the Peace of
Amiens, and were then released, on condition that
they should never return to Ireland. O’Connor went
to France; America consented after all to receive
Emmett and MacNeven; and in their several places
of refuge they continued their implacable animosity
against the Government of Great Britain, which had
rescued them from the justice of their countrymen.

1 ¢ The principles and opinions of
these men are, in my view, so dan-
gerous, so false, so utterly incon-
sistent with any practicable or
stable form of government, that I
feel it to be a duty to my country
to express to your Grace my earnest

VOL. III.

wishes that the United States may
be excepted from the countries to
which the Irish state prisoners shall
be permitted to retire.’—‘ Mr. Ru-
fus King to the Duke of Portland,
September 138, 1798.’ 8. P. O.

Itt

1793.
August.

482

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

Too late to render effective help, not too late to

Rite ageravate the exasperation of the Protestants and

1798.
August.

inflate the hopes of the rebels, their French allies
now appeared upon the scene. Napoleon’s indiffer-
ence to Ireland had prevented any fresh attempt for
an organised invasion in force. But the scheme of fly-
ing squadrons to hover on the coast, and make local
descents wherever opportunity offered, had continued
before the minds of the Directory; and as soon as it
was known in Paris that the Irish were in arms, orders
were given to prepare detachments as quickly as pos-
sible to be sent to their assistance. General Humbert,
who had been with Hoche at Bantry, was commis-
sioned to organise a force at Rochelle; General Hardy
to collect another at Brest. They were designed to
sail together, and to act in concert, if not in union.
Hardy’s division was the largest, and Humbert was
ready before him. August came, and Admiral Bom-
part’s squadron, which was to convey Hardy, was still
behindhand. The Irish exiles were wild with impa-
tience, and Humbert at last started alone, with no
more than 1,100 men, accompanied by Barclay Tee-
ling and Matthew Tone, Wolfe Tone’s brother. He
landed at Killala, on the north coast of Mayo, on the
22nd of August, distributed five thousand stand of
arms among the Irish peasants who came to join him,
and marched at once into the interior. On the 25th he
was at Ballina. Unless he could be met and checked
immediately, it was feared that the whole country

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

would be again in flames, and General Lake and Ge-
neral Hutchinson, who were at Galway when Humbert
arrived, hurried up to intercept him. They reached
Castlebar on the 26th, with 2,000 men, militia chiefly,
and a battery of field artillery. Humbert advanced
in the night by a difficult mountain-road, which had
been thought impassable and had been left unguarded,
and came on Lake by surprise at daybreak. He had
left part of his small force in garrison at Killala. He
had but eight hundred French with him, something
over a thousand armed Irish peasants, and three
small guns. The Kilkenny and Longford militia, who
formed the principal part of Lake’s force, were Catho-
lics, and many of them United Irishmen. They were
said to have been tampered with. If not tampered
with, they were unwilling or unable to encounter dis-
ciplined troops. They ran at the first advance of
the French. The Galway Volunteers followed. The
few artillerymen and Lord Roden’s Fencibles from
Ulster attempted to stand, but were overborne. Lake
was totally defeated, and his guns were taken. Now
or never was the time for the Irish patriots to show
what they were made of. Had they been in earnest,
their regiments, so long organised, would have started
out of the earth as at a trumpet-call. But they pre-
ferred to wait, and let their allies fight their battles
for them. Their zeal showed itself only in an effer-
vescence of murder and robbery, which Humbert
himself had to check. To his surprise he found him-
self, notwithstanding his victory, substantially alone,
or joined only by a miserable rabble who were worse
than useless to him. Had he been left unmolested, the
Irish would probably have gathered heart. General
Hardy was expected hourly from Brest. If Hardy

ey ae

August.

484

BOOK

——_$,
2/98.
September.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

landed while Humbert was still at large and success-
ful, the consequences would, no doubt, be serious.
Cornwallis took the field in person, with the troops
in Dublin, while Lake collected his defeated regi-
ments.

Perplexed at a reception so different from what
they had been taught to look for, the French turned
into Sligo with no definite purpose. They gained
a second small success at Colooney Bridge; and
hearing that the insurgents were up in Longford
they struck across Leitrim, and passed the Shannon
at Ballintra. Lake was close behind them. Corn-
wallis, in superior force, was in front. Before he
could reach Longford, Humbert found himself sur-
rounded; and seventeen days after his landing he

‘closed his brief adventurous career by surrendering

at Ballinamuck. The French became prisoners of
war, and were treated courteously. Teeling and
Matthew Tone, who were taken with them, were
immediately hanged.

Napper Tandy, Lewines, and others of the Irish
party at Paris, hearing that Humbert had sailed, had
followed in a separate vessel, hoping to be in time for
the revolution which they expected to follow. At
Rathlin Island they learnt that all was over, and they
made their way out of reach of danger to Hamburgh.

A month after Humbert had been disposed of,
Bompart and Hardy arrived on the coast. Hardy
had three thousand men with him. The French
squadron consisted of the ‘ Hoche,’ a seventy-four-gun
ship, and eight frigates. On board the ‘ Hoche’ was
Wolfe Tone himself, not this time buoyant with hope
as before, but with the shadow of his approaching
fate upon him and resolute to meet it.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

They had sailed from Brest on the 20th of Sep-
tember. To avoid Sir John Warren, who was known
to be on the watch for them, they made a long circuit
into the Atlantic. They were separated in a storm;
and on the 10th of October the ‘ Hoche’ and three
frigates found themselves alone at the mouth of
Lough Swilly, with Warren in pursuit of them, and
already in sight in the offing. The frigates, drawing
little water, were able to escape through a shallow
channel. ‘Tone was entreated to fly with them, but
he chose toremain. The ‘ Hoche’ fought for six hours
against four ships each as large as herself, and did
not strike till she was sinking. Tone distinguished
himself greatly in the action; and in his French uni-
form was not immediately recognised when the sur-
vivors of the crew were brought on shore as prisoners.
He was known to have accompanied the expedition,
but he was reported to have been killed, or he might
have escaped in one of the frigates. Curious enquiries
were perhaps purposely avoided. The French officers
were politely and hospitably received. ‘They were
invited to a breakfast by Lord Cavan; and Tone,
who accompanied them, would have passed unnoticed
at the table, had he not himself rashly spoken to an
old acquaintance whom he encountered there. He
was instantly arrested by Sir George Hill. He pro-
fessed to expect that his French commission would
protect him. He was painfully undeceived, and was
ordered into irons as a traitor.

Not with dignity, but with the half-sincere heroics of
its Irish counterfeit, he tore off his coat. ‘ These fet-
ters,’ he said, ‘shall never degrade the revered insignia
of the free nation which | have served. For the cause
which I have embraced I feel prouder in my chains

485

CHAP.
II.
_—
1798.
October.

486

BOOK

.e
———_—/
1798

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

than if I was decorated with the Star and Garter of
England.’

He was taken to Dublin, under an escort of
dragoons, and was consigned to the soldiers’ prison.
If the forms of law had been observed, Wolfe Tone
should have been tried at the King’s Bench; but
his rank in the French army, though not allowed
to shield him, was held by a violent construction
to place him under military jurisdiction, and on
the 10th of November he was brought before a court
where General Loftus sat as president.

He appeared in the full dress of a French officer,
wearing the tricolour cockade. At first he was much
agitated, but after calling for a glass of water he
became more composed. He had been taken in the
act of bearing arms against his Sovereign, and his
conviction was a matter of course. He therefore
read for his defence a political effusion which he had
composed as a justification of his conduct. He said
that from his earliest youth he had regarded the
connection with Great Britain as the bane of his
country. He had laboured to break it, and had
sought assistance wherever it could be found.

The president told him that his language was
irrelevant, and would rather injure than serve him.

‘In a cause like mine,’ he continued without at-
tending to the check, ‘success is everything. Success
in the eyes of the vulgar is the test of merit. _Wash-
ington succeeded. Kosciusko failed. I have forfeited
my life. The Court will do its duty. I shall not
be wanting to mine.’

Having been tried as a soldier, he begged that he
might have asoldier’s death. With an inconsistency
which it would have been more seemly to avoid, the

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

request was refused. He was sentenced to be hanged

487

CHAP.
I

on the following morning, in front of the New Prison. nee.
He did not care to figure in a scene which was November.

merely ignominious. There was no time for an
appeal, and in the night he cut his throat with a
penknife. The wound, though severe, was not im-
mediately mortal. It was dressed, and sufficient life
was left in him to permit his being carried to the
scaffold. The cart was prepared. The escort was
already mounted at the prison-door. <A _ spectacle
which could not have been other than revolting was
prevented by the interference of Curran, who rose in
the King’s Bench, and declared that Tone, having held
no commission under the British Crown, was not
within the cognisance of a court-martial. The Judges
agreed. The Sheriff was sent to the barracks, with
a writ of Habeas Corpus, to claim possession of the
prisoner. The Sheriff returned to say that he was
too ill to be moved; but Curran’s end was gained:
the execution was put off ; Tone lingered in pain for
a week, and then died.

488

BOOK

———__

1798.

November.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

THE ignominious story draws towards an end. The
chief leaders of the insurrection were either dead or
banished. Napper Tandy was arrested at Hamburgh
at the instance of the English Minister, sent to Ire-
land and tried, but was spared as too contemptible
to be worth punishing. The other actors in the
drama were cleared away, and their brief notoriety
was ended. But the insurrection itself did not clear
away. It hadcost by this time many thousand lives.?
But the agrarian murders continued unabated. The
peasantry, savage in their misery, were unable to
understand the Act of Amnesty, and, as Portland
expected, attributed it to fear. Again and again the
Viceroy flattered himself that he had gained his end.
Again and again he bewailed his disappointment.
The frenzy slackened only to burst out again with
renewed and more widely-spread destructiveness.
The courts-martial were suspended, but he was com-
pelled to revert to them; and a system of alternate
blows and caresses—the least promising which could
be pursued either with the Irish or any other human
beings—was the chief outcome of the humane efforts
of Lord Cornwallis.

‘The rebellion in Ireland,’ said Lord Clare, speak-
ing, in 1801, in the British House of Lords for the
further continuance of martial law, ‘is of a nature

unparalleled in the history of the world. It did

1 Plowden estimates the num- 70,000, but this is sii sibee fe, great
bers killed on both sides as nearly exaggeration.

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION. 489

not proceed from mistaken loyalty, religious zeal, or CHAP.
party difference; all principle had been corrupted, Ge a
every laudable feeling had been extirpated, and no- A
thing prevailed but treason, blood, and cowardly
assassination. Though vanquished in the field, it

was not subdued. It existed long before. It exists

still. Lord Cornwallis did all that could be done by

man; but to think of repressing such a spirit by
coaxing, concession, and indulgence, is absurd.’

Cornwallis found his life as Viceroy ‘his idea of
perfect misery.’ His failure to restore quiet never
led him to mistrust his own judgment. He was con-
fident as ever that Clare and Kilwarden and Toler
and Carleton were blind, and that he alone saw
clearly. He discerned the cause of the ill-success of
conciliation to be the want of completeness in Ca-
tholic Emancipation; and as it was clearly impossible
to introduce Catholics into a separate Irish Legisla-
ture, he now directed all his energies towards carrying
the Act of Union.

The Parliamentary Union was indeed most neces-
sary, but not chiefly or at all for the sake of Catholic
Emancipation. The remedy which Ireland required
was not additional liberty, but a firm and just Govern-
ment; and the admission of the Catholics to the
united Legislature would be useful or mischievous so
far only as it did or did not conduce to that indis-
pensable end. A Constitution professing to be national
and representative from which four-fifths of the
nation was excluded, was an intolerable absurdity ;
but the error lay in having inflicted such an instru-
ment of government upon Ireland at all, rather
than in having refused to remodel it upon conditions
which would have rendered it only the more un-

490

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

endurable. The argument for a Union was the

Se, proved impossibility of so much as commencing the

1798.

reformation of Ireland so long as a separate Legislature
existed there. From the moment at which the Irish
Parliament discovered its power of embarrassing the
Administration, it became the fertile mother of every
kind of disorder and demoralisation. ‘The inconve-
nience of an adverse vote compelled Government to
corrupt the members, and led the members to insist on
being corrupted. The public departments were sacri-
ficed to jobbery. Public morality was debauched and
poisoned. ‘The scandal and shame gave point to the de-
clamations of agitators, and a show of seeming reason
to the periodic explosions of patriotism. An Indepen-
dent Parliament kept alive the dream of an indepen-
dent nationality, and the result had been an eruption
of the Irish volcano in a stream of horror and ferocity.

So long as the cause continued the same effects
must necessarily repeat themselves. In 1704 the
Trish Parliament had petitioned for incorporation.
The request had been refused on unworthy and dis-
honourable grounds; and reluctance afterwards on
both sides had prevented the renewal of the sugges-
tion as a question of practical politics, till the rebel-
lion had made serious men on both sides of the
Channel feel that Ireland was too dangerous a subject
to be any longer trifled with.

A Union would not of itself secure good government,
or prevent Ireland’s interests from being sacrificed to
Parliamentary mancuvres. Unprincipled ministers
playing on the ignorance of the public might still make
a party cry of justice to Ireland, and carry measures
which they knew to be mischievous, to maintain
themselves in power by the Irish vote. A Union

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

would not necessarily put an end to the scandalous
misappropriation of patronage, or prevent the ap-
pointment to offices of trust and consequence of men

whose fitter place would have been a penal settle-

ment.1

But at least it would remove an institution the
continuance of which in any shape was fatal to the
possibility of amendment. So long as an Irish Par-
liament controlled the Irish finances the Administra-
tion would remain at its mercy, and could only
carry on the Government by means as disgraceful
to one country as ruinous to the interests of the
other. |
The influences by which the Act of Union was
carried are notorious, and there is no occasion to
dwell upon a subject on which too much stress has

1 So little had the lesson of the
rebellion been laid to heart, that for
some years after the Union Irish
preferments continued to be so be-
stowed as if Ministers desired to
prove Wolfe Tone’s assertion true,
that Ireland could never prosper
till she had shaken off the English
connection, In 1802 a bishopric
fell vacant in Ireland. Mr. Ad-
dington nominated a young man
to it whose name I do not men-
tion, lest I should inadvertently
wound the feelings of persons at
present alive. But the attempt
was the occasion of a letter of a
very remarkable kind, from the
Archbishop of Armagh to the
Prime Minister :—

‘I affirm, on my honour,’ the
Archbishop wrote, ‘ that I object
to upon public grounds only.
Emolument is the only object of
this young man, whose character is
indisputably infamous, His promo-

tion would, in my opinion, be fatal
to the Church Establishment. It
exposes us to ridicule and contempt.
It encourages that profligacy of
manners already too prevalent in
Ireland, and it holds forth to the
young men of this country that
morals are of no estimation in the
opinion of the English Minister.
My understanding suggests no surer
method of destroying the Church
than by placing irreligious and pro-
fligate men in those situations
where the people have a right to ex-
pect examples of piety and virtue. I
will not pursue the subject further,
but beg the favour—if the appoint-
ment is persisted in—to lay my
humble request before his Majesty
that he will allow me to resign a
situation which I can no longer
hold with advantage to the public
or credit to myself.

‘W. ARMAGH.’

CHAP.

499 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK been laid. For fifty years a seat in the Irish Par-
—— liament had been regarded either as a passport to
promotion and rank, or as securing to its occupant
a lien on the Irish revenues in the form of a pen-
sion or sinecure. The Noble Lords who returned
nine or ten members to the Lower House received,
as the price of support to the Crown, the patronage
of their respective districts; and either provided by
means of it for needy members of their families, or
sold the appointments in their gift to the highest
bidder. The system had been carried on so long and
so unblushingly, it had been so completely sanctioned
by the successive Administrations who had been par-
ties to the bargain, that the sense of disgrace had dis-
appeared. When they were called on to consent to the
suppression of two-thirds of the Irish representatives,
and the transfer of the remaining third to the Imperial
Parliament, the Irish patrons were in fact required
to surrender not only their consequence in the State,
but a considerable part of their fortunes. The seats for
their private boroughs entered into the value of their
estates, and had been paid for by themselves or their
fathers ; and the sacrifice of them to men already em-
barrassed, as most of them were, by extravagant expen-
diture, was equivalent to ruin. They had the control
of the situation in their hands, and it was not to be ex-
pected that persons who had risen into weight and in-
fluence mainly by corruption should ascend suddenly
into a nobler sphere of patriotic self-devotion. They
insisted on compensation for the destruction of their
property, and they fought against the Union till their
respective claims had been weighed and admitted.
Cornwallis laboured patiently at a work which he de-
tested. At one time he hoped to overcome or weaken

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

the opposition by the help of the Catholics, but the
Catholics would not listen to his blandishments. They
trusted if the separate Parliament was maintained to
make their way into it eventually; and though Eng-
land had saved them from extermination by their
Protestant countrymen, yet, as long as there was a
hope of success, they preferred to join the Protestant
opposition in defence of their national independence.'

The demands of the borough patrons increased with
the eagerness of the Government. ‘I long,’ wrote
the unhappy Viceroy, ‘to kick those whom my pub-
lic duty obliges me to court. My occupation is to
negociate and job with the most corrupt people under
heaven. I despise and hate myself every hour for
engaging in such dirty work, and am supported only
by the reflection that without a Union the British
Empire must be dissolved. Nothing but a conviction
that a Union is absolutely necessary could make me
endure the shocking task which is imposed upon me.’ ”

The ‘ dirty work,’ after two years’ defilement with
it, was at length completed, mainly through the ex-
ertions of Lord Castlereagh; and the Irish Parliament,
which had been barely tolerable when controlled by
Poynings’ Act—which, under the Constitution of 1782,
became the most mischievous parody of a representa-
tive Legislature which the world has ever seen—
closed its dishonoured existence.? One only remark-

1 <The opposition to the Union
increases daily. I was too sanguine
when I hoped for the good inclina-
tion of the Catholics. Their dis-
positionsare so completely alienated
from the British Government, that
I believe they would even be
tempted to join with their bitterest
enemies, the Protestants of Ireland,

if they thought that measure would
lead to a total separation of the two
countries.’—‘ Cornwallis to Port-
land, December 12, 1798.’

* ¢Cornwallis to General Ross,
May 20 and June 8, 1799.’

3 Act of Union finally passed
through the British Parliament
July 2, 1800,

493

CHAP.
ENS

——_—————
1799.

494

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

able feature gave interest to the debates which pre-

a ae ceded and accompanied its fall. Let statesmen who

1800.

dream of reviving, under any pretence, a separate
Parliament for Ireland study the speech of Lord Clare,
delivered in the Irish House of Lords, on the 10th of
February, 1800. It lasted forfour hours. The sub-
stance of it was a summary of Irish history from the
Reformation to the present rebellion, and was dis-
tinguished, like all else which came from Clare, by
keen, unsparing truthfulness. Ireland had been fed
too long upon illusions. ‘ We have for twenty years
been in a fever of intoxication,’ he said, ‘and must
be stunned into sobriety.’ He delineated alternately
the negligence and tyranny of England,’ ‘ the insanity
of the English colony, which in an evil hour separated
itself from the English nation;’ the blind but not un-
natural rage of the old inhabitants, who saw the
stranger in possession of their inheritance, and sul-
lenly brooded over their wrongs. He passed to the
Constitution of ’82, described its origin, and explained
its workings. He showed that in peace it made cor-
ruption a necessity, that in war it led inevitably to
rebellion. There are those who imagine that a
Union between Great Britain and Ireland might be
formed on the same principle which connects Great
Britain with her larger colonial dependencies, on
the principle of ‘unity of the Executive with com-
plete independence of the Legislature.’ Our self-
governed colonies remain attached to us because

1 Clare strongly condemned the he called it a war of extermination.
whole of the past English policyto ‘The rebellion of 1798,’ he said,
Treland, and the chief credit which ‘ would have been a war of extermi-
he allowed her was her interference nation also, if it had not been for
to save the Catholics in 1798. the strong and merciful interposi-
Speaking of the rebellion of 1641, tion of Great Britain,’

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

they are willing to remain. If through their Legisla-
tures they expressed a desire to part from us, both
parties know that the connection might be dissolved
without vital injury to the empire. If the majority
of the inhabitants of the Canadian Dominion were of
the same disposition as the majority (numerically) of
the inhabitants of Ireland, the connection would be
dissolved ; or if maintained would be maintained by
force only, with the suspension or overthrow of the
Colonial Constitution. The vicinity of Ireland forbids
us to contemplate separation as a possibility. Great
Britain cannot sacrifice the integrity of her existence
to the pleasure of a numerical majority of the Irish
people. We are compelled to retain them as subjects
of the Crown, whether they consent or object; and
therefore to restore an independent Legislature in
Dublin is to bring back the necessity of controlling
it by the same methods which prevailed before the
Union. The experiment has been tried. Let Lord
Clare describe the results :—

‘Between two countries equal in power such a
connection could not exist for an hour. Its existence
must depend on the admitted inferiority and marked
subordination of one of them. Ireland is that inferior
country; and call the Constitution independent, dig-
nify it by any other high-sounding title in the Irish
vocabulary, hers must be a provincial government,
and of the worst description—a government main-
tained, not by the avowed exercise of legitimate
authority, but by a permanent and commanding in-
fluence of the English Executive in the Councils of
Ireland, as a necessary substitute for it. If there be
not an implicit concurrence by Ireland in every Im-
perial Act of the Crown which has the sanction of the

495

CHAP.
Ii.

————_-
1800.

496

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book British Parliament, and in every article of British
X.
——— legislation on Imperial subjects, there is an end of

1800.

our connection with the British nation; and I repeat
that the only security which can by nosetbiliey exist
for their national concurrence is a permanent com-
manding influence of the English Cabinet in the Irish
Council. Such a connection is formed, not for mu-
tual strength and security, but for mutual debility.
It is a connection of distinct minds and distinct in-
terests, generating national discontent, and perpetu-
ating faction and misrule in the inferior country.
The first obvious disadvantage to Ireland is, that in
every department of the State every other consider-
ation must yield to Parliamentary power. Let the
misconduct of any public officer be what it may, if
he is supported by a powerful Parliamentary interest
he is too strong for the King’s representative. A ma-
jority in the Parliament of Great Britain will defeat
the Minister of the day. A majority in the Parlia-
ment of Ireland against the King’s Government goes
directly to separate the kingdom from the British
Crown. If it continues, separation or war is the inevi-
table issue; and therefore it is that the general
Executive of the Empire, so far as it is essential to
retain Ireland a member of it, is at the mercy of the
Irish Parliament. It is vain to expect, so long as
man continues to be a creature of passion and inte-
rest, that he will not avail himself of the critical and
difficult situation in which the Executive Govern-
ment of this kingdom must ever remain under its
present Constitution, to demand favours of the Crown,
not as the reward of loyalty and service, but as the
stipulated price to be paid in advance in discharge of
a public duty. Every unprincipled and noisy ad-

LORD CORNWALLIS AND THE UNION.

venturer who can achieve the means of putting him-
self forward commences his political career on an
avowed speculation of profit and loss; and if he fails
to negociate his political job, will endeavour to ex-
tort it by faction and sedition, and with unblushing
effrontery will fasten his own corruption on the
King’s Ministers. English influence is the inexhaus-
tible theme for popular irritation and distrust. Our
present connection, therefore, must continue to ge-
nerate national discontent and perpetuate faction and
misgovernment,’

Let me close this book with one more extract from
the same speech. It contains a promise which still
waits to be completely fulfilled—which will be ful-
filled only when English statesmen of all parties
shall have at last awakened to a remembrance of their
responsibilities, and shall have determined that Ire-
land shall be excluded henceforth and for ever from
the sphere of permitted party politics.

‘If we are to pursue the beaten course of faction
and folly, I have no scruple to say it were better for
Great Britain that Ireland should sink into the sea
than continue attached to the British Crown on the
terms of our present connection. Our difficulties
arise from an Irish war—a war of faction, a Whig
war, a United Irishmen’s war. It has been demanded,
how are we to be relieved by a Union? I answer,
we are to be relieved from British and Irish faction,
which is the prime source of all our calamities. When
I look at the squalid misery of the mass of the Irish
people I am sickened with the rant of Irish dignity
and independence. I hope I feel as becomes a true
Irishman for the dignity and independence of my
country. I would therefore elevate her to her

VOL. IIL. K K

497

CHAP,
Wi

Cn me
1800.

498 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK proper station in the rank of civilised nations. I
*— would advance her from the degraded post of a
mercenary province to the proud station of an in-

tegral and governing member of the greatest empire
in the world.’

1800.

AN, Dx

ABB

bet ee suppression of, i. 40
Abbott, ii, 318

Abduction made felony, i. 418

Abercrombie, Sir Ralph, i111. 8306-310, 327,
3829, 881, 332, 335, 418

Aberdeen, Lord, ii. 362

Abjuration Oath, i. 315, 338, 836, 337

Abraham, Heights of, 11. 52

Absenteeism, i. 26, 163, 216, 218, 454;
li. 22, 28, 214, 450, 458; iii. 75

Absentee rents, il. 177

Absentees, i. 40, 277-279; 11. 149, 152,
155, 198, 224, 469, 511; ii. 450

Absentee tax, il. 59, 62, 67, 151, 153,
160, 372, 394, 395; iii. 231, 232

Adair, Sergeant, 11. 375

Adet, M., minister of the French Repub-
lie, ili. 190

Adrian IV., Pope, i. 16

Agar, Archbishop of Cashel, ii. 261

Agar, Charles (afterwards Lord Somer-
ton), iii. 41

Aghrin, battle of, 1.199; ii. 358

Agitation, trade of, i. 609

Agrarian riots of 1762, ii. 27

Agrarian laws, 11. 481

Agricultural Bill, ii. 105

Agriculture, 1. 398

Aix-la-Chapelle, Peace of, ii. 71

Albany, ii. 203

Albemarle, Earl of, 1. 220, 222

Alexander the Great, iii. 198

Allegiance, oath of, i. 311

Alnager, duties of, 11. 169

America, battle of, 11. 83 ; compared with
Ireland, 83, 84, 125, 133, 163, 174,
204, 221, 275, 320, 330, 340, 430; ii.
16, 22, 159, 190, 254, 295, 348, 463,
4638

American army, ii. 281, 284

American colonies, ii. 182, 183

American fleet, ii. 206

American Independence, ii. 205

American privateers, 11. 255

American question, li, 181

ASS

American Revolution, iii. 3, 6

American war, iil. 235, 384

Amherst, Lord, ii. 215, 216 note

Ancient Britons, iii. 354, 359, 361,
420

Ancram, Lord, iii. 402, 403

Anderson, a smuggler, i. 493

André, Major, ii. 281

Andrews, Dr., Provost of Trinity College,
li. 169

Anglican system, i. 156

‘ Annals of Lough Cé,’ i. 31

Annaly, Lord, ii. 228, 224

Anne Queen, i. 284, 304, 358 note, 360

Anti-Popery Act, 11. 216

Antrim, Earl of, i. 86, 88, 181, 182, 404

Antrim, i. 69; ii. 181, 488; ii. 19, 151-
1538, 177, 188, 803, 899, 425, 426

Appeal, final court of, 11. 350

Arbuthnot, Admiral, ii. 280, 282

Archdall, Mervyn, iii. 29, 145, 181

Ardglass, ii. 317

Aristocracy, English, iii, 3; of Ireland,
ii. 6

Arklow, iii. 398, 401, 402, 403, 419, 420,
421, 486

Armada, i. 57

Armagh, ii. 131, 436; 111. 153, 162 note

Armstrong, Mr., i. 420

Armstrong, Captain, iii. 340, 474

Army, state of the, i. 98, 99, 358; 11.
42, 190

Army Bill, ii. 66

Arnold, General, ii. 281, 284

Arran, Isle of, 1. 184

Artois, Comte d’, 11. 338

Asgill, Mr., 1. 300, 356

Ashton, Sir Arthur, i. 123, 124, 195

Ashton, Mr., i. 169, 170

Ashton, Sir William, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, ii. 26, 27

Assassination, ili. 167, 270, 320, 368

Assassination Bill, iil. 170

Assassination Committee, ii. 250, 289

Assassination Plot, i. 250, 254, 259

KK2

500

ASS

Assembly, National, ili. 76
Athanasius Secundus, ii. 81 node
Athenry, Lord, 1. 256, 404
Athlone, i. 57, 194, 198; ii. 126; iii. 258
Athlone, Lord, iii. 171 note
Athlone Parliament, iii. 112
Atkinson, Mr., iii. 154
Attainters, 1. 216

Atterbury, Bishop, i. 559
Augmentation Bill, 11. 68
Aunger, Captain, 1. 166
Austrians, 11. 127; 111. 198
Avoca, the, iii. 420, 421
Avonmore, Lord. See Yelverton

ACK LANE PARLIAMENT, iii. 70
Bagenal, Mr. Beauchamp, ii. 147,

148, 3438, 348, 358, 359

Bagwell, Mr., i. 576 note

Baker, Major, i. 183

Balbriggan, ili. 420

Bale, John, Bishop of Ossory, i. 42

Ballina, iii. 482

Ballinahinch, iii. 426

Ballinamuck, iii. 484

Ballinskellig’s Bay, ii. 235

Ballycarew, ili, 380

Ballyhack Passage, ili. 436

Ballyhige House, or Castle, i. 478

Ballymore Hill, i. 402

Bandon, emigration from, ii. 126

Bank of England, i. 559

Bantry Bay, i. 156, 186, 204, 206, 230,
262, 263, 287

Barclay, Alexander, ili. 20

Barclay family, 11. 152

Barnewell, Mr., i. 580, 581

Barnwalle, Robert, 11. 15.

Barré, Colonel, ii. 133, 134

Barrington, Sir Jonah, i. 510; i1. 357,
809, 448 note, 475 note, 515 note

Barrow, the, i111. 375, 398, 406

Barry, Sir James, Lord Chief Justice, 1.

144

Bathurst, Lord, ii. 77

Bastile, ii. 519; ii. 10, 11, 17, 19, 399

Beaghan, executioner at Vinegar Hill, iii.
434, and note

Bedford, Duke of, 111. 239

Bedford, Duke of, Viceroy, i. 422, 618,
614, 619, 621, 623, 625, 626-627 ; ii.
12, 45; iii, 451, 452

Beef, salt, 11. 22 note

Belfast incendiaries, 11. 454

Belfast Committee, iii. 179

Belfast, i. 319, 628; i1. 77, 105, 119, 132,
141, 232, 292, 368, 410, 419; ii. 17,
18, 22, 50, 59 60, 69, 71, 75, 95, 105,
106, 185, 158, 157, 160, 162, 174, 175,

INDEX.

BOS

179, 183, 187, 190, 196, 217, 225, 235,
237, 245, 255, 258, 280, 353, 355, 399
426, 459, 460

Belfast Committee, ii. 201, 265

Beling, Richard, i. 108 note, 125 note

Belleisle, ii. 15

Bellingham, Sir Edward, i. 42

Bellew, Christopher, iii. 70

Bellew, Lord, at Aghrim, i. 221 note, 256

Bellew, Walter, i. 221 note

Bentinck, Duke of Portland, i. 222; ii.
301

Bere Island, iii. 205, 210, 212

Beresford, iii. 26, 41

Beresford, Mr. John, ii. 104 note, 107

Beresford, John, Chief Commissioner of
the Customs, iii. 126, 129, 141

Beresford, William, ii. 107

Beresfords, the, ii. 5

Berkeley, George (afterwards Bishop of
Cloyne), i. 507-509 ; ii. 449

Berkeley, Lord, Lord-Lieutenant, i. 165

Bernstorff, Baron, i. 519

Bessborough, Earl of, ii. 46, 47, 150, 152;
ili. 232

Bill of Rights Battalion, ii. 393

Bingham, Sir Charles, ii. 111, 156

Binns, iu. 314

Birch, Robert, 11. 109 note

Bishops, 1. 323 ; ili. 62

Bishops of Ireland, i. 449, 452

Black Dog, prison so called, i. 592 note

Blackrock, i. 520

Blake, Martin, 1. 374 note

Blake, Sir Walter, 1. 410, 415

Blakeney, Mr., ii. 181

Blaquiere, Sir John de, Colonel, ii. 145,
158, 154, 176 note, 178, 179, 187, 394,
490 note; 111. 29, 30, 187, 150, 240, 243
note

Blasters, Society of, i. 510

Blood, William, i. 423

Bodkin, blind Dominick, i. 442-445

Bodkin, John FitzOliver, i. 445

Bodkin, Mr. Dennis, ii. 448 note

Bodkin murder, the, 441-445

Bodkin, Oliver, of Carnbane, i. 441

Boffin, Inis, priests confined in, i. 134

Bolingbroke, Lord, 1. 358-860

Bolton, Duke of, Viceroy, i. 388, 401, 555

Bolton, Sir Richard, Chancellor, i. 91

Bompert’s squadron, ii. 482

Bonaparte, ii. 192, 197, 265, 282, 287,
302, 482

Bond, Oliver, iii. 105, 288, 315, 317, 452,
476

Boolavogue, ili. 378

Bophin, Lord, 1. 325

Borlase, Sir John, 1. 82, 85

Boston, 11. 185, 186

INDEX.

BOS

Bosworth Field, i. 29

Boulter, Hugh, Archbishop of Armagh,
1. 876, 398, 403, 498, 519, 542, 577,
609 note; ii. 449

Bourbon, Due de, ii. 388 .
Bowes, Lord, Chancellor, i. 625; ii. 56
Boyle, Speaker of the Irish House of
Commons, i. 612, 616 note; 11. 5, 6
Boyle, Michael, Primate, made Lord Jus-
tice, 1. 166

Boyle, Richard, second Earl of Shannon,
1.682, See Shannon

Boyle, Roger, Lord Broghill, third son
of the Earl of Cork, i. 143

Boyles, the, ii. 5

Boyne, battle of the, 1.194; i. 22

Brabant, iii. 149

Bramhall, John, Bishop of Derry, i. 91,
154, 158

Brandywine, the, ii. 202

Bray Head, ii. 219

Bray, ii. 237; ii. 419 ©

Breadstreet, Recorder of Dublin, i1. 295

Brehon laws, 1. 18, 28

Brest, iii. 201, 202, 230, 248, 263

Brewer, Mr., iii. 362

Bridges the informer, ii. 29. 30

Bridport, Lord, ii. 214, 230

Bristol, iii. 23, 201

Bristol, Earl of, Viceroy, 11. 44, 380, 382,
383, 886, 392, 393, 398, 399

British Fencibles, iii. 306

British fleet, iii. 195, 198, 200, 201

British regiments, i. 471

Brodrick, Alan, Solicitor-General, 1. 232 ;
Speaker of the Irish House of Com-
mons, 301, 309, 354; becomes Lord
Middleton, 389

Brodrick, Alan, son of the last, i. 389,
024

Broghill, Lord, i. 148, 144; created Earl
of Orrery, 147

Brooke, Sir Arthur, ii. 109 note

Brooklyn, i. 201

Brown, Dennis, ii. 489, 495; iii. 26, 31,
80, 102

Brown, General, ii. 127

Browne, Mr., member for the University,
li, 479, 481, 486; iii. 170

Brownlow, Colonel, ii. 387

Brownlow, Mr., member for Armagh, ii.
423, 424, 428, 480, 434, 485, 468, 510

Bruff, village of, ii. 110, 111

Brunker, Captain, i. 141 note

Brunswick, Duke of, i1i. 64

Bruton, Colonel W., ii. 109 note

Buckinghamshire, Earl of, Viceroy, ii.
207, 217, 222, 224, 232, 233, 242, 246,
250, 253, 269, 270

Buckingham, Marquis of, Viceroy, ii.

501

CAM

487, 489, 490, 493, 494, 504, 504 note,
505, 509, 511, 518, 515, 516, 517, 520 ;
iii. 26

Buller, Sir Francis, iii. 318

Bunker’s Hill, ii, 141 and note, 174 ; iii.
11, 399

Burder, Captain, ii, 214

Burdett, Sir Francis, iii. 227, 228, 319

Burgh, Hussey, ii. 178, 181, 183, 237,
238, 244, 245, 317, 318, 324

Burgh, Hussey, ii. 223, 227; Prime Ser-
geant, 227

Burgh, Mr., ii. 477 ;

Burgoyne, General, ii. 202, 208, 374, 392

Burke, Edmund, 1. 442-445

Burke, Right Hon, Edmund, 1i, 214, 215,
247, 414, 338, 493; iii, 10, 14, 23, 33,
42, 46, 58, 65, 110

Burke, Hubert, 1. 576

Burke, Richard, ii. 33, 34, 37, 38, 49,
20, 58, 61, 62, 111 note, 114, 116
note

Burkes, origin of the, i. 24

Burke of Clanrickarde, 1. 87

Burrows, Mr., iii. 379

Burrows, Mrs., iu. 379

Burrowes, Peter, iil. 10

Bushe, Gervase, Provost, ii. 310

Bushe, Mr., ii. 155, 185, 258, 261 ; iii. 102

Bute, Lord, ii. 34

Butler, Mary, 11. 33

Butler, Mr., iii. 299

Butler, Simon, ii. 20, 105, 109, 117

Butler, Sir Theobald, i. 314

Butlers, the, i. 30, 34, 52, 53, 55

Byrne, Elizabeth, i. 435 note

Byrne, Mr. Edward, iii, 52 note, 56, 62,
70, 185, 144, 246

Byrne, James, ii, 485 note

Byrne, the bookseller, iii. 340

Byrne, William, iil. 476, 478

AHIR, Lord, iii. 328
Cahir, 111. 328

Calvinism, i. 628

Calvinists, i. 238; 11. 488

Cambridge, li. 139

Camden, battle of, ii. 206

Camden, Lady, iii. 416

Camden, Lord, ii. 247, 265; viceroy, ili.
137, 188-140, 141, 148, 144, 155, 163,
164, 167, 170, 177, 179, 183, 184, 186,
202, 211, 215, 216, 226, 234, 236, 240,
244, 245, 248, 252, 255, 256, 266, 267,
270, 271, 272 note, 274, 275, 287, 289-
291, 293, 300, 304, 305, 308, 315, 316,
324, 327, 381, 338, 350, 367, 369, 399,
400, 404, 416, 417, 425, 427, 429, 451,
458, 455, 456, 457

502
CAM

Campbell, Lord Frederick, ii. 66, 146

Camperdown, battle of, iii. 265

Canadas, ii. 14, 1382, 188, 274

Cane, Mr., ii. 181

Capel, Sir Henry, created Lord Capel, i.
231, 232

Capel, Lord, i. 283, 287, 250

Carey, Edward, ii. 109 note

Carey, the printer, iii. 69}

Carhampton, Lord, iii. 161, 162, 167,
177, 188, 250, 251, 261, 288, 451

Carleton, Sir Guy, ii. 202

Carleton, Lord, 111. 477 note

Carlingford, ii. 457

Carlingford, Lord, i. 256

Carlisle, Earl of, ii. 204; Viceroy, 286,
311, 315-3819, 320, 822, 327, 331

Carlow, iii. 110, 303, 365, 378, 398, 401,
436

Carlow Hills, ii. 375

Carmarthen, Lord, ii. 412

Carnew, iii. 401, 408, 420, 436

Carnot, ii. 412; ili. 194, 195-197

Carolina, ii. 206

Carolina, South, 11. 284

Carolinas, ii. 280, 283

Carr, Charles, i. 283 note

Carrick, 111. 110

Carrick, Lord, ii. 29, 32

Carrickbyrne, i. 412, 436

Carrickbyrne Hill, iii. 406

Carrickfergus, i. 81, 97, 192

Carrin, Father, i. 489

Carteret, Lord, Viceroy, 1. 498, 497, 533,
535-537, 541, 574

Carton, 11. 518

Carysfort, Lord, ii. 257

Cashel, ii. 268

Cashel, Archbishop of, ii. 33, 404, 508 ;
ili. 41

Castle Martyr, li. 46

Castle, the, 11. 495, 502; ili. 16, 21, 34, 69,
116, 168, 165, 179, 223, 227, 233, 354,
277, 3038, 307, 310, 345, 346, 425

Castlebar, ii. 381

Castlecomer, i iii. 110

Castlehaven, Lord, i. 86, 118, 128

Castlereagh, Lord, iii. 18, 119 note, 137,
179, 871, 429, 493

Catherine IT. of Russia, ii. 274

Catholics, the, i. 46, 47, 74, 86, 89, 94,
101, 115, 188, 184, 147, 164, 167, 191,
209, 210, 212, 225, 235, 250, 252, 257,
259, 271 note, 273, 274, 281, 296, 306,
307, 312, 314, 316, 317, 318, 319, 323,
329, 332, 336, 337, 362, 367, 370, 372,
378, 381, 566, 568-573, 576, 578, 683 ;
ii. 11, 13,),16,.18, 42, 176, 498, .209,
214-217, 276, 277, 278, 3C3, 304, 311,
312, 314, 325, 350, 354, 356, 386, 407,

INDEX.

CHI

409, 419, 428, 480, 438, 446, 450, 461,
458, 459, 461, 470, 476, 480, 488, 489;
iii. 6, 7, 16, 18, 20, 21, 24, 25, 33, 35,
40, 44, 45, 47, 50, 52, 56, 59, 61, 68,
70-73, 76, 79, 80, 84, 85, 86, 87, 90-
92, 94, 96, 98, 100, 101, 108, 109, 111,
125, 127, 181, 184, 186, 146-148, 149,
150, 158, 154, 156. 169, 171 note, 178,
180, 181, 183, 214, 223, 225, 226, 230,
244, 247, 248, 259, 261, 273, 283, 298,
324, 326, 332, 352, 358, 360, 400, 414,
427, 481

Catholic College, ii. 145

Catholic Committee and Association, iii.
109, 112 :

Catholic Committee, iti. 135 and note,
144, 146, 147-157, 158, 172, 122, 192,
196, 246, 298

Catholic disabilities, iii. 83

Catholie emancipation, ii. 488; iii. 15,
19, 20, 21, 74, 108, 128, 125, 135, 145-
147, 150, 175, 179, 181, 222, 239, 244,
261, 292, 458

Catholic Relief Bill, ii. 219, 233, 304,
305, 850; ili. 40, 131, 133

Cattle houghing, i . 410, 414 note, 415,
416 note, 161

Caulfield, Lord, i. 107

Caulfield, Sir William, i. 411

Cavan, Lord, i1. 485

Cave Hill, iii 160, 175

Cavendish, Sir Henry, ii. 272, 2738, 345,
375; ii. 88

Celts, revival of the, ii. 1, 276, 278

Champlain, Lake, ii. 200, 202

Champneys, Mr., ii. 85

Chancellorship, the, 11. 56

Channel Fleet, 111. 280, 262

Chappell, William, Bishop of Cork, i. 91

Charlemont Castle, i. 107

Charlemont, Lord, ii. 257, 264, 277, 292,
298, 303, 308, 309, 323, 324, 357, 370,
386, 392, 434 note, 508, 507, 509; iii.
hed Na yea

Charles, Prince, ii. 32

Charles L, 1. 77, 87, 117, 118

Charles II., i. 141, 144

Charlestown, ii. 139, 140, 200, 206, 280,
284

Charlotte, Queen, ii. 493

Charter Schools, i. 514, 517, 520, 521,
11.411,.450 + i187

Chatham, Earl of, 1. 614, 622, 628,
630; ii. 14, 54, 78, 182, 188, 187, 344,
502

Chesapeake, ii. 202, 285

Chesterfield, Lord, i. 587

Chichester, Lord, i. 102 note

Chichester, Sir Arthur, il. 118

Chief Remembrancer, ii. 490 note

INDEX.

CHO

Cholmondeley, Lord, ii. 77

Church, i. 243, 374, 379

Church, Anglo-Irish re-established, i. 154

Church eatechism, ii. 451

Church day schools, i. 512

Church, Established, i. 342

Church, Irish, ii. 446, 449, 450, 454

Church theories, i. 77

Civilization, iii. 2

Civil List, ii. 209; iii. 108, 112; con-
demned, ii. 38

Claims, Court of, i. 270

Clane, or Cluain, iii. 358

Clanrickarde, i. 128

Clare, ili. 109

Clare, Lord, ii. 100, 830 note; iii. 96, 183,
270, 345, 354, 371, 391, 394, 404, 451,
474, 478, 488, 494. See Fitzgibbon

Clarendon, Henry, Earl of, i. 157 note,
158; Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 167,
173, 174

Clarendon, Lord, i. 106 note, 111

Clarges, Sir Thomas, i. 219

Clarke, General, iii. 196

Clear, Cape, ii. 219; iii. 204

Cleaver, Dr. Euseby, Bishop of Ferns,
ili. 376, 380

Clements, Mr., i. 621

Clergy, ii. 457, 469, 481, 483

Clifden, Lord, ii. 404, 515, 516

Clifford, Lord, iii. 17

Clinch, Mr., iii. 359

Clinch, Father, ili. 444

Clinton, Sir Henry, ii. 202, 203, 206, 281,
282, 284

Clive, Lord, ii. 43

Cloncurry, Lord, iii. 287, 418

Clonmel, ii. 26, 27

Clonmel, Earl of, Mr. Scott created, 11.
395

Clonmel, Lord, iii. 120

Clover, Adam, i. 108

Coalition Government, ii. 362, 395

Cockayne, the attorney, iii. 117-120

Coghlan, Th., 11. 109 note

Coghlen, Mr., 11. 181

Colclough, Mr. John, iii. 377, 397, 448

Cole, Sir William, of Fermanagh, i. 103

Coles, the, of Fermanagh, 1. 98 note

Coleraine, pestilence in, i. 109

College Green, li. 242, 428

Collins, Mr., iii. 117 note

Collis, Mr., vicar of Tralee, i. 486

Colpoys, Admiral, iii. 230

Colville, iii. 109

Commons, House of, i. 346-348; ii. 420,
430, 486, 489, 476, 482

Commons, Report of the Secret Commit-
tee of the Irish House of, iii. 248

Commercial propositions, iii. 123

503.
cow

Committee, Revolutionary, iii. 315

Comyn, Mr., iii. 233

Concord, ii. 136, 138

Condoreet, iii. 64

Congress, proposed, ii, 410, 416, 418

Coningsby, Thomas, becomes Lord Co-
ningsby of Clanbrassil, i. 195 note, 219,
231, 271 note

Connaught, i. 57, 80, 133, 136

Connaught, Eyre, i. 410; iii.
197, 233, 303

Connecticut, 11. 206

Connell, Maurice, i. 476

Conolly, Mr., i. 382; elected Speaker, 383 ;
Lord Justice, 535

Conolly, Tom, ii. 109 note, 156, 239, 294,
370, 388, 498, 507; iii. 80, 113

Conspiracy Act, 11. 475

Constabulary, ii. 459

Constitution of 82, 11.274, 394, 420, 421,
458, 494, 498, 512; ili. 6, 75, 147, 196,
239

Convention, the, ii. 354, 386, 395; iii.
69, 71, 75, 83, 296

Convention Bill, iii. 113, 115

Convocation, address of, i. 349

Cooke, Edward, Army Secretary, ii. 45

Cooke, Edward, iii. 92, 418

Cooper, Captain, i. 280

Cooper, Mr., 111. 110

Coote, Sir Charles, of Castle Coote, 1.
113, ‘128, 143; created Earl of Mont-
rath, 147

Coote, Sir Eyre, ii. 282

Cootes, the, 11. 127

Corbet Hill, in. 406

Corby, Mr., of Stradbally, created Lord
Corby, ii. 69 note

Cork; 13..11,..17, 775219, .282ie292- a1.
174, 207, 213, 213, 291, 328, 355

Cork, Bishop of, 11. 33

Cork, Dean of, ii. 147

Cork Harbour, ii. 96, and note,

Cork Squadron, the, 1. 389

Corn Bill, Irish, i. 400

Cornwallis, Lord, i1. 206, 283, 284, 286,
299, 320; ili. 806, 339; Viceroy, iii.
457, 458, 461, 466, 489

Corrigrua Hill, iii. 378, 379

Corruption, 11. 106

Corry, James, i. 222

Corry, Mr., ii. 512; iii. 81

Cotter, James, 1. 418 note, 432

Cotter, Sir James, i. 354, 431

Council, Irish, ii. 301, 425; il. 48

County Police Bill, 11. 489

Cove Fort, ii. 96

Cowkeepers, ii. 22 note

Cow Pens, defeat of Gen. Tarleton at, ii.
283

161, 188,

504

cox

Cox, Sir Richard, i. 198, 878; Chancel-
lor, 302

Cradock, Colonel, iii. 155 note

Craik, Mr., of Arbigland, ii. 212

Crawford, Colonel, iii. 408 note

Creighton, John, 11. 109 note

Crichton, Abraham, created Lord Erne,
ii. 69 note

Crillon, Due de, ii. 338

Croix, M. de la, Minister for Foreign
Affairs at Paris, 111. 190-193, 194, 200,
246, 281

Cromwell, Henry, i. 143

Cromwell, Oliver, i. 118, 119, 122, 124,
and note, 126, 127, 132, 138, 137, 149,
285; iii. 376, 406, 440, 464, 468

Cromwell, Richard, i. 143

Cromwell’s troopers, ii. 130

Croppies, ili. 336

Crosbie, Mr. Arthur, Clerk of the Crown
for Kerry, i. 480, 481, 484, 497

Crosbie, Sir Edward, iii. 365, and note

Crosbies of Ballyhige House, or Castle,
1. 478

Crosby, Bridget, or Widow Maghee, 1. 467

Crosby, Sir Maurice, of Ardfert, i. 467

Cuffe, Mr., iii. 148

Cullimore, Isaac, 1. 416 note

Cummins, Mr., iii. 300

Cunningham, Colonel, i. 616 note ; ii. 109
note

Cunningham, General, i. 52

Curragh, il. 373

Curran, li. 889, 419 note, 441, 444 note;
iii. 28, 116 note, 120, 121, 150, 168,
243, 252; Master of the Rolls, 301,
330, 475

Curry, Dr., 11. 18, 479, 480 note

Cusack, Adam, i. 372

Cusack, Robert, i. 872, 3738

Cusacks, case of the, 1. 872

Customs duties, ii. 161

ALE, Catherine, iii. 435 xote
Dale, Joseph, 111. 435 note
Dallas, iii. 318
Dalrymple, General, 11. 177, 204, 209,
210, 211, 214, 230
Daly, Bowes, 11. 388, 389
Daly, Denis, il. 178, 237, 359
Daly, Mr. Justice, i. 168
Damer, Mr., i. 419
Dandaels, General, iii. 262, 265
Danmanus, iii. 209
Darlington, Lady, i. 519
Darragh, Mr., iii. 328
Darrynane Abbey, the O’Connells of, i.
463
D’Auvergne, Captain, iil. 287

INDEX.

DOP

Dawson, Joshua, i. 280, and note, 282
note, 283 note

Dawson, Richard, i. 283

Dawson, Thomas, created Lord Dartry, ii.
69

Dawson, W. H., created Lord Portarling-
ton, il. 69

Day, Mr., ii. 330 note

Deal, iii. 313

Declaration of Independence, ii. 200

‘ Defenders,’ ii. 489; iii. 104, 105, 110,
152, 154, 162 note, 165, 168, 175, 192,
298

Delafaye, Secretary, i. 884 note

Delaware, the, ii. 202

Delegates, ili. 257

Democracies, iil. 3

Denmark, Queen of, ii. 149

Dennis, Mr., i. 549 note

Dennis, Mr. James, made Prime Sergeant,
li. 147 and note,155, 169

Derry, i. 181, 188, 319 ; ii. 180, 181; iii.
19, 151

Derry, Bishop of, Frederick Augustus
Hervey, Earl of Bristol, ii. 370, 371,
380, 382, 383, 386, 392, 398, 398, 399,
418, 449

De Ruvigny, Earl of Galway, i. 250

Desmond, i. 24

Desmond, Earl of, i. 52, 53, 56

Desmond, house of, i. 52, 53

Devereux, John, ili. 71

Devonshire, Duke of, Viceroy, i. 422, 451,
585; li. 46, 55 note, 150; iii. 232,
454

Diamond, battle of the, iii. 154

Dickson, Dr., Bishop of Down, iii. 294

Dignam, Garrat, ii. 411

Dillon, Count, i. 585

Dillon, General, i. 559

Dillon, Gerard, Prime Sergeant, i. 186

Dingle, i. 280 note; iii. 110

Directory, French, iii. 112, 159, 192, 193,
198, 260, 278, 287, 298, 302, 314, 339

Dissenters, i. 835, 359

Dissenters’ Relief Bill, i. 384, 387; ii.
217, 407; iti. 47, 261, 248, 249

Dixon, iii. 396

Dixon, the shipowner, iil. 432, 488, 439,
445

Dobbin, Elizabeth, i. 421

Doddington, George, i. 320, 321 note, 323

Donegal, iii. 66

Donegal Arms, iii. 19, 60

Donegal, Lord, ii. 141, 478; iii. 151

Donegal, Marquis of, ii. 120

Donoughmore, Earl of, ii. 61 note

Donoghue, the, i. 477

Dopping, Anthony, Bishop of Meath, i.
188, 189, 224

INDEX.

DOR

Dorchester, Catherine Sedley, Countess
of, i. 801 note

Dorchester Heights, ii. 200

Dorset, Duke of, Viceroy, i. 497, 498, 574,
581, 582; again Viceroy, 610, 611;
ii. 5

Dowdall, iii. 418

Dowling, Mary, iii. 435 note

Dowling, Patrick, ii. 435 note

Down, 1. 69, 152; ii. 181; ii. 10, 18, 67,
151, 245 note, 303, 3899

Downshire, iii. 179

Downshire, Lord, iii. 278-281, 284, 304,
3805, 314, 418, 452

Downshire men, iii. 214

Drapier’s Letters, 1. 531, 533-535, 536,
037, 539

Drennan, Dr., iii. 10, 119

Drogheda, i. 118, 128, 124, 195; iii.
258

Drogheda, Lord, 11. 29, 32, 75

Drumlannon, il. 33 !

Drunkenness attacked by the Irish House
of Commons, 1. 593

Drury, Captain, 111. 384, 385

Dublin, Archbishop of, ii. 33

Dublin, Artillery corps of, ii. 382

Dublin Castle, i. 97, 100; 11. 341

Dublin Committee, iii. 270

Dublin incendiaries, 11. 454

Dublin merchants, ii. 9

Dublin Police Bill, ii. 484

Duelling, 11. 194, 447

Duels in the Phenix Park, ii. 148

Duff, Sir James, ili. 8372, 873, 444

Duigenan, Dr., iii. 86, 94, 147, 181

Dumourier, ili. 65, 106

Dunboy Castle, 1. 457

Dunboyne, ili. 357

Duncan, Admiral, ili. 263, 265, 287

Duncannon, iii. 392, 486

Duncombe, Mr., Lord Justice, i. 241

Dundalk, i. 118, 126

Dundas, General, iii. 339, 365, 367 and
note, 370, 372, 436, 443, 444

Dundas, Mr., iii. 25, 34, 87, 38-40, 42,
43 and note, 58, 64, 66, 71, 76, 83, 86,
108, 110, 113, 122, 133, 248, 253, 261,
427, 451, 454

Dunleckny, ii. 359

Dunluce, Lord, son of the Harl of Antrim,
11. 109 note

Dungannon, ii. 96, 307, 309, 311, 369,
380; ili. 838, 95

Dungannon, Baron, i. 43

Dungannon Convention, iil. 100

Dungannon resolutions, ii. 817, 355

Dungannon Volunteers, il. 488; iii. 1, 3.
See Volunteers

Dunkerron, barony of, 1. 452

505
EYR
Dunmanway, iii. 209
Dunmore, i. 90 note
Dunn, the blacksmith, iii. 250-252, 270
288
Dunning, Mr., ii. 155
Dunshaughlin, iii. 357
Durseys, ii. 219
Dutch, the, ii. 267, 275, 282, 337
Dutch army and fleet, iii. 262
Dwyer, Captain, 11. 24, 28
Dyson, Jerry, ii. 108

AGER, George, i. 469 note, 470 note
Hast Indian monopoly, ui. 123
Echlin, Robert, Bishop of Raphoe, i. 77
Eden, Mr., afterwards Lord Auckland,
ii. 204, 286, 290, 312, 316, 320-322,
327

Education Act, foreign, ii. 312

Education, ii. 460, 451;
451

Edward L., i. 8

Edward VI., i. 42

Egan, Mr., iii. 26, 46, 50 and note, 116
note, 241

Egremont, Lord, ii. 17, 26

Egremont, Wyndham Earl of, Secretary
of State, il. 6, 8

Egypt, army in, li. 61 note

Elizabeth, Queen, 1. 45, 48, 50

Elliot, Admiral, i. 624

Elliot, General, ii. 280, 338, 339

Elliott, Mr., iii. 428

Ellis, Welbore, ii. 55 note

Elphin, Bishop of, i. 515

Ely, Lord, ii. 218; ii. 231

Emmett, Robert, i. 10, 41 note, 259,
331

Emmett, Thomas Addis, iii. 10, 120, 288,
3817, 474, 481

English settlers, i. 499

Enniskillen, i. 182, 184

Enniscorthy, iii. 1:0, 375, 383, 384, 386,
401

Enniskillen, 1. 98, 103

Enniskillen, Lord, ii. 251

Ennisworthy, iil. 434

Erris, ii. 110

Erskine, Captain, 11. 119

Erskine, Lord, iii. 173, 320

Esmonde, Dr., iii. 859, 3860, 863, 364

Esmonde, Sir Thomas, of Wexford, iii.
359

Essex, Earl of, i. 53, 61, 62

Established Church of Ireland, i. 157

Estaing, Count d’, ii, 205

‘Evan,’ i. 411, 412

Exodus of the Irish, i. 393

Eyres, the, ii. 127

industrial,

506

EYR

Eyre, Colonel Stratford, Governor of Gal-
way, 1. 326, 598, 599 and note, 601
Eyre, John, created Lord Eyre, ii. 69 note

AIRFIELD, ii. 206
Falkland Isles, seized by Spain, ii. 96

Farnham, Lord, ii. 370

Faweett, General, iii. 392, 393, 395

Felons, i. 593

Fencibles, Durham, iii. 420

Fencibles, Midlothian, iii. 406

Fenn, Edward, i. 433

Fergusson, Mr., iii. 318

Ferns, iii. 378

Ferns, Bishop of, i1. 364

Ferris, James, iii. 250

Fetherstone, Mr., ii. 181

Few mountains, iii. 196

Fingal, Lord, i. 86, 404; iii. 25, 35, 244,
366

Fitton, Sir Alexander, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, i. 177

Fitzgeralds of Kildare, ii. 5; iit. 358

Fitzgerald, Edward, iii. 283, 340; of New
Park, ili. 878, 444

Fitzgerald, George Robert, of Turlow, ii.
381 and note, 382 note, 386

Fitzgerald, Lady Edward, ii. 278, 280,
283, 342

Fitzgerald, Lady Lucy, iii. 281, 283

Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, ii. 46, 422 ; iii.
38, 82, 168, 178, 174, 199, 216, 277,
278, 282, 287, 288, 304, 312, 314, 316,
317, 339 note, 340, 342-344, 351, 377,
392, 454

Fitzgerald, Lord Henry, ii. 498

Fitzgerald, Lord Thomas, i. 39, 40; iil.
3844

Fitzgerald, Mr., ii. 181

Fitzgerald, Mr. Austin, 1. 422, 423

Fitzgerald, Mr. Thomas Judkin, iil. 337

Fitzgerald, Sergeant, 1. 431 ; Prime Ser-
geant, 111. 41, 240

Fitzgibbon, John, Attorney-General, ii. 47

Fitzgibbon, the Right Hon. John, son
of the last, afterwards Earl of Clare,
li. 40, 48, 50, 104, 181, 294, 308,
305, 3811, 312, 314, 317, 318, 389-
391, 395, 399, 400, 417-419, 428, 429,
431, 486, 441-444, 460-464, 470, 475,
476, 477, 480, 482, 484, 486, 496, 498,
501 note, 508, 505, 510, 515 and note;
iii. 89, 41, 52, 57, 68, 69, 87, 89, 95,
112, 115, 125, 128, 131, 143, 144, 163,
194, 226, 253, 294, 308, 312

Fitzherbert, Mr., 11. 496

Fitzmaurice, Lord, i. 470 note, 472, 475,
476, 493

Fitzpatricks, the, 1. 373

*

INDEX.

FRE

Fitzpatrick, Colonel, ii. 345, 380

Fitzpatrick, Mr., 599 note

Fitzpatrick of Upper Ossory, ii. 150

Fitzsimon, Henry, i. 461

Fitzsimon, Walter, i. 461

Fitzwilliam crisis, the, iii. 75

Fitzwilliam, Lord, 1. 560

Fitzwilliam, Lord, Viceroy, iii. 122; 124,
125, 128, 1338-135, 141, 145, 152, 156,
232, 239, 241. 450, 454, 455

Flax manufacture, ii, 162

Fleetwood, General, i. 129, 151

Fleming, Mr., Lord Mayor, iii. 357

Flood, Henry, ii. 46,47, 59, 61, 67, 78,
84, 92, 102, 107, 108, 111, 146, 155,
156, 158, 168-174, 178, 183, 223,
224, 238, 295-297, 300, 301, 303, 304,
306, 308, 315, 317, 333, 345, 347, 348,
351, 352, 361, 375-379, 387, 389, 392,
418, 419 note, 481, 435, 440, 441, 460,
462, 477; ili. 218, 296, 392

Flood, Warden, Chief Justice of the King’s
Bench, ii. 49

Fontenoy, battle of, ii. 34, 127

Foote, Colonel, ii1. 381, 382

Forbes, Edward, i. 331, 340, 357

Forbes, Mr., member for Ratoath, i.
462, 463, 468, 513; iii. 81

Foreign Education Act, 1. 307

Forfeiture, Act of, 11. 305, 310

Fortescue, James, ii. 109 note

Forth, Mount, iii, 392, 436

Foster, Right Hon. John, Speaker of the
House of Commons, created Lord Oriel,
i). 238 note, 261; ili. 29, 94

Fostering, 1. 25

Foulk’s Mill, iii. 436

Foundling Hospital, the, iii. 29, 30, 243
note

Four Masters, i. 31

Fox, Right Hon. Charles James, ii. 323,
334, 335; 341, 342, 363, 362, 3738, 374,
376, 425; clerk of the Pells in Ire-
land, 1. 219 note; 111. 178, 239, 320,
822, 451

France, i. 622; 11. 204, 211, 252-254, 274,
280, 282, 338; 111. 5, 6, 16, 22, 64, 135,
158, 161, 170, 177, 198, 229, 262, 289,
349, 372, 400

France, King of, 11. 32

Franklin, Dr. ii. 186, 204, 208; iii. 18,
106

‘ Freeman’s Journal,’ ii. 512

Free Trade, ii. 167, 263, 375, 399

French, the, ii. 182, 188, 283; iii. 110,
257, 339, 377, 399

French fleet, ii. 205, 280, 282, 304, 340;
ili. 51 217, 2338, 252

French Invasion of Ireland, iii. 120, 320

Frenchmen, ii. 430

INDEX,

FRE

French, James, ii. 32

French, Nicholas, i. 103 note

French Revolution, the, 11. 8, 5, 23, 76,
491

French, Sir Thomas, iii. 71, 84 note

Friends, persecution of, i. 438

AGE, General, ii. 136, 138, 189
Gallowglass, iii. 217

Galway, Articles of, il. 42

Galway, Earl of, De Ruvigny, i. 250

Gardiner, Luke (afterwards Lord Mount-
joy), ii. 216, 308, 305, 311, 312, 361,
417, 430, 481, 434; iii. 410 note

Gates, General, ii. 206

George, Dr., i. 193 note

George I., 6th of, i1. 336, 341, 347

George IT., i. 518, 559

George III., 11. 40, 42, 118, 149, 191,
328, 343, 410, 491, 492, 495, 508, 509,
511; 11. 181, 157, 165, 171 mote, 124,
290, 292, 472

Georgia, li. 206

Geraldines, the, i. 24, 30

Germaine, Lord George, ii. 282

German linens, ii. 423, 443

German troops, iii. 306

Germans, 11i. 197

Germany, ii. 149, 163

Geylin, Samuel, 11. 25 note

Gibbet Rath, i11. 373

Gibbon, Edward, iii. 241

Gibraltar, ii. 274, 280, 298, 338, 339

Ginkel, Baron Godard de,i. 196; Earl of
Athlone, 196 note, 201

Giraldus Cambrensis, 1. 15 note

Glamorgan, Earl of, 1. 116

Glass, tax on, il. 134

Glendalough, iii. 375

Glentworth, Lord, iii. 293

Gloucester, Duke of, i. 283

Godolphin, Lord, i. 313, 348

Godwin, Bishop of Elphin, i. 535

Godwyn, Dr., Bishop of Kilmore and
Ardagh, i. 353 note

Goldsmith’s Corps of Volunteers, iii. 84

Good Hope, Cape of, 11. 338

Gordon, Mr. iii. 372, 421

Gorey, iii. 377, 398, 403, 419, 421-423,
436, 445

Gorges, Ric., 11. 109 note

Gormanston, Lord, i. 86, 580, 581

Gormanstown, Lord, ii. 25, 35

Gosford, Lord, iii. 859, 364

Grafton, Duke of, a Lord Justice, i. 382,
384, 523, 525, 529, 559, 561

Granard, Lord, made Lord Justice, i. 166

Grandy, Richard, iii, 412 note

Grantham, Lord, ii. 77

507

HAM

Grasse, Count de, ii. 283, 284, 285, 338

Grattan, father of Henry, Recorder of
Dublin, ii. 50, 51

Grattan, Henry, ii. 50, 188, 185, 209,
237, 288, 243-245, 256, 258, 266, 277-
279, 289, 295, 297, 298, 300, 304, 308-—
$10, 315-318, - 320-822, $24,)..3262
329, 330 note, 331, 334, 335, 340, 342-
344, 347, 352, 354, 359, 373, 376, 378,
3879, 386, 387, 388, 399, 401, 424, 425,
431, 488, 439, 441, 449, 463, 467, 468,
477, 480, 481, 482, 486, 491, 495, 496,
497, 502, 504, 505, 507 508, 509-511,
512, 519; iii. 5, 6, 16, 18, 26, 29-31,
44, 61, 76, 77, 80, 81, 89, 92, 102, 112,
116, 122, 128, 125; 126, 128, 130, 131,
1438, 144, 145, 147, 149, 167, 168, 180,
196, 218, 222, 238, 224, 232, 233, 236,
239, 240, 243, 252-254, 261, 267, 271,
296, 297, 320, 380, 346, 368, 392, 450,
462

Graves, Admiral, ii. 285

Graziers, li. 22 note

Great Britain, ii. 355, 420, 435

Green, Mr., member for Dungarvan, ii.
433, 434

Greene, General, 11. 284

Gregory XIIL., iii. 198

Grenville, Lord, ii. 34, 138, 361; 111. 9,
275, 296, 452 ;

Greville, Mr., i1i. 267

Grey, Earl, iii. 178, 321

Grey, Lord, Viceroy, i. 55

Griffiths, Mr. ii. 495

Griffiths, Captain, 111. 359, 362

Grogan, Cornelius, iii. 397, 447, 448

Grouchy, General, 111. 202, 204, 206

Grove, Miss Susannah, 1. 421

Guildford, 11. 284

Guinness, ili. 120

Gunpowder Plot, i. 66; Act, 111. 197

Gurney, 111. 318

Guyon, Hugh, i. 499 note

ABEAS CORPUS ACT, ii. 1638, 164,
295; i. 179, 180, 226
Hacket, Bishop of Down and Connor, i.
158, 248, 244
Hackney, Darby, i. 437, 438
Hale, Bernard, Chief Baron, 1. 536
Haliday, Dr., ii. 60
Halifax, Earl of, Viceroy, 11. 6, 8, 16
Hamburgh, iii. 173, 278, 280, 281, 282,
292
Hamilton, Dr., iii. 234
Hamilton, General, i. 180
Hamilton, Mr., iii. 109, 299
Hamilton, William Gerard, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, 11. 55 note

508

HAM

Hampden, iii. 181

Hanover, House of, i. 861, 366

Harbourers, i. 280 note

Harcourt correspondence, ii. 185 note

Harcourt, Earl of, Viceroy, i. 447; ii.
145, 186, 187

Harden, John, ii. 24 note

Hardwick, Lord, iii. 181

Hardy, General, ili. 482, 483

Hardy, Major, ili. 419

Harrington, Lord, Viceroy, i. 606, 608

Harris, Dr., 1. 480

Hartington, Lord, Viceroy, i. 612, 613;
li. 46

Harvey, ii. 197

Harvey, Mr. Bagenal, ili. 377, 383, 396,
397, 398, 406, 415, 419, 448

Hassett, Mr. Thomas, perhaps Blenner-
hassett, 1. 489

Hastings, Warren, 11. 282

Hawke, Admiral, i. 623; 11. 15

Hay, Mr. Edward, ii. 371, 388, 394 note,
413 note, 446

Hay, John, i. 388, 444, 447

Hayes, Catherine, 1. 485 note

Healey, John, 1. 435 note

Hearts of Steel movement, 11. 164, 120,
488

Heath, Sir John, iii. 318

Hedge schools, i. 511

Heitmann, Captain, 1. 490, 497

Hemp, ii. 162

Henessey, John, 1. 550 note

Henry VIII, i. 37; King of Ireland, 1.
41; 0.127

Heron, Sir Robert, Irish Secretary, 11.
238, 287

Hertford, Lord, Viceroy, 11. 39-44

Hervey, Frederick Augustus, Earl of
Bristol and Bishop of Derry, 11. 380,
882, 388, 386, 392, 398, 398, 399

Hessian troops, 11. 179

Hewett, a Judge of the Court of King’s
Bench, created Lord Lifford and Chan-
cellor, 11. 58

Hewetson, Mr., ii. 30, 32

Higgins, Mr., 11. 512

Higgins, Father, ii. 3859, 360

High Church party, 11. 131

Hillsborough, Lord, ii. 244, 246, 247,
2538, 254, 288, 289, 315, 318, 404

Hill, Sir George, iii. 188 note, 485

Hindostan, 11..274

Hoadley, Archbishop, i. 610

Hobart, Major (afterwards Earl of Buck-
inghamshire), il. 520; i. 37, 38, 42,
45, 46, 48, 58, 65, 66, 69, 71, 72, 83,
85, 88, 89, 91-93 and mote, 104, 108;
created Lord Hobart, and sent to
Madras, 114, 115 note

INDEX.

IVE

Hoche, General, ii. 412; iii. 173-175, 192,
199-202, 230, 248, 262, 265, 278, 281,
282, 283, 477

Hogan, John, called Shan Reagh, i. 442,
445 note

Home rule under the Normans, i. 29

Hopkins, Ezekiel, Bishop of Derry, i. 181

House of Commons, Irish, ii. 365, 388

House of Lords, Irish, ii. 401

Howe, ii. 208

Howe, Lord, Admiral, ii. 349 ; iii. 51

Howe, General Sir William, ii. 139, 140,
200

Humanity, religion of, iii. 352

Humbert, General, iii. 482-484

Hunter, General, iii. 449

Hussey, Dr., iii. 63 note, 184-186, 187

Hutchinson, Colonel (afterwards General
Lord Hutchinson), iii. 51, 488

Hutchinson, Francis, iii. 51, 52

Hutchinson, Hely, i. 335, 447, 632; ii.
47, 60, 61 note, 65, 81, 90, 108, 168,
223, 228, 238, 261, 268, 301, 305, 318,
314, 326, 328, 344, 388, 404, 515

Hutchinson, Henry, Lord, ii. 61 note

Hutchinson, Richard, Earl of Donough-
more, ii. 61 note

Hutton, Mr., iii. 59

Hyder Ali, 11. 282

NCENDIARIES, ii. 454
Inchiquin, Lord, i. 153
Indemnity, Act of, iii. 162, 165, 171
Independence, 11. 502
Independence, declaration of, ii. 290, 291,
322, 328
Independence, 11. 309
Independents, 1. 154, 156
India, ii. 14, 274, 282
Indies, East, ii. 438
indies, West, 11. 438
Informers, i. 378 ; iil. 1638, 237
Innocent X., iii. 198
Insurrection of 1641, i. 89, 99,
154
Insurrection Act, ii. 4793 iii.
275, 299, 372, 377
Insurrection Bill, ii. 483
Intermarriage Act, 111. 35, 48
Inquisition, 111. 295
Ireton, his Irish estates, 1. 151
Irish Brigade, iii. 87
Trish in America, ii. 141
Irishman, i. 7, 8, 10, 22, 39, 1938, 324
Irishman, the modern, ii. 127
Italy, Bonaparte’s campaign in, ii. 197 ;
Protestants of, iii. 23
Iveragh, barony of, 1. 452

114,

197, 242,

INDEX.

JAC

ACOBINS, iii. 22, 59, 64, 79, 108, 153,
157, 183, 302, 378, 899, 417, 425,

430, 459

Jacobin clubs, iii. 298

Jacobin institutions, iii. 298

Jacobitism, 1. 232

Jackson, Mr., of Armagh, iii. 20, 66, 117,
118, 120, 121, 147, 158, 316, 317

Jamaica, ii. 283, 338

James I., ii. 276

James II., i. 170, 178, 182, 186, 194, 365;
ii. 806; 111. 98

Jamie, Captain, i. 7, 8

Jenkinson, Mr. (afterwards Earl of Liver-
pool), Clerk of the Pells in Ireland, ii.
219 note

Jephson, Mr. Denham, ii. 147; iti. 362

Jew brokers of Spain, 11. 176

Johnson, Mr., iii. 27

Johnstone, Edward, of Carroe, 1. 4384

Johnstone, General, iii. 406-409, 436,
437, 443

Jones, Colonel Michael, i. 117, 118

Jones, Dr., Dean of Kilmore, i. 95 note

Jones, Dr. H. (afterwards Bishop of
Meath), i. 139, and note

Jones, Mr. Todd, ii. 481, 505; ii. 109

Jones, Paul, 1.362 ; ii. 212, 235, and note,
236, 255

Joyeuse, Admiral, iii. 201, 202

Juan de Aguila, Don, i. 62

Juan de Langara, Admiral Don, ii. 280

Judges Tenure Bill, ii. 58, 54, 57, 59, 62,
105, 184, 249, 290

Jury, trial by, iil. 467

Justice to Ireland, ii. 218

ZAOLLY, Doctor Laughlin, titular
Archbishop of Tuam, i. 89 note
Keating, Chief Justice, i. 180, 187
Keating, Mr., i. 169; 1. 30
Kelly, Pat, 1. 469, 470
Kelly, Roger, 1. 443-445
Kendal, Duchess of, i. 518, 522; 11. 77
Kenmare Bay, i. 455
Kenmare colony, i. 245
Kenmare river, i. 451
Kenmare, smelting furnaces at, i. 245
Kenmare, Lord, 1. 404; 11. 18, 385, 473;
ll. 25, 35, 244
Keogh, John, iii. 25, 33, 52 note, 56,
67,68; 69; 70, 71; 73, 77, £8, 83,.208,
135, 144, 158, 159, 165, 178, 179, 183,
190, 197, 259, 396, 482
Keppel, Van, Lord of Voorst, created
Earl of Albemarle, i. 221 note
Keris, Honor, i. 423
Kern, Father, iii, 401
Kernes, iii. 217

509

LAW

Kerry, i. 470, 478 ; ii. 455, 4738; iii. 109,
303

Kerry, Earl of, i. 256, 498, 495

Kerry, Knight of, in 1740, i. 451

Ker’s dragoons, i. 353

Kilconnell, i. 90 note

Kilcullen, ii. 865, 367, 370

Kildare, Earl Gerald of, i. 34

Kildare, Earl of, i. 89, 516, 617, 618; ii.
107, 146

Kilfinnan, iil. 111

Kilkenny, i. 25, 115, 116, 120; 11. 110,
375, 398, 419, 446

Kilkenny and Kildare Militia, iii. 246

Killarney, i. 469 note, 470

Killala, ii. 482, 483

Killala, Bishop of, iii. 65

Kilmakilloge, i. 245, 249

Kilmuckridge, 111. 880

King, Archbishop, i. 318, 389, 535; ii.
449

King, Bishop of Derry (afterwards Arch-
bishop of Dublin), i. 252, 285

King, Captain, ii. 406

King, Charles, i. 449 note

King, Mr. Rufus, ii. 481

King’s County, i. 377 note; iii. 74

Kingsale, i. 118, 182, 184

Kingsborough, Lord (afterwards Earl of
Kingston), iii. 432, 440, 441, 445, 447

Kingsmill, Admiral, 111. 210

Kingston, Duchess of, ili, 117

Kingston, Lord i. 256

Kirkeudbright Bay, ii. 213

Kirwan, Mr., 1. 271 note

Knipe, Mr., 111. 299

Knox, Mr., iii. 94

Knox, Sir George, ii. 148

ACY, General, ii. 127
La Fayette, ii. 205, 281, 284 ; i11. 87

Lake, General (afterwards Lord Lake),
ili. 234, 235, 255, 258, 268, 269, 270,
274, 291, 300, 329, 832, 338, 335, 336,
355, 357, 358, 400, 404, 486, 438, 444,
446, 447, 448, 478, 483

Land, i. 130, 507 note

Landlord exactions, ii. 53, 120-124, 469,
481, 482

Landregan, David, ii. 32

Lanesborough, Earl of, ii. 85 and zote, 90

Langrishe, Sir Hercules, ii. 436 ; i11. 42,
45, 47, 49, 58, 86, 148

Lansdowne, Lord, iii. 451

La Touche, Messrs., ii. 212

La Touche, Peter, ii. 269, 294

Lauderdale, Earl of, 111. 321

Lawder, Rev. Francis, Vicar General, i.
470, 471, 473

510

LAW

Law, Doctor, iii. 95

Law, Irish Courts of, 11. 325

Lawless, Mr., 111. 287, 312, 418

Lawrence, Sir Soulden, iii. 318

Lee, Mr., ii. 155; iii. 247

Légion Noire, iii. 201

Legislature of Ireland, ili. 5

Legislatures, 11. 197

Lehaunstown, ii. 340

Leinster, 11. 828, 355

Leinster, Countess of, i. 518

Leinster, Duke of, ii. 45, 46, 65, 78, 92,
93, 146, 187, 238, 239, 275, 261, 264,
857, 396, 404, 411, 413, 508, 504, 507,
509, 511, 516-518; ii. 112, 186, 173,
199, 224, 245, 267, 270, 287, 3389 note,
308, 450, 454

Leinster House, iii. 46, 82, 312, 317

Leitrim, iii. 109

Lent, 1. 370 note

Leslie, Bishop of Raphoe, i. 158

Leslie, John, Bishop of Down, i. 77

L’Estrange, Colonel, 111. 401, 419

Levinge, Sir Richard, i. 270, 354

Lewin, Mr. Ross, i. 424

Lewines, iii. 283

Lewines, Ed., iii. 117, 259, 262, 266, 267
note

Leixleap Castle, 1. 125 note

Lexington, ii. 1389, 174; ii. 399

Liberation, Acts of, 11. 375

Liberty, i. 604; 11. 366

Lifford, Lord, Chancellor of Ireland, ii.
58, 59, 223, 225, 503, 519

Limerick, Articles of, 1. 202, 204, 255 ;
ii. 42

Limerick, defences of, ii. 77

Lindsay, Archbishop, 1. 384

Lindsay, Dr., Bishop of Killaloe, i. 252

Linen Hall of Belfast, iii. 18, 59

Linen manufacture of Ulster, ii. 71

Linen trade, ii. 124, 162, 421, 4238, 448

Lisburn, ii. 368

Lismore, Lord, Mr. O’Callaghan created,
11. 405

Lloyd, Wm., Bishop of Killala, 1. 252

Loftus, General, iii. 401, 402, 403, 405,
419, 436, 443

Loftus, Lord, 11. 91, 92, 100, 102, 106,
515, 516; created an Karl 11. 619

Loftus, Mr. ii. 401, 405

Londonderry, i. 75 note; iii. 151; house
of, 1. 519

Longfield, 11. 155

Longford, iii. 152

Long Island, 11. 201

Longueville, Lord, iii. 178, 225

Lords Justices, government of the, 11. 35

Lords, House of, 1. 346-348

L Orient, ii, 235

INDEX.

MAG

Lorraine, Duke of, i. 128

Loughborough, Lord, iii. 275

Louis XIV., i. 197, 198

Louis XV., ii. 14

Louis XVL., ii. 430

Louth, iii. 66 note, 105

Louth, Earl of, ii. 85 nete

Lowry, iii. 265

Lowry, A., iii. 282, 283

Lowth, Lord, i. 256

Lowther, Chief Justice, i. 91

Loyalty, spontaneous, iii. 170

Lucas, ii. 65, 78; iii. 218

Lucas, Charles, i. 606, 607, 608

Lucas, Mr. Thomas, i. 423

Ludlow, General, i. 128, 151

Lundy, Colonel, i. 183

Luttrell’s Town, iii. 178

Luttrell, Colonel (afterwards Lord Car-
hampton), il. 322, 395, 417; iii. 161,
455, 460, 471, 472, 474. See Car-
hampton

Lysaght, Mr. ii. 147

ACARTNEY, Sir George, ii. 93, 103,
104° i232
MacArt’s Fort, iii. 160, 165
McCabe, iii. 106
McCann, iii. 316, 317
McCann, John, iii. 475, 476
MacCarty, i. 473
MacCarty, of Newry, ii. 255
McCracken, iii. 62
McCormick, Richard, iii. 57, 65, 185, 159,
316, 317, 125,7283
MacDonnell, or MacConnell, Sir Randal,
Earl of Antrim, i. 69
Macdonnell, Alaster, 1. 106
MacDonnell, Dr., ii. 59
McGuchin, iii. 411
Mackay, i. 198
McKenna, Dr., iii. 39
MacMahon, 1. 440
Macmahon, Emer, afterwards Bishop of
Clogher, i. 89, 96, 128
MacMahon, Hugh, i. 96, 97, 100
Macmanus, Captain, iii. 446
Macmorris, Captain, 1. 7, 8
MacMorrough, ii. 340
MeMurdoch, Mr., iii. 175 note
MacMurrough, Dermot, Prince of Lein-
ster, 1. 16
MaeNally, iii. 117, 120
MacNeven, iii. 125, 229, 260, 262, 278,
283, 317, 352, 474, 478, 481
MacTier, iii. 61
Maddin, Dr., i. 412
Madras, iii. 114 note
Magee, Island, 1. 103, 104

INDEX.

MAG

Magennis, Sir Con, i. 97

Magistrates, 11. 447, 484 ; iii, 168
Magna Charta, iii. 17

at le Lord, of Fermanagh, i. 96, 97,

Mahony, Mr. Daniel (or Donell), i. 452,
454, 477

Maitland, lil. 283

Maidstone, ili. 815

Malby, Sir Nicholas, i. 57

Malone, ii. 57, 108

Malone, Mr. Anthony, Irish Chancellor
of the Exchequer, i. 621 ; ii. 6, 82, 109
note

Malone, Mr., nephew to Anthony, 1i. 109
note, 181

Manchester, ii. 104

Mansfield, Lord, ii. 360, 361

Marcray Castle, in Sligo, iii. 109

Margate, iii. 313, 318

Marino, ii. 386

Marlborough, Duke of, i. 344

Marseillais, iii. 69

‘ Marseillaise,’ iii. 191

Martin, the member for James Town, ii.
352

Martin, of Ballinahinch, i. 477

Martin, Dick, ii. 381 note

Martin, Robert, i. 598

Mary, Queen, and Philip IL, 1. 42

Mason, Monk, ii. 460

Massachusetts Chambers, ii.
141, 206

Massereene, Lord, ii. 180

Massey, Hugh, 11. 109 note

Mathews, ifs ., Archdeacon of Down, i.
239, 243, 244

Matthieson, Mrs., of Hamburgh, iii. 288

Maude, Sir Thomas, ii. 32

Maxwell, Colonel, iii. 392, 394

Maxwell, Henry, i. 288, 290, 387

‘May Flower,’ ii. 129

Mayne, Sir William, i1. 85 note, 92

Maynooth College, iii. 146

Mayo, iii. 109

Meath, iii. 66, 74, 303, 366

Meath, Bishop of, i. 379

Mervyn, Colonel Audley, i. 102 note,

Meskell, Joanna, ii. 24, 25 note, 28

Methodism, i. 628

Methuen, Chancellor of Ireland, i. 250

Middleton, Lord, Lord Justice, i. 524,
535, 542

Milan, iii. 198, 256

Militia Act, ii. 232

Militia, Antrim, iii. 422

Militia, Armagh, iii. 359

Militia Bill, u. 78, 211, 219, 428, 434;
il. 89, 359, 419, 483

Militia, regiments of, formed, i. 164

134, 136,

511
MUR

Milton, Lord, iii. 141

Minorea, ii. 338

Mirabeau, iii. 18, 106

Mitford, iii. 318

Mizen Head, iii. 203

Moira, Lord, iii. 9, 17, 18, 68, 64 and
mote, 71, 114, 115, 224, 229, 237, 244,
261, 268, 270, 274, 27,5, 291, 292, 294,
299, 301, 309-311, 320, 426, 450, 461,
454, 463

Molyneux, iii. 18

Molyneux, Mr., ii, 394

Molyneux, Sir Capel, ii. 370

Molyneux, William, i. 269

Molesworth, Robert (afterwards Lord
Molesworth, i. 356, 386

Monaghan, ii. 67, 306

Monckton, General, wounded, ii. 53

Money Bill, a short, ii. 57, 58

Money Bills, ii. 78, 80 note, 82, 102, 108,
110, 111, 160, 161, 162, 239, 246

Monroe, the American minister, ili. 193

Monro, General, i. 115, 117

Montgomery, Colonel, 11. 200, 370

Montgomery, George, 11. 109 ote

Montgomery, Mr., of Donegal, ii. 345

Moore, Captain, ii. 392

Moore, General, iii. 486, 488, 440, 445,
446, 473

Moore, Roger, i. 96, 100; iii. 24, 428

Moores, the, i. 127

Morgan, Major, i. 135

Mornington, Lord (afterwards Marquis
Wellesley), ii. 896, 404

Morris, Mr. Lodge, ii. 517, 518 note

Mount Alexander, Lord, i. 181

Mountjoy, Lord, i. 62; iii. 406, 407, 410

Mountmorris, Lord, iii. 877

Monntrath, Earl of, i. 147

Mountshannon, John Fitzgibbon’s estate
at, 11. 48

Moylan, Dr., Catholic Bishop of Cork, iii.
70, 214

Muir, Thomas, iii. 115

Mullingar, iii. 258

Mulshinoge, Noe, i. 549 note

Munster, ii. 22, 28, 455, 471, 485; iii
233, 355

Munster, the Geraldines of, i. 56

Munster, President of, ii. 172

Murder, ii. 400

Murphy, iii. 842

Murphy, Father John, iii. 877, 378, 382,
392, 398, 402, 403, 419, 420, 431, 432,
444, 446, 447, 449

Murphy, Father Michael, iii. 377, 880,
898, 423

Murphy, Father, of Taghmon, iii. 413

Murphy, John, of Loughnageer, iii, 412,
413

512
MUR

Murray, Lord Henry, iii. 188 note

Musgrave, Sir Richard, ii. 473 note; iil.
421

Muskerry, Lord, i. 128

Mutiny Act, British, ii, 261

Mutiny Act, perpetual, 11, 266

Mutiny Bill, 1. 258, 260, 264, 265, 287,
290, 295, 297, 320, 325, 336, 342, 499,

Mutiny at Portsmouth and at the Nore,
iii. 195

Mylne, a prebendary of Kilrush, i, 244

TAAS, ili. 164, 358, 359, 362, 364,
436

Nagle, Sir R., i. 173, 197, 256

Nantes, Edict of, iii. 23

Napiers, the, 11. 127

Napoleon, iii. 192, 265

National Assembly, ii. 82

National Congress, i]. 109

National Guards, iii. 80, 82, 157, 298

National independence, i. 2-13

Nationalist leaders, iii. 76

‘Nationality, 11. 340

Nationality, Irish, i. 459

Navigation Act, i. 161

Navigation Laws, il. 215, 438, 439

Nayler, Peter, i. 551 note

Needham, General, iii. 419, 422, 486

Needham’s Gap, iii. 442

Neilson, Samuel, 111. 62, 160, 175, 179,
190, 340, 345, 350, 351, 476

Nenagh, 111. 273

Nepean, Mr. Evan, ii. 413-415 note

Neville, Arthur, i. 612

Nevile, the miniature painter, ili. 246
note

Newcastle, Duke of, i. 3938, 394

Newdigate, Captain Mark, 1. 436

New England, 11. 134, 202

Newenham, Sir Edward, iii. 148

Newgate, i. 592 note; iii. 190, 353

New Haven, i. 206

New Ross, iii. 375, 398, 406,412, 419, 436

Newton, Sir Isaac, 1. 210, 530

Newtown Ardes, iii. 426-428

New Town Barry, iii. 375, 385, 398, 401,
402

Newry, 1. 97

New York, ii. 184, 201, 206, 281, 283

Nonconformists, i. 155, 156, 209, 216,
236, 319, 354, 385, 391; i. 216

Nonconformity, ii. 180,176

Nore, iil. 246, 248, 262

Norfolk, Duke of, iii. 173, 320, 452, 454

Normans, i. 14, 16, 17, 18, 20, 24, 28

‘ Northern Star,’ 111. 268

North, Lord, ii. 108, 111, 114, 187, 145,

INDEX.

ONE

149-151, 154, 160, 171, 179, 181,
184, 187, 207, 215, 217, 218, 289, 310,
318-820, 354 note, 362, 364; ili. 295

Northington, Robert Henley, Earl of,
Viceroy, 11. 362, 363, 373, 375, 380,
334, 385, 394, 395, 416; iii. 137

Northumberland, Earl of, Viceroy, ii. 36,
39

Nottingham, Lord, i. 229

Nugents, i. 374 note

Nugent, General, iii. 426

Nugent, Lord, ii, 214, 220

Nutley, Sir R., 1. 353 note

AK BOYS, ii. 116, 447
O’Brien, ii. 448 note

O’Brien, Sir Donogh, i. 414

O’Brien, Father, co-adjutor of the Arch-
bishop of Cashel, ii. 31

O’Brien, Michel, vicar-general of Kilfe-
nore, 1. 551 note

O’Brien, Sir Lucius, ii. 228, 224, 232
342, 497

O’Briens, the, i. 30

O’Callaghan, Mr., created Lord Lismore,
li. 405

O’Coigly. See Quigley

O’Connor, a United Irishman, ili. 164

O’Connor, Arthur, iii. 28, 32, 173, 174,
199, 216, 224, 227, 229, 258, 281-
283, 288, 312, 314-815, 318, 321, 345,
392, 416, 481, 452, 453, 474, 477, 478,

O’Connell, Daniel, i. 463; iii. 218

O’Connor, Roderick, ii. 458, 460

O’Conolly, Owen, i. 99

Octennial Bill, 11. 59, 65, 66, 224, 363

O’Decies, Marcus, his townlands, i. 189
note

O’Dogherty, Sir Cahir, i. 67

O’Donnells, the, 1. 30

O'Donnell, General, ii. 127

O'Donnell, Hugh, i. 63 and note

O'Donnell, Rory, becomes Earl of Try-
connell, i. 67

O'Donoghue, the, 1. 469 note

Ogie, Mr., of Wexford, i1. 844, 460, 469 ;
ili, 52, 88, 137

O’Leary, Father, 11. 88, 34 note, 418-415

Oligarchy of the Shannons and Ponson-
bies, 11. 48

Oliver, Mr., ii. 155

O’ Hara, Colonel, iii. 422

O’Hara, Mayor of Galway, i.
note

O'Hara, Mr., 111. 47, 48 and note

O’Loghlin, Captain Charles, 1. 414

O’Loghlin, Connor, i. 414

098, 599

. O'Neill, Con, Earl of Tyrone, i. 43

INDEX.

ONE

O'Neill, Sir Henry, i. 97
O’Neill, Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, i. 59-63,

67

O’Neill, Shan or John, i. 48, 252

O’Neill, Lord, iii. 18, 425

ON eill, Owen Rory or Owen Roe,
nephew of the Earl of Tyrone, i. 96,
116, 119

O’Neill, Sir Phelim, his underplot, i. 96,
97, 107 and note, 129; ili, 24, 286,
353, 428

O’N eill, Tirlogh, 1. 57

O’Neills, the, 1. 30

Orange Association, iii. 325

Orange oaths, forged, iti, 273

Orange, Prince of, 1. 178

Orangemen, iii. 154, 165, 168-171, 175,
178, 180, 188, 288, 259, 273, 306, 322,
325, 327, 338, 353, 355, 376, 382, 400,
426, 430, 432, 438, 445, 467

Orators, Trish, ii. 6

Oratory, iii. 44, 45, 348

Orde, Mr. (afterwards Lord Bolton), ii.
396, 397, 413, 414, 424-425, 489-441,
457, 468, 469

Ordnance Department, ii. 35, 106

Oriel, Lord, Right Hon. John Foster
created ii. 238 note

O'Reilly, Philip, i. 96

Orkney, Lady, i. 228, 270

Ormond, Duke of, 1. 24, 52, 58, 82, 86,
115, 117-119, 128, 166, 148, 151-153,
295 note, 299, 348, 344, 345, 348, 360,
553, 559; i. 178

Orr, Samuel, iii. 425

Orr, William, iti. 174, 175, 179, 269, 288

Orrery, Earl of, Lord Broghill created,
1. 147

Osborne, Mr., iii. 149

Osborne, Sir William, ii. 107

Ossory, Bishop of, ii. 364

O’Sullivans of Berehaven, i. 455;

O’Sullivan, Morty Oge, 1. 455, 456

O'Sullivan, Sylvester, i. 465, 466, 469,
471, 475

Oulart, iii. 381, 382

Outlawries, i. 177

Outlawries Bill, i. 252, 258, 255

ili. 209

AINE, Tom, ii, 288, 412; iii. 10, 19,

AT, 76, 110

Pale, the English, i. 27, 30

Pallisers, the, ii. 127

Palmer, Mr., i. 246

Pamela, daughter of Madame de Genlis,
lil. 168 note, 173

Panderus, i. 830-33

Papal power, iii, 149

Paper, tax on, ii. 134

VOL. III.

513

PIT

Papists, Lord Clare on, ili. 100

Paris, Peace of, ii. 34, 133

Paris, ili. 16, 159, 191, 266, 302

Parker, Sir Peter, ii. 200

Parker, the informer, ii. 413-415

Parliament, British, ii. 4388, 501, 492%.
420

Parliament, the Back Lane, iii. 70

Parliamentary opposition, iii. 220

Parliamentary reform, ii. 872, 420, 485,
43 ; in. 44

Parliaments, annual, ii. 372

Parnell, Sir John, ii. 388, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, ili. 41, 89, 94, 116, 122

Parsons, Sir Lawrence, ii. 439; iii. 27,
90, 91, 94, 186

Parsons, Sir William, i. 99

Patriots, Irish, ii. 325, 433, 435, 467 ;.
iii, 28, 224-228, 145, 2417, 243 note,.
289, 3538, 392

Patriots, consciences of Irish, i. 632

Peasantry, Irish, iii. 107, 118, 217, 280,
244, 320, 488

Peel, Sir Robert, iii. 148

Peep-of-Day-Boys, ii. 120, 489; iii. 18,
154

Peers, Irish, ii. 404, 603

Pelham, Mr., iii. 137, 141, 142, 144, 145,
147,174, 180, 186, 253, 270, 271, 274,
287, 289, 290, 303, 304, 316

Pembroke, Earl of, Viceroy, i. 320

Penal Bill, i. 331, 332

Penal Laws, ii. 216; ili. 306

Pennefather, Mr., i. 181, 328

Pennsylvania, ii. 202

Pension Bill, ii. 495; iti. 116, 297

Pension List, i. 801, 519, 612, 614; ii. 7
note, 35, 36, 55, 65, 77, 148, 149, 167,
190, 209, 462 and note, 486, 511, 513;
iii. 103

Pepper, Colonel, i. 359

Perceval, Mr., iii. 381

Pery, Sexton, afterwards Lord Glent-
worth, ii. 64, 78, 84, 90, 102; Speaker,
1038, 104, 112, 155, 156, 187, 2238, 226,
239, 243, 261, 326; iii. 52, 293

Petersburgh, ii. 284

Petty, Dr. i. 111, 118, 132, 183, 152,
153, 245, 451

Philadelphia, ii. 186, 190, 202

Philip IL, i. 42, 48; iii. 198

Phillips, a priest, iii. 161

Phipps, Sir Constantine, Chancellor, i.
348, 353 note, 355, 357

Phenix Park, Artillery Companies of,
li. 355

Pie powder, court of, i. 280 and note

Pitt. See Earl of Chatham

Pitt, Right Hon. William, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, ii. 353, 364, 368, 395,

LL

514
PLA

396, 410, 414, 420, 422, 427, 438, 444,
492, 501 note; iii. 9, 21-23, 24, 25, 35,
37, 43, note, 44, 56, 58, 64, 67, 68, 75,
76, 77, 81, 94, 95, 108, 104, 113, 117,
120, 128, 188, 144, 145, 158, 184, 229,
233, 239, 244, 248, 253, 261, 266, 270,
279, 281, 283, 284, 305, 427, 450, 456

Place Bill, ii. 495; iii. 116, 297

Plantagenet, Harry, 11. 299

Plowden, Mr., ii. 491

Plumer, iii. 318

Plunket, Captain, i. 116

Plunket, Father, i. 135 note

Plunket, Sir Nicholas, i. 144

Pluralists, 11. 469.

Pluralities, 11. 450

Police, 11. 190, 486.

Police Act, ii. 464-468, 497, 511; 111. 6,
131

Policemen, Irish, iti. 218

Political reform, i. 368

Rooley, Bishop of Raphoe, i. 827,328 note

Pope, the, 111. 16, 148

Pomeroy, Colonel, ii. 109 note

Ponsonby, Colonel, 1. 237

Ponsonby, George, ii. 47, 30, 296, 495,
496, 516, 517; ni. 9, 27, 51, 81, 82,
92, 98 notes, 116, 120, 121, 122, 149,
159 note, 180, 201, 224, 282, 242, 2438;
lil. 450, 252, 258, 267

Ponsonby, John, Speaker of the Irish
House of Commons, i. 616, 618, 632;
ii. 6, 36, 39, 46, 47, 57, 60-64, 90, 103,
156, 158, 404,

Ponsonby, William, son of the Speaker,
li. 65, 100, 388, 507, 509, 616, 517;
iii. 29, 80, 116, 122; 224, 232, 241,
252, 450

Ponsonbys, the, Lic, 600; SUL ek Ome
144, 146, 177, 181, 187, 329; iii. 454

Popery Acts, i. 273, 374

Popish colleges,ti . $24

Portadown, Peace of, i111. 154

Porter, Sir Charles, Lord Chancellor, i.
167, 177, 195, 219, 231, 2388, 237, 250

Porter, Sir Stanien, 11. 240

Portia, 11. 502

Portland, Duke of, 11. 298, 321, 323, 324,
325, 328, 331, 332, 334, 336, 343, 345,
358, 362, 376, 378, 499, 515, 516 ; 111.
122, 124, 126, 129, 132, 184, 138, 141,
165, 166, 184-186, 211, 214, 244, 248,
279, 293, 305, 309, 324, 325, 327, 331,
299, 404, 416, 418, 457

Portsmouth, mutiny of the fleet at, iii.
246

Portugal, help. to, ii. 17

Power, Mr., iii. 272 note

Povnings’ Act, il. 5, 81 note, 256, 289,
290, 295, 299, 325, 332, 336, 349

INDEX.

RAP

Poynings, Sir Edward, appointed deputy,
1. 35

Prendergast, Mr., i. 134 note

Prendergast, Sir Thomas, i. 11

Presbyterian marriages, i. 319, 594; iii.
151

Presbyterians, i. 154, 284, 329, 335, 342,
347, 382, 408, 623; ii. 122, 130, 181,
177, and note, 211, 216, 217, 249, 288,
365, 446, 453, 488; ili. 6, 18, 50, 259,
852, 399, 425-427, 430, 485

Press, the, ii. 106, 409

Preston, Captain, iii. 366

Preston, General, i. 117

Pretender, i 325, 357, 365, 408, 451,
553, 559, 598; ii. 21

Priests, i. 817, 547-549 and note, 552,
560, 562; iii. 246

Prim, Mr. Joshua, ii, 421

Princeton, battle of, ii. 201; iii. 190

Pritty, Henry, ii. 109 note

Privateers, American, ii. 280; in the
Irish Channel, ii. 219

Privy Council of Ireland, ii. 254, 380,
492, 499, 518 note

Privy Councillors, iii. 345

Profligacy, political, i. 631

Progress, philosophy of, iii. 4

Prosperous, place so called, iii. 358, 359,
3861, 362

Protection of Irish manufactures, ii. 399,
400, 470

Protestant ascendancy, iii. 53

Protestant families, i. 107

Protestant gentry, iii. 459

Protestants, Irish, ii. 275-277, 325

Protestant revolt, ii. 3

Protestants of Ulster, ii. 116, 117

Pulling, Lieutenant, iii. 210

Puritans in Londonderry, i. 75 note; ii.
133, 151

Puritanism, i. 159; ii. 130

Puxley, John, the revenue officer, i. 456,
458, 459-461

UAKERS, i. 483; 434
Quebec, colony of, ii. 186, 200; ca-
pitulation of, ii. 52
Queen’s County, iii. 110, 339
Quiberon, i. 623; ii. 192, 193
Quigley, a priest, iii, 312, 314, 317, 318,
321; 322

ABY, Lord, i. 221
Rack-rents, iii. 74
Radcliff, Sir George, i. 91
Rapparees, iii. 217, 236, 277, 280, 309,
435 note, 556

INDEX.

RAT

Rathangar, iii. 367

Rathdowney, 1i. 98

Rathfarnham, iii. 357

Ratoath, iii. 357

Ravishers, iii. 217

Ravishment, ii. 447, 460

Rawdon. See Moira

Rawley, Mr., ii. 32

Rebels’ oath, iii. 409 note

Reform Bill, ii. 386, 888, 389, 399, 410,
495; iii. 15, 76, 81, 102, 108, 108, 111,
116, 123, 180, 188, 222, 234, 239, 292,
296, 458

Reformers, Northern, iii, 244

Regan, Ned, 11. 448 note

Regency, ii. 498, 509; ili. 59, 76, 297,
492, 493, 494

Registration Act, ii. 29

Regium Donum, i. 239, 241, 284, 313, 342,
847, 382

Reilly, Mr. Stephen, High Sheriff of
Dublin, ii. 400, 416, 418, 419, 429

Relief Bill, iii. 42

‘Renunciation Bill,’ ii. 361, 362, 364

Republicanism in Ireland, iii. 219, 282

Responsibility Bill, iii. 112, 297

Restoration of the Stuarts, i. 141

Restriction Acts, ii. 247

Resumption Bill, i. 272, 273

Revenue, the, ii. 149, 190

Revenue Board, ii. 91, 106, 110, 144

Revenue, Irish, ii. 4; hereditary, iii.
1038

Revolution, French, iii. 582

Revolutionary Committee, iii. 209, 255,
290, 298, 298, 303, 327, 330, 335, 345,
349

Reynolds, Thomas, iii. 804, 342

Rheinart, Minister of the Directory, ii.
253

Rhine, the, iii. 197

Rhode Island, ii. 205

Rice, Sir Stephen, Chief Baron, i. 173,
177, 197, 314, 404

Richard II., i. 26

Richards, Dr., Dean of Tralee, i, 246,
248, 249

Richmond, Duke of, ii. 46

Rigby, Irish Master of the Rolls, ii. 55
note, 404

Right, Captain, ii. 455-457

Rights, Declaration of, ii. 826, 328

‘Rights of Man,’ Tom Paine’s, iii. 10

Ringwood, iii. 388, 390

Rinuccini, John Baptiste, i. 116, 118; iii.
198

Riot Act, ii. 483

Riverstown, Lord, i. 374 note

Roach, the farmer, iii. 365

Robinson, Mr., ii. 289, 316

SAT

Rochambeau, de, ii. 283

Roche, Edward, iii. 388

Roche, Father, iii. 388, 390, 398, 406,
415, 419, 482, 487, 438, 447

Roche, Sir Boyle, ii. 807, 384, 385, 398 ;
lili. 52 note

Rochelle, iii. 482

Rochefort, Robert, i. 232

Rochford, Mr., 11. 401, 402

Rockingham, Marquis of, ii. 89, 150, 160,
319, 320, 323, 345, 353

Roden, Lord, 111. 857, 444, 483

Rodney, Sir George, ii. 280, 282, 285,
338, 343; iii. 51

Rolleston, Mr., of Green Park, Youghal,
lll. 272 note

Romney, Lord, iii. 318

Roscommon, county of, 1. 409; iii.
152

Roscommon, Lord, i. 153

Rosen, Marshal, i. 182, 192

Roses, Wars of the, i. 28

Ross, i. 127

Ross Castle, on Killarney, i. 127

Ross, General, ii. 298

Rotunda in Dublin, ii. 382, 388, 428

Round-robin, ii. 509, 514, 515; ii. 9

Rowan, Mr. Hamilton, ii. 520; i. 54,
65, 66, 69, 88, 114, 118, 119, and note,
158, 190, 281

Rowley, Right Hon. Mr., M.P. for Meath,
11. 469 '

Rowley, Sir Hercules Langford, ii. 85
note; ii. 10, 17

Royal Exchange in Dublin, 11. 382

Rupert, Prince, 1. 118, 128

Russell, Ensign, ii. 9, 11, 19, 20, 160,
165, 179, 195

Russell, Lord, iii. 181

Russell, Lord John, iii. 173, 320

Russell, Lord William, iii. 455

Russia, il. 168, 274, 423, 443

Rutland, Duke of, Viceroy, ii. 395, 396,
404, 405, 410, 412, 416, 419, 425, 445,
460, 461, 473, 485-487, 518 note

Ruvigny, Henri de, i. 222

Ryan, Captain, iii, 341, 342-344

109,

ACKVILLE, Lord George, Irish Sec-
i) retary, i. 611
St. Alban’s, Duke of, i. 301 note
St. Eustatius, ii. 282
St. George, Colonel, ii. 475; ili. 291, 293,
294, 300
St. George, Lord, i. 415
St. John, Henry, i. 343, 347
, ot. John, Lord Bolingbroke, i, 352
St. Leger, St. Leger, i. 147

516

SAI

St. Mary’s Isle, 11.213

St. Patrick, Order of the Knights of, ii.
362

St. Ruth, French general at Aghrim, i.
198, 199

St. Vincent, Cape, ii. 280

Saltee Islands, iii. 448

Sanders, Nicholas, i. 54, 55, 56

Sandford, Mr., ii. 181

Sandwich, Earl of, 11. 137

Sandy Hook, ii. 201

Saratoga, surrender at, ii. 204, 206

Sarsfield, Patrick (afterwards Earl of |

Lucan), i. 201, 256

Savannah, ii. 206

Schism Act, i. 347, 359

Sckomberg, Duke, i. 192

Scot, the, i. 7, 8

Scotland, i. 8, 9, 286, 840

Scots partly oecupy Antrim and Down,
i. 69

Scott, ili. 318, 388

Scott, Attorney-General (afterwards Lord
Clonmel and Chief Justice), 1. 2388,
242, 243, 262, 2638, 395

Scott, Robert, 11. 109 note

Scullabogue, 111. 406, 426

Security Act, 261, 269

Selkirk, Lord, ii. 2138

September massacre, 111. 64

Septennial Act, 1. 7, 10

Septennial Bill, 54, 55, 57, 59

Settlement, Irish Act of, 1. 148, 150, 190;
li. 22, 305, 310, 506

Shannon, Henry Boyle, first Lord, i. 537,
632; ii. 389, 46; Richard Boyle,
second Lord, ii. 46; third Lord, ii. 57,
60, 85, 90, 114, 144, 146, 147, 169,
187, 218, 404, 509, 515, 516; iii.
231

Shannon, Mount, ii. 417

Sheares, Henry, 111. 340, 346, 351, 474

Sheares, John, 340, 341, 345, 346, 351,

474

Sheehy, Father Nicholas, parish priest of
Clogheen in Tipperary, 11. 29, 30

Sheehy, Buck (Edmund), ii. 30, 31

Sheep farming in Ireland, i. 397

Sheffield, Lord, iii. 241

Shelburne, Lord, i. 453; ii. 54, 58, 221,
246, 247, 320, 321, 332, 335, 341, 363,
361, 362, 462 note

Sheridan, Charles, ii. 49, 538, 322, 325,
498, 509

Sheridan, R. B., iii. 178, 320, 355, 453

Shrewsbury, Duke of, made Viceroy, i.
352, 364, 358

Shylock, ii, 502

Sidney, Sir Henry, i. 52

Sidney, Lord, brother of Algernon Sidney

INDEX.

STO

(afterwards Earl of Romney), i. 195,
198, 219, 222; Viceroy, 225, 228, 229,
231, 239; 11. 79, 258, 422 note, 471

Simms, ili. 61, 160, 175, 179

Simms, Robert, i. 283

Simnel, Lambert, i. 29, 34

Sinclair, iii. 19

Sinecures, Irish, ii. 55

Sirr, Major, iii. 341-343

Skeffington, Hugh, ii. 109 note

Skeffington, Major, ii. 180

Skeffington, William, 11. 109 note

Skerritt, Colonel, iii. 420, 422

Slaney, the, iii. 375, 383, 385, 398, 402,
436, 445

Slieveboy Mountain, iii. 403

Shgo, iii. 109

Smerwick, iii. 198

Smith, Ch., ii. 109 note

Smith, Colonel, 11. 138

Smith, Dr., Dean of St. Patrick’s, i. 251,
252 note

Smith, Mr., iii. 232

‘Smoke money,’ i. 454

Smugglers, ii. 190, 255; 111.166

Smuggling, 1. 446, 447, 449, 450, 506;
il. 76 note, 486

Snow, Captain, iii. 384, 386, 387

Soldiers, Irish, 218

Solicitors and Barristers Bill, 1. 577

Somers, Lord, iii. 181

Somerville, Sir James, i. 607

Sons of the Shamrock, ii. 430

Southwell, Secretary Sir Edward, i. 245
note, 295, 295 note, 299 note, 315, 345

Spain, i. 585; i. 205, 252-254, 274

Spain, fleet of, ili. 51, 340

Spencer, Lord, ii. 495, 497, 503, 504,

508; iii. 122

Spithead, ii. 230

Stack, Mr., iii. 10

Stackpoole, Catherine, 1. 421

Stamer, Mr., iii. 862

Stamp duty, 11. 133, 134

Stanhope, Lady, i. 519

Stanhope, Lord, i. 890, 401

Stanley, Mr., i. 251 note

Stanley, Sir John, i. 354

Stannard, Recorder of Dublin, ii. 6

Stapleton, Colonel, ili. 426

Steel, Hearts of, 11. 447

Sterne, Richard, iii. 484

Stewart, A., ili. 19

Stewart, Colonel, (afterwards Marquis of
Londonderry), ii. 370

Stewart, Robert (afterwards Lord Castle-
reagh), ili. 10, 17, 28

Stock, Edmond, i. 423

Stokes, Whitly, dean of Trinity, iii. 10,
59

INDEX.

STO

Stone, Archbishop, i. 610, 612, 618; ii.
39, 197, 449

Stone, Primate, ii. 197

Strafford, Earl of, Viceroy, i. 72, 78, 79,
81, 82; ii. 276

Strangford, Lord, Dean of Derry, ii. 401-
403

Stuart, A. J., of Action, iii. 288, 418

Sugar Bill, ii. 267

Sunderland, Earl of, i. 320, 321, 343,
382

Supply Bills, ii. 266, 395; iii. 167

Supremacy, Oath of, i. 311

Swan, Major, iii. 316, 330, 341, 342

Swayne, Captain, i, 359-361

Swayne, Mr.. a magistrate, ili. 272 note

Sweetman, iii. 317

Swift, Dean of St. Patrick’s, 1. 328, 329,
352 note, 365, 385 note, 500, 501, 531,
536-538, 539 mote, 546, 605; ii. 196
447

Switzerland, ii. 178, 400

Synge, Dr. Chancellor of St. Patrick’s,
i. 563, 567 ; 11. 449

fbi ree General, 1. 127
Taafe, Lord, i. 118, 127
Taghmon, Mount, iii. 892, 445, 449
Talbot, Colonel Richard, known as Lying
Dick (afterwards the Duke of Tyr-
connell), i. 165, 168, 171
Talbot, Mr., ii. 210
Talbot, Peter, Catholic Archbishop of
Dublin, 164
Talbot, Sir William, of Cartown, i. 165
note
Talleyrand, iii. 281, 304, 312, 342
Tandy, Napper, il. 358, 382, 409, 412,
415, 429, 520; iii. 20, 33, 37, 42, 50
mote, 53, 54,, 55, 59, 66, 69, 179, 190,
266, 267 note, 281, 283, 488
Tara Hill, iii. 366
Tarleton, General, 11. 288
Tate, Colonel, iii. 201
Taylor, Jeremy, made Bishop of Down,
and afterwards of Dromore, i. 156, 158
Tea, tax on, 11. 134
Teeling, Barclay, ili, 281, 283, 316, 317,
482, 484, 485
Temple, Lord, Viceroy (afterwards Mar-
quis of Buckingham), i. 353 360, 361,
3862; 380, 487
Temple, Sir John, Master of the Rolls in
Dublin, i. 90 note, 104 note, 109, 111
Temple, the, iii. 8
Tenants’ Protection Bill, ii, 118
Tennant, ili. 265, 283
Tennison, Mr., iii. 109
Ternay, M. de, 11. 280, 281

517

TUB

Test Act, i. 381, 384, 389; ii. 136, 217,
365

Texel Fleet, iii. 287

Thanet, Lord, iii. 321

‘The Press,’ O’Connor’s publication, iii.
288

Three Rocks, iii. 392, 394, 396

Thurot, M., i. 622-624

Ticonderoga, ii. 202

Tierney, Mr., iii. 458, 455

Tighe, Mr., ii. 181

Tillage Act, ii. 26 note

Tillage Bill, i. 400, 501, 590

Tipperary, li. 22, 23, 26; ili. 328, 337,
339

Tipperary peasant, 11. 20

Tisdall, Philip, Attorney-General, 1. 57,
64, 81, 90, 106, 108, 155

Tithes and Tithe-Proctors, ii. 458, 464,
455, 470, 481, 483, 489; iii. 376

Toler, Mr. Daniel, ii. 34 note; iii, 26,
54, 126, 129; Solicitor-General, 49,
146

Toleration, 1. 563, 566

Toleration Act, i. 240, 359

Tollendal, Lally, his name, ii. 127

Tone, Matthew, ili. 482, 484, 485

Tone, Theobald Wolfe, iii. 8-11, 19, 53,
04, 56, 57, 59, 60, 68, 64, 65, 70, 71,
83,. 84, 109, 118, 119, 144, 151, 158,
157, 168, 165, 174, 175, 190, 191, 192,
193-195, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201, 205,
206, 214, 218, 247, 259, 262, 263, 266,
283, 292 note, 302, 322, 323, 352, 392,
487

Tories, bands of outlaws, so called, i. 135,
164, 237, 280, 360

Tories, English, ii. 314, 321

Tower of London, i. 559

Townshend, Charles, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, ii. 44, 52, 1383, 1384

Townshend, George, third Viscount,
Viceroy, 11. 44, 52, 58, 72, 79, 84, 89, 94,
104, 106, 112, 144, 146, 221, 222, 488,
510

Townshend, Lord, i. 525, 527, 542, 593

Townshend, Marquis, ii. 513

Tralee, Bay of, i. 478.

Trenchard, i. 270

Trenton, battle of, ii. 201

Trim, surrender of, i. 126

Trimleston, Lord Robert Barnewalle, ii.
16, 17—193-22

Trinity College, i. 831; il. 503; il. 6,
289

Troy, Dr., Catholic Archbishop of Dublin,
il. 70, 83, 84, 100, 149, 246

Tuam, diocese of, i. 89 note

Tuam, Archbishop of, i. 3538

Tubman, Jane, 1. 427

518

TUL

Tullamore abandoned, ii. 126

Tumultuous Assemblies Bill, ii. 483

Turnpike Bill, ii. 502

Two Mile Bridge, near Youghal, iii. 271

Tyrannicide, 111. 270

Tyrconnell, Earl of, Richard Talbot, i.
171, 172; Lord Lieutenant, 174, 177,
180, 182, 196, 197, 201, 256; ii. 276

Tyrone, Lord, ii. 75, 104 note, 106, 486,
472; iii. 80

Tyrone, Earl of, i. 256; it. 107

LSTER, i. 57, 68-70, 98, 100, 107,
115, 117, 156, 160, 319, 326; i1.-53,

71, 115, 141, 168, 471, 478, 488, 439;
lil. 18, 28, 155, 178, 188, 233, 235, 239,
240, 257, 259, 266, 267, 268, 291, 325,
329, 361, 399, 400, 420, 425, 426, 452,
483

Ulster corps of Volunteers, ii. 292, 307,
309, 369

Ulster linen, 11. 423

Ulster, Protestants of, ii. 125, 129

Ulster Puritans, iii. 151

Ulster Republicans, i111. 200

Ulster Revolutionary Committee, ili. 279

Ulster settlement, i111. 98

Uniacke, Mr., iii. 291, 293, 294, 300, 337

Uniformity, Act of, 1. 46

Uniformity, second Act of, i. 155

Union, i. 285, 287 note, 288, 297, 303,
304; iii. 79, 103, 113, 123, 144, 298,
439, 489-493

‘ Union Star,’ ili. 269

United Irishmen in 1797, ii. 27; iii. 11,
21, 22, 33, 53, 64, 64, 67, 76, 84, 104,
109, 110, 111, 115, 116, 135, 146, 152,
155, 160, 162, 165, 167, 172, 174, 192,
196, 200, 223, 228, 238, 234, 239, 245,
and note, 247, 248, 255, 256, 257, 259,
267 note, 277, 280, 283, 298, 299, 305,
325, 336, 351, 855, 377, 379

Universities, 111. 21

Upton, Mr., 11.119; made a Viscount,
120

Ushant, iii. 201

Utrecht, peace of, i. 358

ALENCE, General, iii. 280
Valencia, i. 466

Vallancey, Colonel, il. 77

Valmy, iii. 65, 69 note

Vandeleur, Mr., iii. 231

Vane, Sir Harry, i. 89 note, 91 note

Verner, Mr., iii. 169

Vesey, John, Archbishop of Tuam, i. 158,
502

INDEX.

WES

Vesey, Major, iii. 410

Viceroys of Ireland, ii. 35

Vigo, the Duke of Ormond at, i. 295

Villiers, Sir Edward, i. 223

Vinegar Hill, iii. 288, 388, 889, 397, 401,
402, 482, 485, 486, 443, 473

Virginia, ii. 134, 206, 281, 284, 285

Voltaire, ili. 15

Volunteers, ii. 211, 235, 236, 239, 241,
264, 265, 269, 287, 288, 291, 292, 303,
307, 308, 310, 315, 316, 322, 328, 347,
356-359, 361, 366, 368, 369, 371, 372,
373, 3875, 380, 388, 889, 392, 393, 395,
399, 409, 411, 420, 428-430, 432, 433,
434, 445, 447, 459, 460, 461, 485, 488;
iii. 1, 5, 6, 11, 17, 68, 67, 79, 83, 84,
89, 95, 105, 106-108, 178, 227, 298

Vie Lady, ii. 77

Wales contrasted with Ireland, i.
289

Wales, Prince of, title of, i. 10 (after-
wards George IV.); ii. 491-493, 495,
497, 500, 501, 504, 508, 511; iii. 229,
239

Walford, General, iii. 365

Walker, Dr., at Derry, i. 188

Wallace, English Attorney-General, ii.
273

Waller, Mr., iii, 234

Walpole, Colonel, 111. 401, 402

Walpole, General, 111. 402, 403, 406

Walpole, Horace, English ambassador in
Paris, i. 465; ii. 34

Walpole, Sir Robert, i. 380, 496, 514,
524, 525-527, 541, 581

Walsingham, iii, 181

Walsingham, Lady, i. 519

Wandsworth, Sir Christopher, Deputy
1. §2

Warbeck, Perkin, i. 34

Ward, Dean of Connor, i. 244

Warren, Sir John, iii. 485

Washington, General, ii. 200, 201, 281,
288, 285, 478; i. 18

Waterford, 1. 17; 11. 27, 28, 96, 219, 232,
256; iii. 375, 398, 419, 436

Waterford, Bishop of, ii. 33

Waterford, Lord, iii. 231

Waterford road, great, ili. 358

W. D., 1. 551 note

Welfare, Committee of Public, iii. 162

Wellesleys, the, iii. 127

Wesley, or Wellesley, Arthur, iii. 28, 80,
112

Welsh, i. 9

Welsh Fencibles, iii, 354

Welshman, i. 7, 8

Wesley, John, i. 626

INDEX.

WES

Wesleyans, iii. 435

Westenra, Mr., ii. 109 note

Westfieldstown, iil. 357

West Indies, ii. 342, 338; iii. 400

Westmeath, Lord, i. 128

Westminster, a commission sits at, to con-
sider the Irish claims, i. 144

Westmoreland, Earl of, Viceroy, 1, 520;
ili. 156, 25, 26, 35, 37, 89, 41-438, 49,
50 note, 57, 67, 68, ils 73, Tis 80, 124,
144, 145

West Point, ii. 281

Wexford, i. 17, 113, 126; iii. 110, 342,
370, 875-377, 429-431, 482, 440, 459,
473

Wexford city, i11. 375, 381, 387, 392, 394,
897, 400, 403

Wexford Harbour, iii. 436

Weymouth, Lord, named as Viceroy, ii.
39, 72, 74, 94, 223, 233

Wharton, Earl of, Viceroy, i. 114, 328,
329, 334, 343, 381 ;

Whiddy Island, i. 455; ii. 205

Whig Club of Dublin, ii. 519; i11. 9

Whig Club, Northern, ii. 9, 15, 16, 17,
18, 54, 59, 348, 344; i1. 310, 314, 322,
323, 491; i. 82, 95, 122, 177, 318,
453

Whisky Bill, ii. 105

Whisky shops in Ireland, ii. 105, 460

Whitbread, Samuel, iii. 321

White, Mr., of Seafield, iii. 209, 213

White, Mrs., i. 209

White, Rebecca, i. 425

Whiteboy disturbances, i. 590; ii. 22

Whiteboys, the, ii. 24, 25 note, 27, 28, 31,
32, 39, 538, 71, 96, 97 note, 115, 190,
447, 455, 459, 461, 467, 470, 471, 473,
476, 484, 485, 489, 510; iil. 23, 66, 87,
376

Whitehaven, ii. 214

Whitshed, Chief Justice, i. 503

Whyte, General, iii. 105, 106

Wickham, Mr., iii. 418, 429

Wicklow, i. 113; iii. 808, 339, 370, 398,
419, 473

Wicklow, petition from, ii. 221, 222 note

Wicklow Hills, iii. 375, 420, 445, 449

Wilberforce, Mr., iii. 455, 456

Wildgeese, the, i. 365, 451, 456, 585

519

YOU

William the Conqueror, i. 8

William and Mary, 4th of, ii. 498

William III. i., 193-195, 196, 197, 201,
205, 237, 241, 250, 254, 259, 272, 283,
339, 341; i1. 181, 806; iii. 322

Willoughby, Captain, iii. 448

Wilmington, ii. 284

Wilson, Lord, i. 256

Wilson, Mr., iii. 110

Winchester, Paulet, Marquis of, i, 250

Winter, Admiral de, iii. 262, 263, 265

Wogan, Sir Charles, i. 197

Wolfe, Attorney-General (afterwards Lord
Kilwarden), ii. 41, 159, 167, 240, 324

Wolfe, General, ii. 52, 126, 129; iii. 198

Women, abduction of, i. 417

Wood's patent, 1. 522, 5238, 524, 530, 581,
548, 544, 560

Wool, i. 160, 265, 267, 290, 446

Woollen cloths, ii. 228, 229; iii, 297

Woollen weavers, ii. 35

Workhouses established in Dublin, i. 591

Wright, of Clonmel, iii. 337

Writ of Error, ii. 342, 350, 401

Wrixon, Major, ii. 97, 98

Wych, Sir Cyril, Lord Justice, i, 241

Wynn, Sir Watkin, 11. 354

ARMOUTH, Countess of, ii. 77
Yelverton, Barry (afterwards At-

torney-General and Lord Avonmore),
li. 238 note, 248, 256, 295, 299, 301,
308, 310, 311, 316, 318, 324, 348, 387,
391, 392, 395, 478, 479

Yeomanry, iii. 128, 178, 179, 187, 202,
210, 224, 230, 233, 236, 238, 256, 273,
803, 306, 328, 346, 354, 355, 359, 363,
867, 376, 381, 384-386, 394, 417, 419,
422, 428, 430, 468-465, 474

Yonge, Sir George, ii. 345

York, Cardinal of, ii. 100

York, Duke of (afterwards James II.), i.
151, 153

York river, ii. 285

Yorktown, ii. 285, 298, 307, 338

Youghal, ii. 96

Young, Arthur, i, 406, 418 note, 595; ii.
21, 46, 71, 119 note, 447 note, 479 note;
iii. 376

LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTZ7SWOODS AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET

‘

|
i
,
, 4
:
*
,
ve...
ie.
i.

oe

satel tn AW,
b hel ;
ad ee

ea) U8 aa,
de ed

a ae

i: eae *
Reh: rf tee
vA Ctl

% (aaa, if al Hy

Lhe ie at

ioe edhe ae aE

THE ENGLISH IN [IRELAND

IN THE

KIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

BY

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, M.A.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

Vole ts

LONDON :
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
1872.

All rights reserved.

af A, Ms AO big i
can es
a in,

s

a | “a
dle 8 Fe
—-— ‘ aia

SS le pr
Lg Pi
Se eh,
Sha

AN

093 5

art AS sis

: eet eetitt es Pees SE Rescestensects Rrbtes Seseass
te +e ant aE Set Te reek achat PI Vicks tenet a mans tnceatts dee ott
: ¢ it eck hawebht cee foment Scat abe tidhaoe. Ses:

i ale

=e

we

eg Se Sate eg Lee sere
2 wise

hte)

: ; pret. .s make te >:
hs} aes abso tibet ieee
a | RE aes Peace cS

Fcbor es cheese teeues
Swity PETE poet np

et ale

RCH Sok FPS SS.

ersetc®
ike ashe ee

retheee Ftd

<4
aoe
SEapirHie Nr past ea

a5 2. >
ey a a RRE Sele
