ASSESS BOTT TTR TEE Sas Sg ITE agent Ty NET ERT NY SS TY Nagy
, : iy SRS SETS Heer EE Tak TE TOT eI

FY ee EE os on - saa

mot as oer a Ss; : 4 om " nay pnt A eae heat eran , nis ras >

TL See REST pe ONSET Staite 2 aan eh 2 NPR een ei 22 oh ATES ee Roras Sea ferives—s secant =o =e

regis. i eats ER a a ree > é Sone : - pina r

Satire rg Nyeecie ween tes Tiles : eis:

te ae -

ype
A

mote

Py ot eat id La os ar

: Li > D =)
Lie padiattie salhilakh see — ¥
REBUT ey; epee hiegs Sy
ny Bd

> +1 .
REA Gos AREER

eatts4

79,0.

Bt" Ser REN Sre t2 Bee BSP
eee ees ore

SU Des ORG Bo ed Hae, “ Foneds outs :
Nee, gow AT ay Bale BS E8 aE ges Psp SN sage oe

SSPE SOR or Halter ee RD URN NR aerF OS
age * ee? Sete A Sy SOS 1A CE Mesa Tew Cece Te TENT San .
WOT. F22 em, Sng < aS eat Oa st peers ere Rie hpigben cack kien on StL ee cathe otiahid etre
Ree tate ect 5 ‘s yen Pees AEX ete HTN eee HA ee Sey B Veni Pct) ee Sala ‘
: ee Cay A Ae Br “eget f rte) a eet Ee verry sees Abas rns EAs naget pers azacke
et aroaene a a SAN all cess ns a ot nare sme
* oe" f Me, Se ae Rages SU IPERS os sect ee ashe oh . ron
eneeaies a) ; » 2 re ie Pa TN iat Sa :
Sa aoe er eet ham wet rs
ab ong erry
. SPST EET OU, v. mn. = ve ¥
oh, . a - - ae
. & . oe i sah ae aye
EE DP Nee © Tener Gynt FO Fer et Sree Oreo are PE aie ee er a ‘. 2 were Par FO apg s aT e x baal
ee eee oS Spoke ena eNeaaa cere ee = pt ratat hhmtaapr ped PE ID IOR TF gs sk one yy TTR se Cena drnyice a SOS sgt GU Mont re NPE ope sk eg sig POR AS rh oe eth Ee al oe ee mal ae a a z a4: id
‘ r : geghbite d oe Niles Mite = ag ete Brier ee Fora, eh rAP RP ot WS et tae —_ » petits tetas ie 7 AP ascitee : a EY, Ser ns eat sme Fest |b...
bad oad ialchemch! Sk ARAN a ebay neds ipe ean ah eens ie, Sou Ree oe ee as eae ari a Si ni Tg ISON at Sl aah ee et NT a aE ee tee SOR ANS oi a TONE A OED Se AS a A BN ay rama T= Oe SOE et
3- mae tee he ee ret ae ~ ee ee eens Sie He ~ re es - bet verat PILE Sen M - m \ a Phar ortaenec ltt orem ‘ tee ag Fly Pia fe
3 xs ae: re ; ee Pty Sit eet = aataet Pikes come cmgeasategas ap aeabeimane tees sing taei erie ie ODES ESS DEM SEAS OLSEN nS Oe eet ees — ot Ores ee RN rn en rere ail ere ARE 3 Ss farsavesers fT
in en o Sipeeig be - . $9. 8s eReg a; rg he tarts ne Re Oe + soars . ra es ° METRE, ear yee te ben woe, fore 1 facbelahibedy cai ee eee Ba sf a pe a cae
NLS SS etn tee Ee ow treed >. — teehee spit esaenes: a poate: salah meee. <P ee ee mbes rare . = ep re vi! on he ui aaa |
eieF eter eig? o-Fe . =e Se a Fe 3 +1 ohttet pe eg gee, ri<ce sete aay ower papee : : ; nao : %

4 : 3 z media E ne bi ji léasgtad HB ciancrpncentreita chen ate teiatinngead Gia. nine alniicaie aig emer?
ag enim Sine rene RN EEN Sp Forty teri ie ae? oa ie 2 a SE Hine sa et le ~ aves | = es othe”, minbesie

Pe he their Te . - bos oe eT M ses chit iy:
os eee > uekek pRrti cle = Son /e-ahs te =e es nee His 2
s Re re Ne OO I SA oF nn a EE REE nt wi rote Sree ao None = SPS es See rf

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Vou. I.

LONDON: PRINTED PY ee
SPOTTISWOODH AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE i
AND PARLIAMENT STREET matys

/ a, yu eee
M ’ ‘ ae Bis iat Me : ; “
] ; ‘ 4 s } : ’

’

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND

IN THE

KIGHTEENTH CENTURY.

BY

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, M.A.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

Mieie AL

LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
; 1872.

All rights reserved.

SECTION

iy
II.

IIT.
IV.

VIL.

C.0O7N EE NOES:

6-4

Bie Orcs |

CHAPTER I.

PRELIMINARY.

Conditions of national independence ,

Relations of England with Scotland, Wales, orf lice
land ;

The Norman Sonnet of Treen

Norman degeneracy and its causes .

Peculiarities of the Irish character .

Effects of the Civil Wars in England

Ireland at the accession of hey the Seventh

Poynings’ Act . :

Harly policy of Henry ‘he Bighth

. Rebellion of Lord Thomas Fitzgerald, followed by

general submission

. Reigns of Edward and Mary

Accession of Elizabeth :

Necessary hostility of the bbaiites:

Causes for extending the Act of Uniformity te iin
land .

Central faults of Elizabeth’s Teh RAB art oo Pee

Rebellion of Shan O’Neil F ,

Rebellion of the Earl of Desmond .

Extermination of the Munster Geraldines

Rebellion of the Harl of Tyrone

Consequences of these insurrections

aval

SECTION
I. Expectations on the accession of James the First

II.

Til.

LV.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER II.

INSURRECTION OF 1641.

Disappointment and renewed revolt.
The Ulster Settlement
Commencement of prosperity .

Complaints and sufferings of the native it ish ete

Toleration of the Catholics

Division of the Protestant interest .
Persecution of the Presbyterians
Viceroyalty of the Earl of Strafford
Intended Settlement in Connaught

An Irish army
Trish resentment against ine Berlemenie
Disagreements among the Irish Catholics

leaders ?
Symptoms of =e ga: pipet
The Irish Parliament in the summer of 1641

Negotiations of Charles the First with thes That

Intention of the Catholics to take possession of the

Government ,
Underplot of Sir Phelim ON cif
Conspiracy to surprise Dublin Castle
Outbreak of the Rebellion
General massacre of Protestants
The affair at Island Magee
Sufferings of the Protestant failiog
Scenes in Dublin
Estimate of the numbers dosteayenly
Effect of the news of the massacre in England
The Civil War
Arrival of a Nuncio
Catholic divisions

Destruction of Ormond’s ar ae at Bethea :
. Justice to Ireland

The landing of eae
The storming of Drogheda
The storming of Wexford
Universal submission

SECTION

Vee

Et.

TET:

IV.

Vil.

CONTENTS.

Theory of property in land

The Cromwellian Settlement

Union of the two Kingdoms
Principles of Cromwell’s Government
Effect upon Ireland .

CHAPTER II.
THE REVOLUTION.

. The Restoration and the expectations of the Irish

A deputation sent to Charles the Second .
Half measures . :
The Irish Parhament Peart he

The Act of Settlement

Hstablishment of a Court of Crarce

The Down Survey . ;

Final results of the Reballion :

The re-establishment of the Anglo-Irish Crech
Persecution of the Nonconformists . ‘ .
The Established Church unsuited to Ireland
Lord Clarendon’s opinion of the condition of it
Suspension of the Penal Laws

Increase of wealth . r
English jealousy and commercial roueceuone :
Catholic revival :

Disarming of the Protestants .
Viceroyalty of the Harl of Clarendon

The Earl of Tyrconnell :

Attacks on the Act of Settlement

Clarendon recalled .

. Approach of a fresh struggle

Favour shown to Catholics
Attitude of the Hstablished Charon
Closing of the gates of Derry .
Siege of Derry

. The Irish Parliament

Repeal of the Acts of Settlement
Protestant attainders

Landing of King William

Battle of the Boyne
Confiscations .

Vil

PAGE
130
133
136
137
139

14]
144
146
147
149
150
152
153
154:
156
157
158
159
160
162
165
166
167
Lal
173
174
176
178
179
181
183
184:
189
190
193
194
196

Vill

SECTION

VIL.

if

iG

III.

CONTENTS.

Battle of Athlone

Battle of Aghrim

Siege of Limerick

Articles of Limerick

The disputed clause

Review of the situation .
Relations between Romanism and Pr Steeten nate
Justification of repressive laws
Effects of leniency in Ireland .
The remedial measures required
Toleration of Nonconformists .
Laws against Absentees .

A union of the two realms

BOOK Wi:
CHAPTER I.
OPENING OF THE" PENAL ERA.
False dice

Indulgence to the (Ceeieucs

Corruption in the disposition of the inne
Discontent of the Protestants .
Viceroyalty of Lord Sydney

Session of 1692

Quarrel between the Viceroy ad the Pathan nt
Impeachment of Chancellor Porter .
Jacobitism in the Established Church
Education in Ireland

Disarming Act

Tories and Rapparees

Persecution of Nonont tenes

Refusal of a Toleration Act

The Regium Donum

Condition of the Church

Distribution of patronage

Remonstrance of the Bishop of Pee
Ruin of Protestant Settlements

PAGE
198
199
201
208
204 —
207
209
211
212
214
215
216
217

219
221
222
224.
225
226
228
230
233
234
235
236
238
240
241
243

. 245

247
248

SECTION

IV.

VII.

1

III.

CONTENTS.

General dishonesty .

Jacobite Bishops

Favour shown to Catholics :
Confirmation of the Articles of Citanice
Status of the Catholic clergy .

Intermarriages between Catholics and Bepteeten fe ;

Conspiracy against the King
Rejection of the Security Act in Testa
English indignation :

. English commercial jealousies

Restrictions on the export of wool .
Destruction of the Irish woollen manufactories

. Corruption of the Court of Claims .

The Resumption Bill

English Act against the growth of Popery
Fate of the forfeited estates

Absenteeism :

Tenures of Irish land
Formation of modern Irish society .
Life in Dublin. : ;

The Bishops of the Ratabliahment

CHAPTER IL.
FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

. Growing estrangement between England and Ireland

Desire of the loyal Irish for a legislative union
Contrast between Ireland and Wales

Probable effects of the commercial restrictions
Mr... Maxwell’s Essay .

English estimate of the value of Tretand’
Viceroyalty of the Duke of Ormond :
Act to prevent the further growth of Popery .
Opening of the Session of 1703

The Irish Parliament petitions for a Union
Letter of Sir Richard Cox

The Union refused . . :

Catholic remonstrances against the Ponerr ee
Character of the Act
Agitation in Ireland ; ;

The Act as remodelled in inginnd ;

1X

PAGE
250
252
253
255
257
258
209
261
262
264:
265
267
270
272
274:
276
207
278
280
282
283

285

D.«,

CONTENTS.

SECTION

vd:

vit:

Attached Test Clause against Dissenters .
Object of the introduction of this clause .
Catholics heard in opposition

The Bill passes ;

Act for the Registration of Brees ;

. The laws against Catholics unenforced

Vigorous prosecution of Nonconformists .
Unstable character of English policy
Jacobite leanings of the Bishops and clergy

. Intended descent of the French on Galway

Condition of Galway

The Harl of Wharton

Swift and the Dissenters .

Jacobitism in Trinity College

Second Act against Popery

Ineffective sage SG to union deere Piotestaiits
The Abjuration Oath ; :

How evaded by the Catholics .
Revolution principles

The Students at Trinity Gallars
Defacement of William’s statue
Persecution of Presbyterians .

Recall of Wharton .

Whig temper of the Army

Quarrel between the Lords and Gaaeeare
The Regium Donum suspended
Prorogation of Parliament

Address of Convocation .

Feud between the Government at the Corporation
of Dublin

The Duke of Snes anal vices

Election riot ; : F :

The New Parliament

Renewed quarrel with the Dowie

Complaints of the House of Commons

Suspected regiments disbanded

The Schism Act

Death of Queen Anne and fall of hs Tory Ayia
tration 4 ; : . :

PAGE

SECTION

le

II.

ee

IV.

Vi.

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER III.
PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

Attitude of the Irish Catholics

Hiffect of severity on the Irish mind.

The Wildgeese

Swift’s opinion of the pr afeee of the Catholics

The operation of the Popery Acts

The Catholics in 1715

Cases under the Popery Acts .

How the law was carried out ;

Streneth of the Church Establishment

Penal Code a dead letter .

Hstablishment of regular clergy in iWTten

The odium of the Penal Code thrown on the Teseh
Protestants . ‘

Attempts to repeal the Test Glaxive

Successful opposition of the Bishops

Reasons for the promotion of ae ie ns Trish
Sees

Opinion of Mr. eyed ean on the Dikcente’
question : ; ; :

The Test Peiniained

A Toleration Act

Protestant Emigration to Aetice :

. Condition of the Trish peasant

Sheep farming

Attempt to encourage agricultnre

English jealousy.

The Irish Corn Bill pated 4 in anion

Character of Archbishop Boulter

The gentry of the old blood

Arthur Young’s portrait of them in 1770.

Accounts of them in the earlier part of the century .

Xl

PAGE
362
364:
365
366
367
370
3/2
374:
376
378
379

380
381
384:

386

387
390
391
392
395
397
398
399
4.00
403
405
4.06
407

Xi CONTENTS.

BOOK wT,
CHAPTER LI.
0h PS Bh BOD AS:
SECTION PAGE
I. Galwayin171l_. 408
Sheep and cattle farming in Caigey Hii RGaouAeen 409
Resolution to exterminate the settlers . 410
Cattle houghing , . All
Identification of the parties eenearned : : . 414°
II. Abduction of women : / : . 417
Difficulty of interference . : : . 418
Specimen stories. 420
Cases of Elizabeth Dobbin and Garnerae Stackpoole 421
Case of Honor Keris : : . 428
Case of Rebecca White . : . A425
Case of Jane Tubman .. ; . 427)
Combination of ferocity and nine ; ; . 430
Execution of James Cotter . . 432
Revenge of the Irish on the Ounitere : 43.4,
III. Conspiracy to murder Captain Newdigate at ie 436
IV. The Bodkin Murder ; : . 44d
CHAPTER II.

THE SMUGGLERS.

I. Premium onthe wool smuggling. . 446
Mr. Hely Hutchinson’s statement . : . 447
Extent of the practice . ‘ ' : f . AAd
Effects, political and social : ; : . 450
The gentlemen of Kerry , : : . 4ol1

II. The great Shelburne estate . : . 452
Mr. Donell Mahony, of Dunloe se ae ; . 4538
Kenmare Bay . ; ; : . 405
Story of Morty Balliean : . 456
The Bantry smugglers. ‘ ; ‘ . 458
Murder of John Puxley . : ; . 460
The burning of Morty’sden . . 462

Daniel Connell one of Puxley’s murderers . 463

SECTION

LIT.

EE

CONTENTS.

The Smugelers at Valencia f
Sylvester O’Sullivan a Government spy .
O'Sullivan at Killarney

A Vicar-General of the Hstablished Churn
Lord Fitzmaurice at Ross Castle

Kerry law :
O’Sullivan’s perils Sate escapes

. General anarchy

The Crosbies of Bally hine

Wreck of a Danish Hast ivathF pines on ibaateniee
Sands .

Her crew and cargo, tenis iver bullion aeped aid
carried to Ballyhics

Conspiracy in the county to seize ite pile phere

Attack on Ballyhige; the chests carried off

Division of the plunder

Complicity of the magistrates .

Fruitless efforts of the Government to recover ne
silver or punish the robbers

Remonstrance of the Danish Minister

PRCT. oy DV

CHAPTER I.
EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

. The bright side of the English settlers

Exertions of Dean Swift

Ineffectual prosecutions

Social and political tracts

Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne

Berkeley’s remedies for Irish abbas
Education in Ireland ; the Hedge Schools
Church Day Schools :
Proposed extension of the system

The Charter Schools

Expenses and results

Limitation of funds

The Irish Pension List

Xill

PAGE
4.66
467
469
4:70
472
473
475
477
478

480

4.82
483
4.89
491
4.92

4.95,
498

499
501
5038
505
507
509
511
512
518
514,
516
517
519

X1V CONTENTS.

SECTION
Subscriptions and donations

Success and failure . ;
III. The Duchess of Kendal and Mr. Wood

Patent for the copper coinage: real injury to be
feared from it

Resistance of Ireland. }

Letter of Sir R. Walpole .

Perplexity of the Government .

SirIsaac Newton’s Report, and resolution to hepasets

The Drapier Letters

Viceroyalty of Lord Carteret

Proposed prosecution of Swift

Enthusiasm for Swift in Dublin

Carteret advises concessions

Letter from Archbishop Boulter

The Patent is withdrawn

IV. Intended severities against the at etl)

Fiction and fact

The registered and anreaeterea be

neeriae dealings with bead by the Government .

Need of more systematic methods ;

Alteration of the heads of a Bill by the Goutal

Singular character of that alteration

The Bill thrown out in the Irish House of Lor dk

Further efforts in the sates? of the Duke of
Grafton ‘

Postponement of ie eeehice in Mnciand

V. Violent attempts to repress the Priesthood pene

forward abandoned , ; ;

Doctor Synge’s Sermon on Toles

Necessary limitations in Ireland

Proposal for a legal recognition of the Catholic cleeee

Catholic Bishops in correspondence with the Govern-
ment

CHAPTER II.
PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

I. Four methods of administering the Government of a
dependent country
The method adopted in Tana the bee)

570
572

CONTENTS.

SECTION

IT.

III.

IV.

VI.

VII.

Attitude of the English Government towards the
Catholics ; ;

Selection of magistrates .

England’s policy

Doubts on the Disarming eo

The Catholic gentlemen resume their swords

Singular scene at Trim .

Address of the Catholics to George the Second

Alarm of insurrection

New Disarming Act and its laine onidtatten

Ireland without a history .

Kfforts of the resident gentry .

Reform of the gaols

Social improvements

The abductions and the bench of Biehopst

The nobler section of the country gentlemen

Galway in 1747

Colonel Eyre and the hacen a

Disappearance of Protestants .

. Irish conception of liberty

Dawn of political patriotism

Charles Lucas

Parliamentary corruption

Primate Stone ;

Viceroyalty of the Duke SE Bede!

Complaints of Parliament

Letter of Bedford to Lord Cheinte:

Trish politicians

Treasury scandal

French War

Riot in Dublin

Lord Chatham on Irish av tisee ee “ai Gavernnient
officers :

Political profligacy

The consciences of Irish pelectaie

596
598

610
614:
615

622
625

628

632

f
i

wie >, A be tet rs. Wi)

weil

.
1% 3 it? sie <1 io

. 4
1 v \ ¥ a, i y pt ;
; 3 war’t
, ; ; :
5 Y a D7 , “J } tall
. rb a
5 f a,
‘ ; ¢
+ ray
’ * ’
a ¥
4 is A)
’ 1
ight eatk ad? a eS OR it
F F
cere a
Pe Ve Behe ea ret ve: at Mes ee
(2 eG
7 i +)
*
sage
7 i“
4

tate |e
x
» i ,
- : i se
as Ls

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND

IN THE

HKIGHTHENTH CHNTURY.

BLOLOd Guat

te

Crea Ei Eee.

PRELIMINARY.

SECTION I.

WHEN two countries, or sections of countries, stand CHAP.
geographically so related to one another that their oe,
union under a common government will conduce to
the advantage of one of them, such countries will
continue separate as long only as there is equality
of force between them, or as long as the country
which desires to preserve its independence possesses
a power of resistance so vigorous that the effort
to overcome it is too exhausting to be permanently
maintained.

A natural right to liberty, irrespective of the
ability to defend it, exists in nations as much as ana
no more than it exists in individuals. Had nature
meant us to live uncontrolled by any will but our own,

VOL. I. B
Ag

BOOK
I.

THE ENGLISH IN JRELAND.

we should have been so constructed that the plea-
sures of one would not interfere with the pleasures of
another, or that each of us would discharge by
instinct those duties which the welfare of the com-
munity requires from all. In a world in which we
are made to depend so largely for our well-being on
the conduct of our neighbours, and yet are created
infinitely unequal in ability and worthiness of cha-
racter, the superior part has a natural right to
govern; the inferior part has a natural right to be
governed ; and a rude but adequate test of superiority
and inferiority is provided in the relative strength of
the different orders of human beings.

Among wild beasts and savages might constitutes
right. Among reasonable beings right is for ever
tending to create might. Inferiority of numbers is
compensated by superior cohesiveness, intelligence,
and daring. The better sort of men submit willingly
to be governed by those who are nobler and wiser
than themselves ; organization creates superiority of
force; and the ignorant and the selfish may be and
are justly compelled for their own advantage to obey
a rule which rescues them from their natural weak-
ness. There neither is nor can be an inherent pri-
vilege in any person or set of persons to live un-
worthily at their own wills, when they can be led or
driven into more honourable courses; and the rights
of man—if such rights there be—are not to liberty,
but to wise direction and control.

Individuals cannot be independent, or society
cannot exist. With individuals the contention is
not for freedom absolutely, but for an exten-
sion of the limits within which their freedom must
be restrained, The independence of nations is

PRELIMINARY.

spoken of sometimes as if it rested on another founda-
tion—as if each separate race or community had a
divine titledeed to dispose of its own fortunes, and
develop its tendencies in such direction as seems good
to itself. But the assumption breaks down before
the enquiry, What constitutes a nation ? And the
right of a people to self-vovernment consists and can,
consist in nothing but their power to defend them-
selves. No other definition is possible. Are geogra-~
phical boundaries, is a distinct frontier, made the
essential? Mountain chains, rivers, or seas form, no
doubt, the normal dividing lines between nation and
nation, because they are elements of strength, and
material obstacles to invasion. But as the absence
of a defined frontier cannot take away a right to
liberty where there is strength to maintain it, a moun-
tain barrier conveys no prerogative against a power
which is powerful enough to overleap that barrier, nor
the ocean against those whose larger skill and courage
can convert the ocean into a highway.

As little can a claim to freedom be made coincident
with race or language. When the ties.of kindred and
of speech have force enough to bind together a powerful
community,such a community may be able to defendits
independence. If it fail, the pretension in itself has
no claim on the consideration of the rest of mankind.
Distinctions of such a kind are merely fanciful and
capricious. All societies of men are, in the nature of
things, forced into relations with other societies of
men. They exchange obligations, confer benefits, or
inflict injuries on each other. They are natural
friends or natural rivals ; and so agree to unite, or
else find themselves in collision, when the weaker must
give way. The individual has to sacrifice his in-

B 2

CHAP.

4

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

BOOK dependence to his family, the family to the tribe;

ls e e . ?
—— the tribe merges itself in some larger community ;

and the time at which these successive surrenders
of liberty are demanded depends practically on
nothing else than the inability to persist in separa-
tion. Where population is scanty and habits are
peaceful, the head of each household may be sove-
reign over his children and servants, owing no
allegiance to any higher chief or law. As among the
Cyclops—
Oeptorever Exacroc
TALOwWY HO, aAOXwY OVD aAAwWY aEYOUELY.

Necessity and common danger drive families into
alliance for self-defence ; the smaller circles of inde-
pendence lose themselves in ampler areas ; and those’
who refuse to conform to the new authority are
either required to take themselves elsewhere, or, if
they remain and persist in disobedience, may be
treated as criminals.

A tribe, if local circumstances are favourable, may
defend its freedom against a more powerful nejghbour,
so long as the independence of such a tribe is a lesser
evil than the cost of its subjugation ; but an indepen-
dence so protracted is rarely other than a misfortune.
On the whole, and as a rule, superior strength is the
equivalent of superior merit ; and when a weaker
people are induced or forced to part with their separate
existence, and are not treated as subjects, but are
admitted freely to share the privileges of the nation
in which they are absorbed, they forfeit nothing
which they need care to lose, and rather gain thar
suffer by the exchange. It is possible that a nobler
people may, through force of circumstances, or great

PRELIMINARY

numerical inferiority, be oppressed for a time by the
brute force of baser adversaries ; just as, within the
limits of a nation, particular classes may be tyran-
nized over, or opinions which prove in the end true,
may be put down by violence, and the professors of
such opinions persecuted. But the effort of nature is
constantly to redress the balance. Where freedom is so
precious that without it life is unendurable, men with
those convictions fight too fiercely to be permanently
subdued. Truth grows by its own virtue, and false-
hood sinks and fades. An oppressed cause, when it
is just, attracts friends, and commands moral support,
which converts itself sooner or later into material
strength. Asa broad principle it may be said, that
as nature has so constituted us that we must be
ruled in some way, and as at any given time the
rule inevitably will be in the hands of those who are
then the strongest, so nature also has allotted supe-
riority of strength to superiority of intellect and
character ; and in deciding that the weaker shall obey
the more powerful, she is in reality saving them from
themselves, and then most confers true liberty when
she seems most to be taking it away. There is no
freedom possible to man except in obedience to. law;
and those who cannot prescribe a law to themselves, if
they desire to be free must be content to accept direc-
tion from others. The right to resist depends on the
power of resistance. A nation which can maintain
its independence possesses already, unless assisted by
extraordinary advantages of situation, the qualities
which conquest can only justify itself by conferring.
It may be held to be as good in all essential condi-
tions as the nation which is endeavouring to overcome
it; and human society has rather lost than gained

CHAP.

6 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK when a people loses its freedom which knows how to
—-— make a wholesome use of freedom. But when resist-
ance has been tried and failed—when the inequality
has been proved beyond dispute by long and painful
experience—the wisdom, and ultimately the duty, of
the weaker party is to accept the benefits which are
offered in exchange for submission: and a nation
which at once will not defend its liberties in the field,
nor yet allow itself to be governed, but struggles to
preserve the independence which it wants the spirit
to uphold in arms by insubordination and anarchy
and secret .crime, may bewail its wrongs in wild and
weeping eloquence in the ears of mankind,—may at
length, in.a time when the methods by which sterner
ages repressed this kind of conduct are unpermitted,
make itself.so intolerable as to be cast off and bidden
go upon its own bad way: but it will not go for its
own benefit. It will have established no principle,
and vindicated no natural right. Liberty profits
only those who can govern themselves better than
others can govern them, and those who are able to
govern themselves wisely have no need to petition
for a privilege which they can keep or take for them-
selves.

PRELIMINARY. 7

SECTION IL.

In the scene before Harfleur, in the play of Henry cuap. .
the Fifth, there are introduced representatives of —~:—
the three nations which remained unsubdued after
England was conquered by the Normans, and the
co-ordination of which, under a common sovereignty,
was a problem still waiting to be accomplished. Care-
less always of antiquarian pedantry, Shakespeare
drew men and women as he saw them round him,
in the London of his own day; and Fluellen, Captain
Jamie, and Captain Macmorris were the typical
Welshman, Scot, and Irishman, as they were to be
met with in Elizabeth’s trainbands.

Fluellen, hot-blooded, voluble, argumentative, is
yet most brave, most loyal, and most honourable.
Among his thousand characters there is not one
which Shakespeare has sketched more tenderly, or
with a more loving and affectionate irony. Captain
Jamie is ‘a marvellous falerous gentleman,’ well
read in the ancient wars, learned ‘ in the disciplines
of the Romans,’ and able to hold discourse on them
with any man, but shrewd and silent, more prone to
listen than to speak, more given to blows than to
words, and determined only ‘to do good service, or
ligge in the ground for it.’ Macmorris, though no
less brave than his companions, ready to stand in
the breach while ‘ there were throats to be cut, or
work to be done,’ yet roars, rants, boasts, swears
by his father’s soul, and threatens to cut off any

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

man’s head who dares to say that he is as good as
himself.

Captain Jamie never mentions Scotland: we learn
his country from his dialect, and from what others
say of him. Fluellen, a Welshman to the last fibre,
yet traces his Welsh leek to the good service which
Welshmen did, ‘in a garden where leeks did
grow, at Crecy, under the English Edward. He
delights in thinking that all the waters of the Wye
cannot wash his majesty’s Welsh blood out of his
body. Macmorris, at the mention of his nation, as
if on the watch for insults from Saxon or Briton,
blazes into purposeless fury. ‘ My nation! What
ish my nation? Is a villain, and a bastard, anda
knave, and a rascal? What ish my nation? Who
talks of my nation.’

Had William fallen at Hastings instead of Harold,
and had the Norman invasion failed, it is likely that
the Lowland Scots would have followed the example
of Northumberland, and have drifted gradually into
combination with the rest of the island. The Con-
quest made the difficulty greater; but if the Norman
kings had been content to wait for the natural action
of time, Increasing intercourse and an obvious com-
munity of interest would have probably antedated
the Union by several centuries. The premature
violence of Edward the First hardened Scotland
irrecoverably into a separate nationality. The de-
termination to defend their independence created the
patriotic virtues which enabled the Northern Britons
to hold at bay their larger rival. The Union, when
it came about at last, was effected on equal terms.
Two separate self-governed peoples entered slowly
and deliberately into voluntary partnership on terms

PRELIMINARY.

of mutual respect. The material wealth which Scot-
land contributed to the empire was comparatively
insignificant; but she introduced into it a race of men
who had been hammered to a temper which made them
more valuable than mountains of gold; and among
the elements of greatness in the country known to
later history as Great Britain, the rugged Scotch
resolution to resist conquest to the death, tried in a
hundred battles, holds a place second to none.

The Lowland Scots were Teutons; the language
of the Lothians was not distinguishable from the
language of Northumberland; and the Union with
Scotland might have seemed so far an easier feat than
the Union with Wales. On the other hand, the
Welsh were fewer in number, less protected by
situation, less able to obtain help from other quarters.
They were neither slaves nor cowards. They loved
their freedom, they fought for it long and desperately,
rising again and again when civil wars in England
offered them a gleam of hope. When resistance
became obviously hopeless, they loyally and wisely
accepted their fate. They had not to suffer from
prolonged severity, for severity was unnecessary.
There was no general confiscation, no violent inter-
ference with local habits or usages. They preserved
their language with singular success, and their cus-
toms so far as their customs were compatible with
English law ; while in exchange for independence
they were admitted to the privileges of English
citizenship in as full measure as the English them-
selves. They continued proud of their nationality,
vain with true Celtic vanity of pedigrees which lose
themselves in infinity. Yet, being wisely handled,
restrained only in essentials, and left to their own

10

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

way in the ordinary current of their lives, they were

—~_ contented to forget their animosities; they ceased to

pine after political liberty which they were con-
sciously unable to preserve; and finding themselves
accepted on equal terms as joint inheritors of a mag-
nificent empire, the iron chain became a golden
ornament. Their sensibilities were humoured in
the title of the heir of the crown. In bestowing a
dynasty upon England they found a gratification for
their honourable pride. If they have contributed
less of positive strength than the Scots to the British
empire, they have never been its shame or its weak-
ness; and the retention of a few harmless peculiarities
has not prevented them from being wholesome and
worthy members of the United Commonwealth.
Ireland, the last of the three countries of which
England’s interest demanded the annexation, was by
nature better furnished than either of them with
means to resist her approaches. Instead of a narrow
river for a frontier, she had seventy miles of
dangerous sea. She had a territory more difficult to
penetrate, and a population greatly more numerous.
The courage of the Irish was undisputed. From the
first mention of the Irishman in history, faction fight
and foray have been the occupation and the delight
of his existence. The hardihood of the Irish kern
was proverbial throughout Europe. The Irish sol-
diers, in the regular service of France and Spain,
covered themselves with distinction, were ever
honoured with the most dangerous posts, have borne
their share in every victory. In our own ranks they
have. formed half the strength of our armies, and
detraction has never challenged their right to an equal
share in the honour which those armies have won.

PRELIMINARY.

11

Yet, in their own country, in their efforts to shake off cap.
English supremacy, their patriotism has evaporated ca

in words. No advantage of numbers has availed
them ; no sacred sense of hearth and home has stirred
their nobler nature. An unappeasable discontent
has been attended with the paralysis of manliness ;
and, with a few accidental exceptions, continually
recurring insurrections have only issued in absolute
and ever disgraceful defeat.

Could Ireland have but fought as Scotland fought,
she would have been mistress of her own destinies.
In a successful struggle for freedom, she would have
developed qualities which would have made her
worthy of possessing it. She would have been one
more independent country added to the common-
wealth of nations; and her history would have been
another honourable and inspiriting chapter among the
brighter records of mankind. She might have stood
alone ; she might have united herself, had she so
pleased, with England on fair and equal conditions ;
or she might have preferred alliances with the
Continental powers. There is no disputing against
strength, nor happily is there need to dispute, for the
strength which gives a right to freedom, implies the
presence of those qualities which ensure that it will
be rightly used. No country can win and keep its
freedom in the presence of a dangerous rival, unless
it be on the whok a well and justly governed country ;
and where there is just government the moral ground
is absent on which conquest can be defended or
desired. 7

Again, could Ireland, on discovering like the Welsh
that she was too weak or too divided to encounter
England in the field, have acquiesced as the Welsh

12

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK acquiesced, in the alternative of submission, there was
—— not originally any one advantage which England

possessed which she was not willing and eager to
share with her. If England was to become a great
power, the annexation of Ireland was essential to her,
if only to prevent the presence there of an enemy;
but she had everything to lose by treating her as a
conquered province, seizing her lands, and governing
her by force; everything to gain by conciliating the
Irish people, extending to them the protection of her
own laws, the privileges of her own higher civilization,
and assimilating them on every side, so far as their
temperament allowed, to her subjects at home.

Yet Ireland would neither resist courageously, nor
would she honourably submit. Her chiefs and leaders
had no real patriotism. In Scotland, though the nobles
might quarrel among themselves, they buried their
feuds and stood side by side when there was danger
from the hereditary foe. There was never a time
when there was not an abundance of Irish who would
make common cause with the English when there was
a chance of revenge upon a domestic enemy, or a
chance merely of spoil to be distributed. All alike,
though they would make no stand for liberty, as little
could endure order or settled government. ‘Their
insurrections, which might have deserved sympathy
had they been honourable efforts to shake off an alien
yoke, were disfigured with crimes which, on one
memorable occasion at least, brought shame on their
cause and name. When insurrection finally failed,
they betook themselves to assassination and ‘secret
tribunals; and all this, while they were holding up
themselves and their wrongs as if they were the
victims of the most abominable tyranny, and inviting

PRELIMINARY.

the world to judge between them and their op-
pressors.

Nations are not permitted to achieve independence
on these terms. Unhappily, though unable to shake
off the authority of England, they were able to
irritate her into severities which gave their accusa-
tions some show of colour. Everything which she
most valued for herself—her laws and liberties, her
orderly and settled government, the most ample
security for person and property—England’s first
desire was to give to Ireland in fullest measure. The
temper in which she was met exasperated her into
harshness and at times to cruelty; and so followed
in succession alternations of revolt and punishment,
severity provoked by rebellion, and breeding in turn
fresh cause for mutiny, till it seemed at last as if no
solution of the problem was possible save the expulsion
or destruction of a race which appeared incurable.

13
CHAP.
I.

Sa et

14

BOOK
8

THE ENGLISH IN JRELAND.

SECTION III.

THERE are many ways in which a conquered but
still reluctant people may be dealt with, when the
interest of the conquerors is rather in the country
itself than in the inhabitants who occupy it. They
may be exterminated, either wholly, as the Red races
are being exterminated in North America, or in part,
as the Gauls were by Czsar, and the Mexicans by
Cortes and his successors; or they may be held con-
tinuously down by the sword, as the North of Italy
was held by Austria; or again armed colonists may
be settled on the soil who, in exchange for land on
easy terms undertake the maintenance of order, as
was done in Ulster under James the First, and in
Leinster and Munster by Cromwell.

The Norman occupation of Ireland in the twelfth
century differed materially from all and any of these
methods. The Normans were not properly colo-
nists; they were a military aristocracy whose peculiar
mission was to govern men. When a tract of land
was allotted to a Norman baron, it was not at first
an estate out of which to extract rents to spend
upon his own pleasures, so much as a fief, over
which he was a ruler responsible to the crown.
The Irish, when the Normans took charge of
them, were, with the exception of the clergy, scarcely
better than a mob of armed savages. They had
no settled industry and no settled habitations, and
scarcely a conception of property. The poor-spirited
and the weak were told off for such wretched tillage

PRELIMINARY.

as could not be dispensed with. The only occupation
considered honourable was fighting and plunder; and
each tribe roamed within its own limits, supported
either by the pillage of its neighbours or the wild
cattle which wandered through the forests. They
had some human traits. They were fond of music
and ballad-singing. They were devout after a fashion
of their own ; and among the monks and friars there
were persons who had pretensions to learning. But
the religion of the Irish Celts, which three centuries
earlier had burnt like a star in Western Europe, had
degenerated into a superstition, and no longer served
as a check upon the most ferocious passions. When
Giraldus Cambrensis was sent by Henry the Second
to report on Ireland, their chief characteristics were
treachery, thirst for blood, unbridled licentiousness,

and inveterate detestation of order and rule.’

1 Giraldus attributes the moral
condition of the people to the neg-
lect of the bishops and clergy. ‘In
episcopis et preelatis,’ he says, ‘ hoc
fere solum reprehensionis dignum
invenio quod in populi tam enor-
miter delinquentis correctione de-
sides nimis sunt et negligentes. . .
Si preelati a tempore Patricii per
tot annorum curricula predicationi
et instructioni item increpationi et
correptioni pro officii debito viril-
iter institissent et preenotatas gentis
enormitates aliquatenus extirpas-
sent, aliquam in eis procul dubio for-
mam honestatis et religionisimpres-
sissent, Sed non fuit in ipsis qui
tanquam tuba vocem exaltaret.’

They lived, he said, retired in
their cloisters, given up to con-
templation.

‘Hujus terre prelati intra ec-
clesiarum septa de antiquaé con-
suetudine se continentes, contem-

To

plationi solum fere semper indul-
gent. ... Unde accidit ut nec
verbum Dei populo preedicent nec
scelera eorum eis annuntient nee in
grege commisso vel extirpent vitia
vel inserant virtutes.’— Topographia
Eibernica, Distinctio iii. cap. 28.
‘Phere has always been a difficulty
in understanding how, among so
lawless a people, the churches and
monasteries escaped destruction.
The supernatural character attach-
ing to the clergy was perhaps in
part the cause. Giraldus, however,
says, that some stronger protection
was required, and attributes it to
the power of an Irish saint’s curse,
and his quick, sharp, promptitude
in pronouncing it. ‘Hoc autem
mihi notabile videtur quod sicut
nationis istius homines hac in vita
mortali pre aliis gentibus impati-
entes et precipites sunt ad vin-
dictam, sic et in morte vitali meritis

15

CHAP.

I.
ee

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

such a people, needing bit and bridle, liberty was
only mischievous, and the Normans came to take
direction of them. How their coming was brought
about in detail—how Dermot MacMurrough, prince of
Leinster, was driven out and fled for help to England
—how he made himself a vassal of Henry the Second
—under a compact already sanctioned in the famous
grant of Ireland by Pope Adrian—this and the history
of the conquest which followed does not need repeat-
ing. The Normans in occupying both England and
Ireland were but fulfilling the work for which they
were specially qualified and gifted, and the grant
of Adrian was but the seal of approbation by the
spiritual ruler of Christendom. ‘They did not de-
stroy the Irish people ; they took the government of
them merely, as the English have done in India, dis-
possessing the chiefs, changing the loose order of
inheritance into an orderly succession, giving security
to life and property, and enabling those who cared to
be industrious to reap the fruits of their labours
without fear of outrage and plunder. Their right to
govern lay in their capability of governing and in
the need of the Irish to be governed. The Pope may
have had in view other objects of hisown. The Irish
Church claimed immunities from the Roman juris-
diction which the irony of fate selected the Anglo-
Normans to abrogate. Celtic Ireland was neither

jam excelsi pre aliarum regionum
sanctis, animi vindicis esse videntur.
Nec alia mihi ratio eventus hujus
occurrit nisi quoniam gens Hiber-
nica castellis carens, preedonibus
abundans, ecclesiarum potius re-
fugiis quam castrorum municipiis,
et preecipue ecclesiastici virl seque
suaque tueri solent, divina provi-

dentia simul et indulgentia, grayi
frequentique animadversione in ec-
clesiarum hostes opus fuerat; ut
et sic ab ecclesiasticé pace impiorum
pravitas procul arceatur et ipsis
ecclesiis ab irreverenti populodebita
veneratio vel serviliter exhibeatur.’
— Lopographia Hibernica, Distine-
tio iil. cap. 55,

PRELIMINARY.

Papal, nor inclined to submit itself to the Papacy, till
Henry the Second riveted the Roman yoke upon them.
But the true justification of the conquest lay in the
character of the conquerors. They were born rulers
of men, and were forced, by the same necessity which
has brought the decrepit kingdoms of Asia under the
authority of England and Russia, to take the manage-
ment, eight centuries ago, of the anarchic nations of
Western Europe.

Nor did Ireland fail on the outset to profit by
their presence. [or two centuries after the land-
ing of Strongbow and Fitzstephen large sections
of the country were subdued into some kind of
order and arrangement. The Celtic chiefs were
driven into the mountains. Fitzgeralds, Lacies, De
Burghs, De Courcies, Blakes, Butlers, Fitzurzes took
the places of M‘Carthies, O’Neils, O’Briens, U’Sul-
livans, and O’Connors. Those of the old race who
remained in the homes of their fathers were compelled
to conform to some kind of rule. The new comers
rooted themselves into the soil, built castles, gathered
about them retainers of their own blood, who over-
mastered, held down, and, in some degree, trans-
formed the wild and wayward vagabonds, whom they
forced to become their subjects. The work begun
by the Danes was carried on and developed. Seaport
towns—Dublin, Wexford, Waterford, Cork, Limerick
—of which the sea-rovers from the Baltic had laid
the foundations, were enlarged, strengthened, sur-
rounded with walls, and governed like English cities.
Trading ships went and came. Outside the forti-
fications, and within the shelter of their garri-
sons, round Dublin especially, the country became
settled and cultivated. Tenants took leases of lands

VOL. I. C

CHAP.
i

18

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and raised houses on them; while in the interior, with

ru f ; j
—— incessant fighting and arduous police work which

knew neither end nor respite, the heads of the Norman
families hammered the unwilling metal of the Celts
into some consistency, and forced them into habits
less extravagantly wild and confused. ‘The four pro-
vinces were mapped out into districts. Inland towns
were raised, fortified, and provided with sovereigns
(mayors) and aldermen, and the forms, at least, of free
municipal institutions. Sheriffs and magistrates were
chosen ; and the Brehon traditions—a code of customs
in which crime was a word without meaning, and the
most savage murders could be paid for with a cow or
a sheep—began to yield before the English common
law, as quict and industry recognized the need and
value of protection. The progress was slow. The
prospect seemed often desperate. Unstable as water,
the Irish temperament wanted cohesiveness to bear the
shapes which were imprinted on it. And the work was
the harder because—and it is the same difficulty
which has been at once the honour and. perplexity of
English relations with Ireland from first to last—
because the effort of the conquerors was to govern the
Irish not as a vassal province but as a free nation; to
extend the forms of English liberty—her trials by
jury, her local courts, her parliaments—to a people
essentially unfit for them; and, while governing
Ireland, to teach her at the same time the harder
lesson to govern herself.

In contrast with the age which succeeded it, the
century of Irish life which followed the Conquest
was comparatively humane and rational. Authority
was a real thing; and it might have seemed that, by
the side of the Anglo-Norman civilization which was

PRELIMINARY.

shaping itself into consistency in England, a Norman-
Celtic society, parallel to it though with subsidiar
differences, was tending to form itself with equal
firmness in the sister island. But the same causes
which, at a later period, undermined the Protestant
ascendancy were at work with equal potency four
hundred years before.

o 2

in

CHAP.
iy

—_--—

20)

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

A CONQUERING race can retain its peculiar charac-

paeeo teristics, unaffected by the local influences and ten-

dencies of the people by which it is surrounded, as
long only as it preserves the most intimate relations
with its kindred elsewhere. Unless strengthened
by a continuous stream of importation the pure blood
of the conquerors declines. They recruit themselves
by intermarriages with the natives. ‘They form

alliances -and friendships ; they find the work of

government more easy by humouring the customs

and imitating the manners which they see round

them; and: when human beings are thrown together,
especially if there is no difference of religion to

keep them apart, 1t is at once inevitable that kindly

associations shall rise between them, and the character
of both will tend to assume a colouring in which the
points of agreement will be more visible than the points

of difference. Were the English in India cut off by

any sudden convulsion from their native country,
they would still probably, if they so wished, be able
to maintain their sovereignty, but it would be at the
expense of becoming themselves Orientalised. Were
there nothing else to produce a change, their children
would inevitably catch a tone from their servants
and nurses. Native wives and mistresses would work
alteration in the blood ; and, in spite of Christianity,
six or seven generations would find them half trans-
muted into an Asiatic type. The Normans in Eng-
land, though many of them retained their estates in —

PRELIMINARY.

France, and went and came, and French continued
for centuries the language of the court, and, for a
time, it seemed as if England might become a mere
appanage of the Plantagenets’ continental dominions,
yet in each generation approached closer to the

Saxons, till at length the distinction disappeared..

Their Irish kindred,, filtered. many of them first
through Wales, and in the process already partially
Celticized, were exposed to trials infinitely more
severe. Those to whom Ireland was. distasteful
refused to make their homes there, and forsook it not
to return. Those who remained were left for the
most part to themselves. The Irish Sea, thrice the
breadth of the Straits of Dover, cut them off from
their old connections. Surrounded by swarms of
enemies, they had to stand. by such strength as they
could rally to them. on the spot, and made the most

of such of the Irish as they could persuade into
loyalty. In the Irish character too they came im

contact with elements peculiarly fitted to work upon
them. From a combination of causes—some creditable
to them, some other than creditable—the Irish Celts
possess on their own soil a power greater than. any:
other known family of mankind of assimilating those
who venture among them to their own image. Light-
hearted, humorous, imaginative, susceptible through
the entire range of feeling, from the profoundest
pathos to the most playful jest, if they possess some
real virtues they possess the counterfeits of a hundred
more. Passionate in everything—passionate in their
patriotism, passionate in their religion, passionately
courageous, passionately loyal and affectionate—they
are without the manliness which will give strength
and solidity to the sentimental part of their disposi-

2]

CHAP.
il

——

22 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK tions ; while the surface and show is so seductive
—— and so winning that only experience of its instability
can resist the charm.

The incompleteness of character is conspicuous in all
that they do and have done; in their history, in their
practical habits, in their arts and in their literature.
Their lyrical melodies are exquisite, their epic poetry is
ridiculous bombast. In the lives of their saints there is
a wild if fantastic splendour; but they have no secular
history, for as a nation they have done nothing which
posterity will not be anxious to forget; and if they
have never produced a tolerable drama, it is because
imagination cannot outstrip reality. In the annals of
ten centuries there is not a character, male or female,
to be found belonging to them with sufficient hard-
ness of texture to be carved into dramatic outline.
Their temperaments are singularly impressionable,
yet the impression is incapable of taking shape. They

have little architecture of their own, and the forms
introduced from England have been robbed of their
grace. Their houses, from cabin to castle, are the
most hideous in the world. No lines of beauty soften
anywhere the forbidding harshness of their provincial
towns; no climbing rose or creeper dresses the naked
walls of farmhouse or cottage. The sun never shone
. on a lovelier country as nature made it. They have
pared its forests to the stump, till it shivers in damp
and desolation. The perceptions of taste which belong
to the higher orders of understanding, are as com-
pletely absent as truthfulness of spirit is absent, or
cleanliness of person and habit. The Irish are the
spendthrift sister of the Arian race. Yet there is not-
withstanding a fascination about them in their old
land and in the sad and strange associations of their

PRELIMINARY.

singular destiny. They have a power of attraction
which no one who has felt it can withstand. Brave to
rashness, yet so infirm of purpose, that unless they
are led by others their bravery is useless to them;
patriots, yet with a history which they must trick
with falsehood to render it tolerable even to them-
selves ; imaginative and poetical, yet unable to boast
of one single national work of art ; attached ardently
to their country, yet so cultivating it that they are
the byeword of Europe ; they appeal to sympathy in
their very weakness; and they possess and have
always possessed some qualities the moral worth of
which it is impossible to over-estimate, and which
are rare in the choicest races of mankind.

Amidst their weaknesses, their confident boastings
and imperfect performances, the Irish have shown
themselves at all times, and in all places, capable of
the most loyal devotion to anyone who will lead and
.command them. They have not been specially
attached to chiefs of their own race. Wherever and
in whomsoever they have found courage and capacity,
they have been ready with heart and hand to give
their services ; and whether at home in sacrificing
their lives for their chiefs, or as soldiers in the French
or English armies, or as we now know them in the
form of the modern police, there is no duty, however
dangerous and difficult, from which they have been
found to flinch, no temptation however cruel which
tempts them into unfaithfulness. Loyalty of this
kind, though called contemptuously a virtue of bar-
barism, is a virtue which, if civilization attempts to
dispense with it, may cause in its absence the ruin of
civilization. Of all men the most likely to appre-
ciate it were the Norman barons; for personal fidelity

24

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of man to man lay at the heart of the feudal organiza-

~—— tion. But nevertheless in Ireland it was their tempt-

ation as well as their strength. To the Irish kern it
mattered little whether his chief was a Geraldine or
an O’Connor ; it mattered much whether he was to
be ruled under the imported laws of the stranger, or
by the customs and traditions of his own people ;
whether when he had found a chief who would lead
him to annual victory he was to be allowed to enjoy
the fruits of victory in the old fashion, or was forced to
be content with barren honour and the praise of his
master. He would have accepted the new conditions
had it been possible to enforce them for a few gene-
rations while habits of order could grow. But the
times were pressing; the barons had much work to
do and few men of their own to do it with. Money.
was scarce with them, and rewards of other kinds
were equally scarce ; while plunder was easy and satis-
factory, and was the time-honoured mode by which
services in war were paid for. The baron and his Irish
retainers found the relations between them grow easy
when the customs of the country were allowed to
stand; and when a Butler or a Lacy, not contented
with leading his people to spoil and victory, adopted
their language and their dress, and became as one
of themselves, the affection of which they were the
objects among the people grew at once into adoration.
Then old Celtic names were dropped. The fighting
men of Galway became the De Burgh’s men and called
themselves Burkes. In Kerry and Limerick half
the inhabitants became Geraldines. The Ormond or
the Desmond of the day became a kind of sovereign.
He forgot more and more that he was come to Ireland
to introduce English order and manners; and to

PRELIMINARY.

strengthen his authority and conciliate his subjects,
he left them to their own laws and their own ways,
while they in turn became the instruments of his
ambition. His Norman dependents followed the ex-
ample, took Irish wives, and followed Irish fashions;
and if on one side, and in some places, the con-
guerors had introduced civilization, elsewhere they
had but lent fresh strength and sinew to the very
thing which they were sent to subdue.

The metamorphosis of the feudal baron into the
Celtic chief was not completed without efforts from
the nobler part of the English settlers to arrest the
downward progress. By the statute of Kilkenny, in
1367, it was made treason for an Englishman of birth
or blood to accept or govern by the laws of the
Brehons. Intermarriage with the Irish, or fostering!
with the Irish, was made treason. Those who had
chosen to adopt Irish manners, Irish names or lan-
guage, were threatened with forfeiture. Private
war between the great families had become as fre-
quent and as scandalous as before the Conquest.
Swords were forbidden to be drawn without orders
from the Lord Deputy ; and wardens of the peace
were named for every county to see the law obeyed.
The attempt to keep the races apart has lately been
considered vain and impolitic; but the framers of these
statutes understood the conditions more clearly than
those who condemn them. ‘The interfusion of races
did not mean the elevation of the Irish to the level of
their rulers, but the degradation of the ruler to the
state of those whose fashions it was his business to ex-
tirpate. It meant that every separate potentate was

? Entrusting the children to of all the means by which the de-
Irish foster-nurses, the most fatal generacy was brought about.

CHAP.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to assume a savage independence, and, for’ the sake
of himself and his immediate dependents, to extend
and perpetuate the lawlessness which was Ireland’s
curse.

The Kalkenny Parliament was followed by fresh
efforts on the part of England. Richard the Second
appeared in person on the scene, brought the chiefs
upon their knees, read Ireland the often-repeated
lesson that England had but to exert herself to assert
an instant and absolute supremacy. Absenteeism,
the deepest root of the mischief, had already been at
work. Lords and gentlemen who retained most com-
pletely the English character, and whose presence
in Ireland, therefore, was most indispensable, had
learnt to prefer the society of their friends at home
to the pain and trouble of coercing banditti in
Donegal or Galway. They had reduced their con-
nection with their estates to drawing rent or re-
venues from them; and the old families came back
into their places charged with payments which on such
terms were no more than robbery. Civilization was
not sufficiently advanced to tolerate modern views of
the rights of property. They were ordered back to
their posts under pain of confiscation.

Unhappily, a cycle of civil war was opening in
England itself. Richard, the slave of parasites and
courtiers, was shaking on his throne. ‘Three times
he crossed to Ireland: on his last visit, in 1399,
he was perhaps looking to his subjects there, as
Charles the First and James the Second looked after-
wards, to save him from revolution at home. He
failed and fell, entailing in his overthrow a century
of convulsions. ‘The House of Lancaster, to divert
attention and strengthen their imperfect titles by

PRELIMINARY.

gratifying the national vanity, flung themselves into
conquest. Had the army which conquered at Agin-
court been directed upon Ireland, had the genius
which for a brief interval turned France into an
English province, been addressed to the subjugation
and settlement of England’s own dominions, Henry
the Fifth might have left a less distinguished name,
but the Irish difficulty might have been for ever
ended, and he would have bequeathed to his son a
less fatal inheritance. But Ireland, as in a later
century, was neglected as too inglorious a field for
enterprise, and was left to her own will, to tear in
pieces the parchment laws which there was no longer
a sword to enforce. As disaster thickened in France
the change in Ireland was significantly marked. So
far from absenteeism being checked, the wars had
recalled a yet larger number of the Norman-Jrish
leaders to take part in the struggle. The pretence of
carrying English law through the whole country was
formally abandoned. The four counties known as the
English Pale* were divided from the rest of the
island, where the Irish, except in the sea towns, were
left to themselves. The English were required by a
statute of Henry the Sixth to distinguish themselves
by a difference in the beard.? Those of the natives
who cared to be protected by English law were
allowed to live within the frontier on condition of
adopting the English characteristics. Those beyond
the Pale came to be called the king’s Irish enemies.
The English were forbidden to hold intercourse with
them, visit them, or even trade with them ; and an
Irishman found inside the border was liable to arrest

1 Dublin, Meath, Kildare, and Louth. @ Shaving the upper lip.

CHAP.

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

asa spy.’ Every ‘liegeman’ was permitted to kill
notorious thieves,” and received a reward from the
county for each thief destroyed, which the sheriff
was bound to levy. As a corollary on this statute
arose the famous saying, that it was no felony to
kill an Irishman. Those who formally refused sub-
mission to English law could not be allowed its pro-
tection.

Such measures were symptoms of growing weakness,
and of the recovering strength of the Irish clans.
The Wars of the Roses followed, and completed the
collapse. England was disabled for half a century
from further efforts, and the counties of the Pale fol-
lowed the rest of the island. The best of the remain-
ing English went back to give their swords to Red
Rose or White, and the English interest in Ireland was
reduced to the families who cared least for their old
homes, and had identified themselves most completely
with the land of their adoption. The O’s and the
Macs repossessed themselves of their old inheritances.
Ulster they recovered altogether. In the south and
west the Anglo-Normans held their ground, but
only by having become denationalized themselves.
Geraldines, Butlers, and Burkes shared the country
with O’Neils, O’Donnells, O’Connors, O’Rourkes,
O’Briens, and O’Sullivans, scarce distinguishable
from them in habit or appearance, with no law but
the Brehon. They made war on each other, maraud-

1 Trish Statutes, 25 Hen. VI. rious known thieves, and thieves
cap. 4. found robbing and spoiling and
2 It was not necessary that they breaking into houses by night or
should be caught in the act of day, and thieves found in the
robbery. ‘It shall be lawful to manner—to kill them,.’—28 Hen,
every liegeman of our sovereign VI, cap. 3.
lord the King—all manner noto-

PRELIMINARY,

29

ing, burning, killing, driving each other’s cattle, as if cuHap.
they were no better than so many robber chieftains, ——_

and owned no more obedience to England than an
acknowledgment of titular authority. For the first
time for three hundred years Ireland was in full and
ample possession of all the privileges of home rule.}
Bosworth Field and the accession of the House of
Tudor gave peace to England, and brought with it
the necessity of facing the Irish problem once more.
The English sovereigns, though not yet calling them-
selves Kings of Ireland, were Domini, or lords para-
mount there; and, having claimed supremacy over
the island, were responsible to God and man for the
administration of some kind of justice there. The
unwelcome task might still have been postponed,
but the Irish lords themselves forced forward the
consideration of it. ‘They considered, as their de-
scendants considered on the deposition of James the
Second, that, though attached to the English Crown,
they were not attached to England, and had a right
to determine for themselves who was or was not the
lawful possessor of the throne. The White Rose
was, on the whole, the favourite with them; and
pretenders, who came to them as its representatives,
were instantly made welcome. They crowned Lam-
bert Simnel in Dublin. When Lambert Simnel
broke down they received Perkin Warbeck, and met
him in a Parliament. These phantom figures soon
vanished, but their reception decided Henry the
Seventh to make a resolute attempt to put the bridle
1 The sea towns remained Eng- and bailiffs of Waterford applied for
lish, the magistrates seemingly and obtained permission to go on
having so little to do in the way of _ pilgrimage to £t. James of Compo-

secular management, or so little stella.—Co., vol. i. p. 175.
care to doit, that in 1483 the mayors

30

THE ENGLISH JIN IRELAND.

BOOK once more between their teeth.. An account of Ire-
—~— land written at this time by an Englishman calling

himself ‘ Panderus,’ or ‘the Pander,’ shows with
some clearness the problem to be solved.+

Half Louth, half Dublin, half Meath, and half
Kildare were still nominally subject to English law ;
but between the extortions of the officials of the
court, the subsidies paid for protection which was
not furnished, and the consequent necessity of paying
black mail to the chiefs of the Irish, ‘the English
folk’ within the Pale were reckoned ‘more oppressed
and more miserable than any others in the whole
country ;’ ‘none in any part of the known world were
so evil be seen in town and field, so brutish, so trod
under foot, and with so wretched a life.’ Outside
these limits, the two great houses of the Geraldines
in Leinster and Munster, the O’Briens in Clare, the
Butlers in Kilkenny, the O’Neils and O’Donnells in
the north, exercised a rude supremacy. Under
their titular leadership the country was shared out
between sixty Irish chiefs of the old blood and
‘thirty great captains of the English noble folk,’ each
of whom ‘lived only by the sword, and obeyed no
temporal power but only himself that was strong.’
These ninety leaders, on an average, commanded seven
or eight hundred swords apiece; but their retainers,
when their services were unrequired by the chief,
were generally fighting among themselves. The
captains among the Irish were chosen by ‘ fort-
mayne.’ The head of the clan was he that had ‘ the
strongest arm.’ Every lad of spirit under him who

1 The Pander’s account is em- rently the whole substance of that
bodied in ‘A Report on the State of  report.— State Papers, Hen, VIII.
Ireland in 1515, and forms appa- vol, ii. p. 1.

PRELIMINARY.

could gather a score or two of followers set up for
himself, seized or built some island or forest strong-
hold, where he lived by his right arm on the plunder
of his neighbours, and fought his way to the first
place under his lord.

Their private habits were wild as their occupations
were lawless. In the latter half of the sixteenth cen-
tury, when a distinct view of them begins to be obtain-
able, the cattle and human beings lived herded together
in the Karl of Desmond’s castle. If Fynes Moryson
may be believed, the daughters of distinguished Ulster
chiefs squatted on the pavement round the hall fires
of their fathers’ castles, in the presence of strangers,
as bare of clothing as if Adam had never sinned.
According to Spenser, in striking contrast with the
Irish of later experience, the women in all their
relations were emancipated to the fullest imaginable
extent; and, in Spenser’s time, they had rather im-
proved than deteriorated since the visit of the Pander.
A hundred thousand families (the population did not
exceed, if it reached, half a million) divided Ireland,
whose ways of life, and whose notion of the objects
for which life was given them, were the ways and the
notions of savages. In unconscious simplicity their
historians reveal their character. ‘The pages of the
Four Masters, the ‘ Annals of Lough Cé,’ are filled
with a monotonous series of murders and destruction.
Strife and bloodshed were the sole business of life; and
those of them took highest rank, and rose most to
favour in song and legend, who had slaughtered most
enemies, and burnt and harried the largest number of
homesteads. Partial exceptions there may have been.
Within the walls of towns there must have been
some kind of human decency. In Ormond’s castle

32

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of Kilkenny, at Maynooth, and in the houses of the

ee great barons of the Pale, the example of the English

viceroy at Dublin was, perhaps, faintly imitated.
Imagination may with difficulty approach, it certainly
cannot exaggerate, the condition of the rest of the
island.

‘The holy woman Brigitta,’ says the Pander
emphatically, conveying under an Irish legend his
general impressions as to the whole subject, ‘ used to
enquire of her good angel many questions of secrets
divine. And among others she enquired of what
Crystyn lande was most sowlles damned. The
Angell shewyd her a lande in the weste parte of the
worlde. She inquiryd the cause whye. ‘The Angell
sayd for there is most contynuall warre, rote of hate
and envye and of viceis contrarye to Charytie. And
the Angell dyd shew till her the lapse of the sowlies
of Crystyn folke of that lande, how they fell downe
into Hell as thyk as any haylle shewrys. And pytty
thereof movied the Pander to consayn his said boke,
for after his opinion thys is the lande that the Angell
understode, for ther is no lande in this worlde of
so long contynuall warre within hymselff, nor of so
greate shedding of Crystyn blode, nor of so greate
rubbing, spoyling, preying, and burneing, nor of so
ereate wrongfull extortion contynually as Ireland.
Wherefore it cannot be denyed by very estymation
of man, but that the Angell dyd understande the
lande of Ireland.’ !

What could the King do more than had been
done? it was asked. The land had been conquered,
and settled with English, and subjected to English

1 ‘State of Ireland and Plan for its Reformation, 1515,’ State Papers,

vol, ii.

PRELIMINARY.

laws; ‘and so did continue and prosper a hundred
years and more.’ Then barbarism had come back as
if it were the fatal destiny of the country. Some said
that things had been never better; others, that the
disorder was incurable and never could be removed.
The Pander thought that an account of Ireland would
be demanded by God at the King’s hands; and that,
for his own soul’s sake, he must take it in hand. ‘It
would be more honour to him to surrender Ireland
altogether, than suffer his poorer subjects to be so
cruelly oppressed by the nobles, and the nobles to be
at war with themselves, shedding blood always with-
out remedy.’ ‘‘’he herde must render account of
his folk and the king for his.’

Once more there was to be an attempt to govern;
but how it was to be done remained obscure as ever.
The despised ‘ churles,’ or poor tillers of the earth,
were the worthiest part of the population, the worthiest
and the most cruelly oppressed. The Pander’s pro-
posal was to give the churles an English training,
and arm them against their lords, who would thus be
compelled to respect their properties, and, for want of
plunder on which to sustain their followers, would be
driven, in spite of themselves, to more peaceful habits.
But this was one of those paper measures so uncertain
in its results; for the churles after all might turn their
weapons against their patrons. It was a plan easy to
recommend, but impossible to execute without a com-
plete conquest, which Henry, shaking on his throne,
was unable to undertake. His hope was still to con-
ciliate, to reclaim by persuasion and favour the least
desperate of the great Irish families, and with their
assistance rule or influence the rest. The two most
powerful houses of Norman descent were the Butlers

VOL. I. D

d4

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and the Geraldines of Kildare. Each of them had

_*_ accepted earldoms from England. They held their

estates in feudal tenure, with regular descent to the
eldest son; and their heirs in part or wholly were
educated at the English court. The Butlers, the
sole exception in Ireland, were traditionally loyal.
They had little influence beyond their own princi-
pality, as having English sympathies, and were
therefore less available for Henry’s purpose. The
Kildares, far advanced in intelligence beyond the
Trish level, and better aware than their countrymen
of English strength, had played fast and loose with
the English connection as the turn of events recom-
mended, but they were ready to fall back upon it if
they could be regarded as the hereditary representa-
tives of their sovereign. Earl Gerald, after crowning
Lambert Simnel, shook himself free from his falling’
cause; in combination with his kinsmen in Munster,
he crushed the party which had declared for Perkin
Warbeck, and drove the new Pretender out of the
kingdom. All Ireland, it was said, was not a match
for the Earl of Kildare. Then, ‘ Let the Earl of
Kildare govern all Ireland,’ was the answer of Henry
the Seventh. Gerald, the eldest son, was married
to the King’s cousin, Lady Elizabeth Grey.t The
Kildares were deemed the most fit connecting links
between the two islands. ‘They undertook to keep
Ireland quiet in its allegiance, and to govern, if
nothing else, at least inexpensively. Prince Henry,
then a child and Duke of York, was appointed viceroy,
as a complimentary equivalent to the title of Prince
of Wales borne by his brother. The political question

1 From this marriagecamethe fair _ lish court, and with her Irish charms
Geraldine, who grew up atthe Eng- captivated the young Lord Surrey.

PRELIMINARY.

3)

ood

raised by Simnel’s coronation had to be disposed of cHap.
before a final settlement. Sir Edward Poynings, ehatety Tee

sent over as Deputy, carried through the Irish Par-
liament the two famous acts known by his name, by
which English law was constitutionally established
im Ireland;* and the Irish legislature surrendered
its pretence to pass measures which had not been first
approved in London.? This point concluded, the
sword of justice was delivered over to the Kildares,
. and was held by them for a quarter of a century.
The establishment of the Tudor dynasty, it has
been sometimes supposed, was the most favourable
opportunity as yet offered for the erection of an
Ireland loyal to England, yet governed by her
own people according to ‘Irish ideas ;’ and had it
been tolerable for an orderly and well administered
kingdom to retain a dependency at its doors abandoned
wholly to those habits of lawlessness which govern-
ments exist to repress, the administration of the
Geraldines might have been continued indefinitely
without provoking a collision. Poynings’ Acts were
an unfelt restraint, when the statutes of an Irish
Parliament were not even nominally in force beyond
the Pale. The Kildares deriving their strength from
their popularity could govern only by humouring the
‘ideas,’ which they were chosen to represent ; and
where in other countries anarchy works its own cure
through the miseries which it creates, in Ireland the
misery was itself enjoyment. The free right of every
one to make war upon his neighbour at pleasure was
the Magna Charta of Irish liberty. To sacrifice
the privilege of appeal to the ordeal of battle was
to sacrifice everything which made life itself worth

1 10 Hen. VII. cap. 22. * 10 Hen. VII. cap. 4.
5)

|x

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

having.’ So long as England left the Irish free to
plunder and kill, they were well contented that one of
themselves should sit in Dublin Castle with the title
of King’s Vicegerent. Freedom such as Scotland
fought for the inhabitants of the sister island never
sought or cared for. Conscious that they could not
stand alone, they were satisfied to live under a power
which left them in possession of all that they desired,
without risk of interference from other countries which
might perhaps prove less forbearing. If the absence
of every element which in the court of reason and
conscience constitute the justification for the forcible
annexation of Ireland, formed a hopeful ground for
the establishment of amicable relations between the
two peoples, the attempt to govern by ‘Irish ideas,’ as
exemplified in the administration of the house of Kil-
dare, had only to have been persevered in to have
brought about the desired union of heart and affec-
tions. ;

But England to her misfortune has never been
able to persevere long in any one policy towards
Ireland. She tries coercion, till impatience with the
cost, and a sense of the discredit, produce a hope

1 “Some sayen also that all the
noble folke of the lande of Ireland,
fro the highest degree to the lowest,
English or Irish, that useyth the
sayde extortions hadde lever to
continue the same at ther lybertye,
and bere the greate daunger of
Godde and of their enemyes, than
to have all the lande as well
orderyd as England and as obedyent
to Godde and to the King, if ther-
bye they shulde lose their lybertyes
in vyceis and the said extortions ;
for ther is no lande in all thys

worlde that have more lybertye in
viceis than Ireland and lesselybertye
in vertue; for every greate captayne
within his rome holdeyth by the
sworde imperyall jurysdyction at
his lybertye that nature most
desyre; which he shulde lose for
ever if the lande were orderyd and
be at lybertye in vertue; that is to
be obedyent to the Kynge’s laws
and to the Holye Churche.’—‘ State
of Ireland and Plan for its Reforma-
tion.’ State Papers, Hen, VIII.
vol. ii. p. 16.

PRELIMINARY.

ot

that coercion is no longer needed, or a belief that it omar.
has been a mistake from the beginning. Conciliation —

follows, and compromise, and concession, and apology.
The strain is taken off, the anarchy revives, and again
with monotonous uniformity there isa fresh appeal
to the sword. The ignominy of having a country
nominally subject to him, where the first elements of
social order had yet to be introduced, forced itself
slowly and with difficulty into the mind of Henry
the Eighth. No one knew better than he that order
was a plant of slow growth, that bad habits were a
second nature, to be changed only by time and for-
bearance. ‘Realms, nevertheless, without justice,’ he
said, ‘were but tyrannies and robberies more consonant
to beastly appetites than the laudable life of reasonable
creatures. Where wilfulness did reign without law
or justice, there was no distinction of property: no
man might say this is mine; but by strength the
weaker was oppressed.’* Henry did not insist that the
Irish, ill-trained as they had been, should submit at
once to English law; but he held it necessary ‘ that
they should conform their order of living to the obser-
vance of some reasonable law, and not live at will as
they had been used.’ He, like his father, was willing
to try peaceful means, but means which would lead to a
result with a defined purpose of improvement. He
disavowed—and in perfect sincerity, for throughout
all his troubled relations with Ireland he acted con-
sistently on the same principle—he disavowed all
intentions of depriving the chiefs of their lands, or con-
fiscating their rights for the benefit of Englishmen.
He desired to persuade them to exchange their system

1 ‘Henry VIII. to the Earl of Surrey, 1520.’ State Papers, vol. ii. p. 52.

5)

8

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK of election for a feudal tenure, to acknowledge by a
—*_ formal act of surrender that they held their lordships

under the crown, receiving them again with English
titles, and with legitimate jurisdiction derived from
the King. Under this condition, instead of being Irish
enemies, they would become subjects entrusted with
formal authority; and in return might retain and ad-
minister the more tolerable of their own Brehon laws,
till a more settled life brought a desire with it for
the English common law. The worst and weakest
code ever digested into authoritative form would at
least be better than no law at all.

A people who could understand an appeal of this
kind would perhaps have never required to be so
addressed. As spoken to Ireland it was like an in-
vitation to water to become, of its own free will, solid
land, or to a sandy wilderness to clothe itself with
corn. Jt is well that so clear an answer re-
mains on record to the stereotyped slander, that
England’s only object in her management or mis-
management of that unhappy country, was to rob the
ancient owners of the land of their fathers. Yet the
failure was inevitable, and would have been followed at
allevents by rougher measures, even without the new
element of discord which was flung out into Europe,
and among its other results gave coherence and defined
form to Irish disaffection.

PRELIMINARY.

SECTION V.

On the rupture of England with the Papacy, the Irish,

39

CHAP.

by immediate instinct, threw themselves on the Roman ————

side. Could they have found Protestant allies within
reach, and had Henry continued in deed as well as
in name Defender of the Catholic faith, the Church of
Ireland might perhaps have remembered and reclaimed
her ancient liberties, have dated her slavery from the
grant of Adrian, and have fought for independence
under the name of spiritual freedom. The Celts of
Wales and Cornwall are vehemently Protestant; the
Irish themselves lose their Papal fervour when settled
in countries where Popery is no longer identical with
patriotism; and their tendency in all England’s
quarrels to take the opposite side might have re-
minded them that it was England which first riveted
the Roman yoke upon their necks.

England, however, shook off the ‘Italian Priest,’ and
declared herself competent to decide her own causes
ecclesiastical and civil within her own borders. The
Irish, already uneasy at Henry’s attempts to meddle
with them, declared themselves champions of the
true faith. The Pope claimed the right to absolve
them from their allegiance; and rebellion became thus
a second duty. ‘The first results were not en-
couraging to the new ideas of patriotism. The trusted
and favoured house of Kildare put themselves for-
ward as champions of the Catholic faith. The Earl,
who was in London, was thrown instantly into the
Tower, where he died. Lord Thomas Fitzgerald,

40

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book his eldest son, who at first carried all before him,
pe aad compelled, after half a year of triumph, to sur-

render with his uncles, and was hanged at Tyburn.
Failure so absolute daunted for a while the insurrec-
tionary spirit, and through the King’s adroitness and
forbearance it seemed doubtful whether it would re-
vive. The Kildare Geraldines were attainted, but
their estates were left untouched, to be restored as
the return of their loyalty. Few if any of the con-
federates were punished with loss of lands. ‘There
were confiscations, but confiscations of the estates not
of the Irish but of the English absentees. Those of
the colonists who were unable, or who neglected, to
discharge the duties attaching to their places, were
declared to have forfeited their tenures. English
noblemen who held lands in Ireland were required to '
reside and maintain them. The rights of property
were made stringently conditional as the fulfilment
of its obligations.’ Justice so far was even-handed,
and justice being a rare virtue in that country never
failed to be appreciated.

A measure followed which, from another side, pro-
duced a favourable effect on the Irish leaders. The
abbeys in Ireland as well as England were sup-
pressed so far as an act of Parliament could suppress
them.” The estates of the Church were passed on
easy terms to the great persons in the different
provinces, as a bribe to purchase their assistance in
carrying out the statute. Superstition or piety in
some places forbade the sacrilege; in others conscience
was too weak to resist temptation. The chiefs and
nobles having consented to a share in the spoils,

1 Act of Absentees, 28 Hen, VIII. cap. 3. Irish Statetes,
4 33 Hen. VIII. cap. 6.

PRELIMINARY.

4]

forgave the spoiler; and the first singular results of cmap.

this violent and seemingly dangerous act were the
acquiescence of the O’ Neills, O’Briens, and MacCarties,
in the plans of Henry for a change in their mode of
tenure. ‘They surrendered their lands, to take them
back again subject to English conditions and to the
English rule of inheritance. They accepted earldoms
in the place of their Irish chieftaincies, and attended

in their robes at a parliament in Dublin; while Henry.

himself, seemingly with universal consent, took the
title of King of Ireland, when before he had been
but Dominus, or Lord.

The beginnings of a new order of things were
happily laid, and there had never, since the Con-
quest, been better promises of peace. As usual, when
England showed strength and resolution, Ireland
became immediately submissive. If Henry had lived
a few more years, and if the quarrel with the Pope
had not been further complicated by differences of
doctrine, the emphatic success of an authoritative
policy at a critical time might have spared the need
of future outlawries, spoliations, and insurrections.

r
eel

42

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

Tuer short and unhappy reign of Edward the Sixth pro-
duced less agitation in Ireland than might have been
anticipated. Attempts were ventured to introduce
and force upon the people the doctrinal theories for
which even England was unprepared. Evangelical
Protestantism of a serious kind was really and truly
better fitted to make its way among an impressionable
people like the Irish than the ambiguous formulas of
the Anglican Church; but spiritual conversion was
too tedious a process for the impatient precipitancy
of the advanced Reformers. Unconsecrated prelates
were thrust into the Irish sees under the naked au-
thority of letters patent. John Bale, the most viru-
lent and the most profane of the unfortunate party
whose excesses provoked the counter reformation,
commenced work as Bishop of Ossory, which would
have led, under ordinary circumstances, to an in-
stant explosion. In Ossory, the bishop was under
the exceptional protection of Lord Ormond, who was
himself a Protestant; the Irish leaders were as yet
apparently uncertain whether to accept finally the
bribe of the Church lands; and the secular govern-
ment was in the hands of Sir Edward Bellingham,
one of the ablest viceroys who ever wielded the Irish
sword. But the exasperation which would have soon
burst into rebellion rendered easy and complete the
counter-revolution under Edward’s successor. On the |
marriage of Philip and Mary, and the formation of the

PRELIMINARY.

close alliance with Spain, religion was no longer a
cause of difference. ‘The friars were reinstated in the
religious houses, and the English Church and the
Catholic clergy worked hand in hand for the restora-
tion of order.

The two countries, notwithstanding, were no nearer
than before toa real union. No sooner was the quarrel
of the creeds suspended, than the old grounds of
jealousy revived; and Mary, before she died, found
herself at issue with the most powerful chief of the
native race on questions of jurisdiction and inherit-
ance. Con O’Neill had accepted the earldom of
Tyrone from Henry the Eighth, with reversion to
his eldest legitimate son. The amours of Con had been
miscellaneous. His children irregularly begotten were
numerous. The custom of the tribe on the death of a
chief had been to choose in his place the bravest and
the strongest. The Baron of Dungannon, the lawful
heir under the patent of the earldom, was inefficient
and unpopular. His bastard brother, Shan or John, a
model Irishman, fierce, brave, and unscrupulous, the
idol of the clan, was elected by acclamatiom, not to
the English title, which he despised, but to the name
and place of the O’Neill. The Baron of Dungannon
was murdered; Shan O’ Neill emerged for a brief period
of splendour into the championship of Irish liberty,
and prepared, Church or no Church, to vindicate the
right of his people to manage their affairs and elect
their rulers on their own principles. In the settle-
ment of this dispute the life or death of Mary
would have made no difference; and if Ireland was
to be reclaimed to civilization, a reconquest would
have been equally a necessity, though the Reforma-

43

CHAP.
I.
—

44 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

zook tion had been no more heard of, and England had
_ | _ gontinued tkenceforward a loyal vassal of the Holy
See. But Mary went the way of her brother; Eliza-
beth succeeded ; and with Elizabeth came the begin-

ning of modern Irish history.

PRELIMINARY.

SECTION VII.

45

Tue revolution on the death of Queen Mary rees- cHApP.
tablished in England the supremacy of the Crown, =

the Act of Uniformity, and the Reformed Prayer
Book. The majority even of the English were still
Catholics; yet the change, if largely unwelcome to
them, was received without surprise. In the theory
of the constitution the law which undertook the
direction of conduct extended to the exercise of
religion. Opinion remained free; there was no in-
quisition into the conscience ; but public worship was
a formal act which, by universal consent, the Crown
and Parliament were held to have a right to control.
The experience of three hundred years has taught
us that the widest divergence of belief is compatible
with equal purity of life and equal fidelity to a com-
mon government. But the conditions did not exist
which make toleration possible at a time when, though
differing infinitely in the articles of faith, all parties
were nevertheless agreed that heresy was the darkest
of crimes, that to hold the right faith was the first
of duties, and that the business of the civil magistrate
was not only to execute justice but to maintain truth.
When feeling was thus intense, and the conscience
so keenly excited, to have allowed the public and
avowed exercise of more than one religion would
have led inevitably to acts of violence. If the law
had been silent, the several congregations as they
were gathered under their preachers into organized
bodies would have themselves attempted to give

46

BOOK
I

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

expression to the universal sentiment; and so un-

~~ animous was the conviction that the state could allow

but one religion, that the aspirations of the English
Catholics were less directed towards toleration and
free chapels and churches, which they would have
counted it an impiety to concede to their adversaries,
than to a counter-revolution, which would replace
the exclusive authority in their own hands.

The Catholics, by the necessity of their situa-
tion, made themselves liable to additional dis-
abilities. So long as the Pope claimed a right to
absolve them from their allegiance, and they on their
part refused to repudiate his pretensions, they could
neither be, nor be considered, loyal subjects of an
excommunicated sovereign. To be a good Catholic
was, In the nature of things, to be unfaithful to the
secular prince. All Protestant governments were
obliged to regard the adherents of the Roman see
as secret enemies ; and although practice was not
governed by logic, and English gentlemen contrived
subterfuges by which to reconcile incompatible obliga-

tions, Elizabeth’s government, when she had decided

to go forward with the Reformation, was compelled
to watch them with distrust.

At first there was the utmost forbearance. The
Act of Uniformity was the public law of the land;
fines were attached to non-attendance at church; an
oath of allegiance, excluding and denying the pre-
tended rights of the Pope, was made a condition of
holding office under the Crown, of admission to the
Universities, or of the exercise of a learned profession.
But mass was said by connivance in private houses.
The allegiance of the peers was assumed as not needing
to be confirmed by protestations. The fines were not

PRELIMINARY.

exacted. The widest toleration was permitted consis-
tent with the existence of the law. Withsome it an-
swered, with others it failed. The passionate Papists
murmured, conspired, fell into treason. Their leaders
were executed. The laws were enforced more strin-
gently. They conspired again, and invited help from
Spain. The nation, whose patriotism was stronger
than their superstition, stood by the Crown. The
cause of independence triumphed, and the Pope’s
authority in England died utterly away.

The state of Ireland was materially different. In
England, at Elizabeth’s accession, though the Pro-
testants were a minority, they were the most ener-
getic and vigorous of the population. In Ireland,
‘of the birth of the land,’ there were no Protes-
tants at all. Yet the difficulty of adopting a separate
principle of government was enormous. Although
there was no legislative union, yet laws of Imperial
consequence, which had been passed in England,
were re-enacted as a matter of course by the Irish
Parliament. The Ireland of the Statute Book was
still only the Pale and the port towns, and though
even within these narrow limits Protestantism had
as yet made no progress, yet the need of defence
against the Pope was even greater there than at
home. The Act of Uniformity, therefore, and the
Act of Supremacy were pushed, by some means
or other, upon the Irish Statute Book. The Bishops
of the Pale who refused the oath of allegiance
were deprived, and others instituted in their places.
The sees in the rest of the island were filled up when
they fell vacant, only as the Government found itself
strong enough to maintain Protestants there with-
out danger of their being murdered. Meanwhile

CHAP.

48

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the private toleration allowed in England received

1 eal in Ireland a far larger latitude. The Primate was a

Protestant. Inthe parish churches in the Pale there
was either a Protestant service or none. But when
over zealous Deputies showed a disposition to prose-
lytize, they were invariably checked by the Queen ;
and the policy which was succeeding in England, it
was supposed, not wholly without reason, might pro-
duce analogous effects in the sister country. The
Prayer Book especially, when translated into Latin,
retained a Catholic complexion. The King of Spain
long turned a deaf ear to invitations from the Irish
leaders to interfere. If in Ireland, to begin with,
there were scarcely any Protestants at all, in England
they were in a minority of one to five or six,’ and
were almost limited to London and the large towns.
One difference was overlooked, and that a vital one.
In England, when her independence was threatened
by the Catholic powers, the national spirit was on the

side of the Reformation. In Ireland, zeal for re-

ligion identified itself with political freedom; and
the more ardent the orthodoxy, the greater the pro-
spect of obtaining sympathy and help from Spain and
Italy and France. Elizabeth, perhaps, considered
that the Catholic powers had work enough on their
own hands; that, if the magistracy, the public offices,
and the learned profession were kept strictly in the
hands of conformists, the Pale would become gradually
reconciled, and, with time and forbearance, the rest of
the island would follow. The calculation was utterly
disappointed; the Queen’s meaning towards Ireland
was nothing but good; she detested persecution, she

1 The highest estimate was one Catholic representations to Philip,
in three. The lowest, in the made them but one in twelve.

PRELIMINARY.

was scrupulously anxious, like her fathers, to protect
the Irish owners in possession of their estates. Yet
‘she pursued a policy the most fertile in disaster that
the most malignant ingenuity could have devised. The
problem presented to her was, doubtless, complicated.
To have left religion alone and contented herself with
the secular government, would have been equivalent
to a declaration that there should be no Protestants in
Ireland at all; it would have furnished an unanswer-
able argument for indulgence to her Catholic subjects
at home; while the Irish, from the nature of the
case, would have been in league with all her enemies
within the realm and without. To harmonize the
laws of the two countries was a political necessity ;
but, if the Queen found herself compelled to establish
a Church which should be independent of the See
of Rome, her obvious duty was to secure the pre-
sence of a Protestant community by a second influx
of colonists, who would be protected by the difference
of creed from the seductive influences which had
proved so fatal to the descendants of the Normans.
The Church property of the Pale, the lands of the
abbeys, which were again suppressed, the estates
attached to the bishops’ sees, had all of them lapsed to
the Crown. There was land enough, without dispos-
sessing a single lay proprietor, to have settled colonies
of Protestants throughout Dublin, Meath, and Kildare,
who would have given strength to the English interest,
supported clergy, and at least have shown the Irish
people that, to be a Protestant, was not to be an
atheist. Elizabeth, unfortunately, not choosing to
have a war of creeds in Ireland, preferred to postpone
the introduction of the Protestant religion to a more
convenient season. Irritated with the expenses of the
VOL. I. E

CHAP.

~

o

0

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK government, she farmed the Church lands, farmed even
a . .
—_,— the benefices themselves, squeezing out of them some

miserable dribblet of revenue; and gradually, as the
English power extended, applied the same method
in the other provinces. The priests withdrew from
the churches to the hill sides, or to the chiefs’ castles.
No ministers took their places when there were
neither houses for them to live in, nor parishioners to
protect them from murder. Roofs and windows fell
in, doors were broken from their hinges, till at last
there was neither church nor chapel through which
rain and wind had not a free sweep; while grooms
and horseboys pattered through some mockery of a
ritual at a begear’s stipend.

It may be answered that all this was inevitable.
The priests made themselves apostles of, insurrection,
and the life of a Protestant minister would not
have been worth a day’s purchase. But Protestant
colonies could have maintained themselves with
ease in the Pale. So feeble for many years were
the resources of Irish insurrection, and so divided
were the chiefs among themselves, that a mere
handful of English soldiers were able, not, indeed,
to keep order, but to shatter any rebellion which
assumed an organized form. Had the Church lands
been everywhere resolutely taken possession of and
distributed among English families who would have
undertaken to defend them, and had four thousand
soldiers been dispersed in strong positions through
the four provinces, with wages regularly paid, the
savage spirit of resistance, which ultimately became
so formidable, would never have been able to grow;
and the frightful catalogue of crimes which provoked,
and in some degree excused, that resistance, would

PRELIMINARY.

never have been committed. Elizabeth’s soldiers,
with their pay for ever in arrears, and not choosing
to starve, lived almost universally on plunder.
Placed in the country to repress banditti, they were
little better than banditti themselves. Their scanty
numbers were a temptation to disturbance. Too few
to be able to take prisoners or hold a mutimous dis-
trict in compelled quiet, their only resource was to
strike terror by cruelty. When sent to recover stolen
cattle, or punish a night foray, they came at last to
regard the Irish peasants as unpossessed. of the com-
mon rights of human beings, and shot and strangled
them like foxes or jackals. More than once in the
reports of officers employed on these services we meet
the sickening details of these performances related
with a calmness more frightful than the atrocities
themselves; young English gentlemen describing ex-
peditions into the mountains ‘to have some killing,’
as if a forest was being driven for a battue.

Every crime is entered im the register of nature.
Expiation sooner or later 1s demanded with mathe-
matical certainty, and, three-quarters of a century
later, the bill was presented, to be paid with interest.
Meanwhile, neither the faults of particular soldiers,
nor the negligence of Queen Elizabeth, could alter
the essential nature of facts. The worst cruelties
of the garrisons were but the occasional copies
of the treatment of the Irish universally by one
another. ‘The best and only hope for the country
was the extension of English influence over it, and by
the necessity of things that influence continued to
grow. Gladly would Elizabeth have let Ireland alone
if the Pale would have been decently obedient, and
the chiefs have remained at péace with her and with

sy

52

bOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

each other. Jt could not be. They identified the

oe wrongs of Ireland with the wrongs of Holy Church;

they made themselves soldiers of the Pope; they
threw themselves on the ‘support of Philip the
‘Second; and the Queen was driven, in spite of her-

self, to encounter them one after another, and force

them to acknowledge her authority.

Shan O’Neill was the first to try conclusions with

her. Shan, having established himself in his own

rights, proceeded to claim sovereignty over Ulster.
He crushed the smaller chiefs; he crushed the
O’Donnells; he corresponded with the French King.
He aspired to be the liberator of Ireland, and to assume
on Tara Hill the crown of his ancestors. Elizabeth,
after trying in vain the eternal policy of concession
and temporising, varied with treachery and an attempt
at assassination, was at last forced into characteristic
activity. She did not conquer Ulster, but she bribed
the inferior tribes to rise against the O’Neills. She
assisted the O’Donnells. She made use of a piratical
colony of Scots, who had settled in Antrim, whom
Shan had injured. Sir Henry Sidney ravaged Tyrone, |
and fixed a garrison in Derry. ‘Shan’s enemies closed
round him, and he was murdered. The immediate
danger was over; but the essential mischief, the
anarchy and turbulence of the clans had been fostered
and fed in the process.

The South rose next, and the same plan was fol-
lowed. The house of Desmond and the house of Or-
mond were hereditary foes for generations. Munster
had been distracted by their quarrels. Sir Henry
Sidney while viceroy had insisted that Munster must
be made a presidency, und that both factions must be
forced into obedience to law. A presidency would

PRELIMINARY.

cost money; Elizabeth preferred so. to manage the
rival noblemen that they should. be a check upon each
other, while both should depend upon herself. She
was sure of Ormond, for Ormond was a Protestant..

She insisted that her viceroy should take Ormond’s.
side in the quarrel between the two houses, whether
Ormond was right or wrong. Injustice and favour-
itism never produced good fruit in Ireland. The
Geraldines were ardent Catholics. They had held
aloof from Shan O’Neill; they had no mind to

build a throne for a native Irish chief ; but they were

none the less determined to resist the encroachments.

of Protestantism and England. The Earl, who had

avoided compromising himself, was summoned to.

London to explain suspicious features in his conduct.
He obeyed and was imprisoned. His heir was born
while he was in England. Leaving this precious

hostage for his good behaviour, he was. released, was.

again arrested in Dublin, escaped, and was. then
allowed to remain among his own people, because it,
was dangerous to pursue him; and the fatal lesson
was taught, that the English Government could be
defied with impunity.

Disgust with Irish anarchy had led to the discus-
sion of projects for the resettlement of the South by
English undertakers. The country had been mapped
out. Volunteers came forward who offered, in ex-
change for lands, to bear the cost of military occupa-
tion. Elizabeth listened coldly. Cecil said, in answer
to their petitions, that lands could not be escheated
till the owners had forfeited them by treason. But the
abortive scheme of the Earl of Essex to form a colony
in Ulster coupled with the revival of claims on estates
in Cork under Norman charters, long neglected and

CHAP.

5A THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book forgotten, worked on the Irish susceptibilities. The

Gee expectation that the attempt would be renewed hung

like a standing menace over an excited and agitated

race, who believed that England was watching for an
opportunity to sweep them out and destroy them.

The fanaticism of a few English divinity students

who had seceded to the Church of Rome, fired the

mine which lay ready to explode. The celebrated

Nicholas Sanders, after libelling, as only an English

pervert could. libel, the Reformation of his own

country, became a missionary agitator for a Catholic

crusade. He found Philip cold, but he wrought with

more success on the inflated imagination of the Pope;

and, having fallen in with an exiled Geraldine, who

assured him that if the Pope would speak the word

all Ireland would rise in enthusiasm, he procured a

commission thither as legate for the Holy See. He

obtained money and arms, collected a few hundred

Italian and Spanish volunteers, and landed on the

coast of Kerry. He learnt, as many others have had

to learn, that there were two Irelands—the Ireland of

imagination—the Ireland of eloquence and enthusiasm

and the Ireland of fact and performance. Long

before, had there been any real genuine national spirit

in the Irish race, the pitiful handful of English would

have been pushed into the sea with all the ease that

Sanders counted on. But in Ireland, behind the most

fervid language, there lay always a cool calculation

of interest. When an Irish leader committed himself

to rebellion, his neighbours had their reasons for

hanging back and making a merit of their fidelity

with England. ‘The Geraldines had held aloof from

the O’Neills; the O’Neills and the O’Briens declined

to help the Geraldines; and the Butlers had their old

PRELIMINARY.

srudge, which the time was come at last to repay.

ayy)

CHAP,

The Earl of Desmond himself, contented with passive eat

defiance and the partial sovereignty of the south-
western counties, shrunk as long as he could, from the
war to the knife to which the Anglo-Papal firebrand
was committing him. It was found necessary to force
his hand by the murder of an English officer, who
was his cousin’s guest at Tralee, a crime for which he
knew that there would be no forgiveness.

Then at last, desperate of other remedy, the Earl
of Desmond rose. The Geraldine clan gathered to
his side in the passionate personal fidelity which is
the noblest feature of the Irish character; and Lime-
rick, Kerry, Cork, and part of Waterford, assisted
afterwards by some of the Barons of the Pale, entered
into a struggle for life and death with all the power
of Elizabeth. A rebellion so begun, and with such
objects, she well understood that for her own safety
she must trample out. She could not afford to leave
the Papal banner flying on any spot in her dominions.
Troops were sent over. A fleet came round to the
western coast. Lord Grey, the Viceroy, by a rapid
march to Dingle, blocked the Italian troops into a
fort from which there was no escape, bombarded it,
and destroyed them to a man. But she was not
content to do the work alone. Against the Irish
fighting on their own soil, among bogs, and mountains,
and forests, other allies were more efficient than
English soldiers. The Butlers were let loose on their
ancient enemies. Every living thing was destroyed
by which the insurrection could maintain itself. ‘The
corn was burnt in the field; the cattle were driven
into the camp and slaughtered. The men who could
bear. arms were out with their chief; the aged and

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the sick, the women and the little ones perished all in
the flames of their burning homes. The official records
of this deadly war return the killed and hanged in
tens of thousands, and famine took up the work
where neither sword nor rope could reach. Finally,
when of the proud clan of the southern Geraldines
there were none left but a few scattered and desperate
bands, the last weapon was produced which never
failed to operate. Pardon and reward were offered
to those who would kill their comrades, and the
bloody heads of noted leaders were brought in by
sacksful to be paid for in land or money. The legate,
hunted like a wolf, died wretchedly in a forest shanty.
Desmond himself, after three years of outlaw life,
was betrayed by his own people; he was stabbed in
his bed, and his head was set on a spike on London '
Bridge; while so utterly desolated was Munster, that
the lowing of a cow, or the sound of a ploughboy’s
whistle, was not to be heard from Valentia to the
Rock of Cashel. Now would have been the time to
have settled Munster effectively and for ever. Half
a million of fertile acres were escheated to the crown.
They were granted away among Elizabeth’s favourites
as a reward for service, or among undertakers who
were allowed at last to carry out their project of
occupation. But the colonization was irregular, un-
systematic, and imperfect. The essential condition
of residence, without which confiscation was useless
robbery, was evaded in act, if insisted on in words ;
and the change over part at least of the forfeited
territory did little more than create a fresh poisonous
batch of absentee proprietors, while the lands were still
occupied by an Irish tenantry, who waited for and in
due time found their opportunity for revenge.

PRELIMINARY.

For the moment, however, rebellion was beaten
down, and the insurgent spirit had to pause and
recover itself from the frightful chastisement which
had been inflicted on it. In the Pale, where Des-
mond had found active sympathy, an extensive revolt
had been planned; but it broke out prematurely.
A few of the leaders fled; others were taken, tried,
and executed. Connaught, after a severe discipline
from Sir Nicholas Malby, was overawed into out-
ward quiet by a garrison at Athlone. Ulster, the
most Irish of the four provinces, and very far the
strongest, remained with its resources still unbroken.
Tirlogh O'Neill, who succeeded Shan, had the pru-
dence to avoid violent collision with the English,
so long as he was left uninterfered with. The ex-
perience of the Desmond rebellion was an appalling
proof of what the English could do if provoked to
extremity, while the cost of suppressing that rebel-
lion made Elizabeth more than ever reluctant to pro-
voke another.

Yet it was inevitable that English law and English
authority must make their way throughout the island,
and that Ulster’s turn must come at last. Eleven
years of quiet followed, and the fire broke out once
more.

The defeat of the Armada, the English invasion of
Spain and Portugal, and the support which Elizabeth
was driven at last to extend to the United Provinces,
induced Philip, who had hitherto turned a deaf ear
to Irish overtures, to think more seriously of the
opportunities for revenge which Ireland seemed to
offer. The stupid ferocity with which the Western
Irish had robbed and murdered the crews of the
wrecked galleons of the Armada, left a painful im-

CA
~I

CHAP.
1}

—_—”

58

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK. pression of the character of his intended allies. A
few fortunate companions, however, who had been

entertained kindly in the North, reported more
favourably. ‘The success of Elizabeth’s government
generally, the hopelessness of a Catholic revolution
in England—to which they had long looked for de-
liverance—and the increasing strength of the Pro-
testant party in Europe, had created a fear in the
Trish Catholic gentlemen, that the forbearance with
which their religious scruples had been hitherto
treated might not be of long continuance. Virtually
they had enjoyed full religious liberty ; but, with
every conquest made by England, the limits were
extended within which the country fell under the
statute law. Unless they could secure their rights
by formal concession, they might discover that the
law would be made a reality. Lvery Catholic in the
country was thus ready to join in a demand for the
free exercise of their religion ; and if their request
was refused, and if Spain would help them, to redeem
the errors which they had made in leaving Desmond
unsupported.

The force of circumstances had carried Ireland for-
ward, in spite of herself, in the general stream of
civilization. Her bishops and clergy had been edu-
cated in Italy, in France. Many of her gentlemen
had served in the French and Spanish armies. Some
had taken degrees at Oxford and Cambridge. Some
had been at the Inns of Court in London. They had
thus grown capable of more comprehensive political
views, and of larger and better considered combina-
tions. In Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, Elizabeth
was now to find the most formidable Irish antagonist
which either she or her predecessors had encoun-

PRELIMINARY.

tered. To her he was indebted for life, rank, and

59

CHAP.

if
fortune. He was the son of the Baron of Dungannon, ——~~—

whom Shan had murdered, and the grandson of the
first Earl Con. Beyond doubt, he would have shared
his father’s fate, had he not been sent to Eng-
land, and thus taken care of. He was brought up
at the Court as a Protestant,in the midst of the most
brilliant circle which any capital in Europe could
show. No pains were spared to make him a fit in-
strument for the reclamation of his country; and,
when of age, he received the patents of his grand-
father’s earldom, and returned to Ireland. The wolf
which is treated as a dog remains a wolf still. O’Neill
bound himself to permit neither monk nor priest
within his jurisdiction who would not conform to the
Established religion. He became himself a Catholic.?
He promised to introduce English law, to abolish the
Irish customs among his subjects, conform himself
to English rule and order. He assumed the title of
‘the O'Neill,’ as the symbol of the Irish independent
sovereignty, and he adopted the customs which he had
forsworn. He asserted and enforced his authority
over the inferior chiefs, and Elizabeth discovered that
she had nurtured him, armed him with intelligence,
and restored him to his rank and his estates only that
he might be the better able to defy her. He became
not only the unruly Irish chief, but a skilful and
dangerous conspirator ; and while he was protesting
against being misunderstood, and affecting to desire
to recover the Queen’s favour, letters were intercepted
from him to Philip, and to other Spanish nobles,
entreating assistance for the defence of the Catholic

1 ‘Articles agreed on by the Earl dar, Carew MSS, p. 38.
of Tyrone. June'17, 1590.’— Calen- * Ibid. p. 108.

60

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Church.’ He still pretended to be ready to submit,

—*— and the Queen was willing to pardon him; Lord

Burghley, to escape the expenses and dangers of
another rebellion, advised that the terms of his
forgiveness should be made as easy as the State
could grant ; but O’Neill proposed rather to prescribe
conditions than receive them. He required the dis-
missal out of almost the whole of Ulster of every
English soldier, sheriff, magistrate, or other officer
whose business was to set in action English law.; he
demanded further, free liberty of conscience, by
which he meant free a of religious worship
throughout Ireland,’ and the restoration of the Church
lands to the Catholics.

The commissioners appointed by the Queen to treat
with him—so earnest were they to come to an ar-
rangement—replied that, ‘as her majesty bad hitherto
given full toleration without punishment of any, in
all likelihood she would continue the same.’ It was
likely, also, she would let O’Neill have the spiritual
lands. The Queen herself, when she learnt what had
been offered in her name, repudiated so gross an
engagement. She had acted mercifully, she said,
but she could never listen to the request of a subject
for permission to break the law. She declared her-
self ‘highly offended with his petition,’ and required
that it should be withdrawn. O’Neill affected to
comply. He said he would submit in everything
to the Queen’s wishes. He trusted only that she
would not insist on his expelling Catholic priests
who might come into Tyrone. This the Queen

1 The Earl of Tyrone and Hugh * ‘Demands made by Tyrone,
O’Donnell to the King of Spain, O’Donnell, and others, January 19,

&e. September, 1595.’.—Calendar, 1596.’—Ibid. p. 183; and see
Carew MSS. p. 122. p. 147,

PRELIMINARY.

did not require. She had ‘determined,’ she said,
‘on a course of pacification.’ She pardoned O'Neill
and O'Donnell, and all their confederates,’ and she
appointed commissioners to make general enquiries
into the condition of the Government of Ireland, and
redress whatever might be found amiss. Nosovereign
could have shown more forbearance, or a more anxlous
desire to avoid extremities. But O’ Neill’s submission
was affectation merely. He had made up his mind
to try the religious question with the sword, and the
ink was scarcely dry upon his promise to be a good
subject, before he had sent a circular round to the
Irish of Munster, inviting them to join in a confeder-
acy for the defence of ‘ Christ’s Catholic religion.’ ”
The war which followed lasted for six years. The
whole country was filled with blood and fury. O’ Neill
showed high qualities both as a commander and as a
politician. He held the Irish together more success-
fully than any insurgent leader had succeeded in doing
before him; and his career is unstained with personal
crimes and atrocities. He destroyed an English army
at the ford of the Blackwater. The Karl of Essex was
sent over with the largest English force which had
ever been seen in Ireland. Essex, who perhaps was
already meditating treason, wasted his means and his
opportunities in an expedition into Munster, where his
presence was useless. When he moved at last against
Tyrone, it was with reduced numbers, which was his
excuse for producing no results. He had known
O’Neill personally in England. Instead of meeting him
in the field, he had a private interview with him, at
which no third person was present. He agreed toa

1 ¢The Queen to Lord Deputy Carew MSS. p. 176.
Russell, May 25, 1596.’— Calendar, * July 6,1596, Ibid. p. 179.

61

‘ CHAP.
ie
. 5

62 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK cessation of arms, left the Irish unharmed, and re-
—_ turned, without orders, to Elizabeth, to disgrace, con-
spiracy, and the scaffold.

Lord Mountjoy took his place in Ireland, and the
conduct of a war that had been too long trifled with
was at length in efficient hands. The negociations
of the Irish with Spain ripened into fruit. In Sep-
tember, 1601, Don Juan de Aguila landed at King-
sale with a Spanish army 4,000 strong. Mountjoy
hurried down with ail the troops that he could collect,
and drove Don Juan within the lines of the town.
O'Neill, rallying the scattered Irish, came in haste to
his relief, but was utterly and ruinously defeated;
Don Juan surrendered, and reimbarked, glad on any
terms to be quit of service among allies so feeble in
the field; and gradually smouldering in scattered
fires, which one by one were trampled out, the rebel-
lion burnt down and was extinguished. A Nuncio
came from Rome to stimulate the failing energies of
the rebel leaders. No Catholic, it was solemnly pro-
claimed, could, without sin, submit to a heretic sove-
reign, far less take part against the faithful who were
in arms for Holy Church. This miserable doctrine,
which was the root and foundation of all Ireland’s
woes, which made toleration impossible, and compelled
the maintenance of laws which in turn provoked in-
surrection, continued to work among the people, and
had yet to issue in fresh and terrible consequences.
But for this time O’Neill’s insurrection had spent its
force. The country was so dreadfully wasted that
children were killed and eaten for food. In one place
three. wretched little creatures were found feeding on
their dead mother. The horrors of such scenes were
too powerful for the apostolic exhortation. 'The

PRELIMINARY.

Nuncio was killed in a skirmish. Hugh O’Donnell,
who had gone to Spain for fresh help, died at the
castle of Simancas, possibly by poison.’ Fanaticism
could do no more; and, at the end of 1602, the last
rebel laid down his arms.

The sufferings inflicted by the war had been so
dreadful that there was no further punishment, and
the bloody scenes of the Geraldine conquest were not
renewed. As the chiefs submitted they were received
to mercy. O’Neill himself was left in the enjoy-
ment of his earldom ; few forfeitures were exacted
anywhere; and such lands as had fallen to the crown
from outlawed leaders killed in battle, were made the
rewards of such of the Irish as had done service to
the crown.

The re-establishment by law of the Catholic Church
of Ireland, which had been the object of the insur-
rection, was once more rendered impossible. If the
Popes would have renounced their pretensions to
control the allegiance of Catholic subjects—if the
Catholics themselves would have bond jide and by
some formal act acknowledged that they did not
recognize any right in the Pope to interfere between
them and their sovereign, their claims for toleration,
notwithstanding abstract theories of the duties of the
State, neither could nor would have been long re-

1 In the desperation of such

scenes as were witnessed daily in
an Irish rebellion, any means seem

lordship hath been formerly ac-
quainted. At his coming into
Spain he was suspected by O’Don-

lawful which may help to end
them. On October 9, 1602, Sir
George Carew writes to Lord
Mountjoy :—‘O’Donnell is dead.
The merchant that bringeth me
the news I do trust ; and I do think
it will fall out that he is poisoned
by James Blake, of whom your

nell, because he embarked at Cork ;
but afterwards he insinuated his
access, and O'Donnell is dead. He
never told the President in what
manner he would kill him, but did
assure him it should be effected,’
— Calendar, 1602, pp. 550, 351,

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sisted. A right which was steadily refused by them-
selves to members of a different communion in
countries where the power was in their hands, would
have been extended with only too much readiness to
them by every Protestant government in Europe.
Another century of fighting, however, was still ne-
cessary, before the ie of Rome could learn that
they were no longer sovereigns over the human con-
science; and no Protestant state could recognize, with-
out self-condemnation, the exercise of a religion among
its subjects which elevates rebellion into a duty.

If the Catholics suffered under disabilities they
were themselves to blame. The four provinces of
Ireland had risen successively against England and
the Reformation, and had been one by one defeated.
At last, they had risen all together. They had been
supported by the Catholic Powers as they desired,
and they had again failed. ‘Two at least of these
rebellions, and those the worst and the last, need
never have arisen under a wise government. They
were the fruits of the injudicious economy which left
the country inadequately garrisoned at a time when
the religious passions had not yet assumed their
virulent form ; and from the neglect of the obvious
duties which a conquering power owes always to the
people subjected to it, and owes most of all at a crisis
so serious. The smallest evil of insurrections is their
immediate danger. Kevolts are rarely without provo-
cations, which in later ages excuse them, and ennoble
them; and their suppression in blood leaves a legacy
of hate which centuries fail to efface. Yet, after all,
the battle had been fought and England had proved
the stronger ; and the Queen might now, had she so
pleased, have insisted on a universal confiscation,

PRELIMINARY.

or made a profession of Protestantism a condition on
which land might be held in fee. The estates of those
who had been in rebellion, or had refused conformity,
might have been granted to Englishman or Scot, or
to any other of the Reformed creed, whose allegiance
could be depended on; and though it might have been
hard measure, it would have been in strict conformity
with the usage and example of the Catholics them-
selves.

Once more it was decided to try a gentler method
—to insist only on the abolition of the traditionary
tribal rights which bred perennial anarchy ; to leave
the Catholics in possession of their estates; to make
no curious enquiry into their creed; to let them be
sheriffs and magistrates; to allow them seats in Par-
lament, and the same private toleration of their
religion which all along they had enjoyed. It was
hoped that they would recognize and respect the
leniency of their treatment, and that the further assi-
milation of Ireland to English ways and character
might be left to the gradual action of time.

Experience was to show that the Irish did not un-
derstand forbearance, that they interpreted lenity
into fear, and respected only an authority which they
dared not trifle with.

VOL. I. EF

66

seers

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER II.
THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.
SECTION I.

Tue accession of James was looked forward to by the

+ Catholics of both England and Ireland as the period of

1636

their suffering. So long as the English Jezebel lived
the son of Mary Stuart was supposed to have con-
cealed his true feelings. When her death set him free
he was expected to declare himself a member of the
Roman communion. The disappointment in England
took the form of the Gunpowder conspiracy. In Ire-
land the corporations of Cork, Limerick, and Water-
ford announced that they were unable to allow the
proclamation of a heretic sovereign. They ensconced
themselves behind a supposed decree of the univer-
sities of Salamanca and Valladolid; and it seemed
at first as if a general rebellion would again burst
out. Waste, bloodshed, and misery had no terrors
for a population who for centuries, of their own free
choice, had lived in chronic war, and deliberately
preferred it to a state of peace. To rise against
England was a game in which success was always
possible, and defeat had no perils, for the conquerors
either could not, or dared not, inflict effectual punish-
_ment. The country, however, was utterly exhausted.
“There was no more present ier from Spain; and

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

the late leaders were beaten to their knees. Mount-
joy, by abstaining from violence, succeeded in quiet-
ing opposition, and the new reign was inaugurated
by a general pardon. A wet sponge was passed over
all the crimes committed against the late Queen.
Three-quarters of the Catholic lords and gentlemen
had been in arms against the crown ; their disloyalty
was forgiven; all who would surrender their lands
received them again under letters patent on the ten-
ure of English freeholds. Rory, the late O’Donnell’s
brother, was created Earl of Tyrconnell. Hugh O’Neill
was reinstated, promising to forget his illusions and.
to be a good servant and subject in consideration of
the mercy shown to him. Once more Ireland was to.
be conciliated.

The illusion lasted for four years. The English
undertakers, in the expectation of quiet, flocked over
into Munster and Leinster. English order and law
began to root themselves, and Protestantism to be-
come a settled institution. The gentle dealing with
the insurgents was construed as usual into fear.
They determined on one more desperate effort to
save their country before it was too late. O’Neill
and Tyrconnell, whose sister he had married, were
again the intending leaders. They had written to
Flanders to the Archduke for support. The con-
Spiracy was discovered. The Earls tacitly confessed
their guilt by flyimg abroad and refusing to return.
Sir Cahir O’Dogherty, a hot youth of twenty-one,
tried his hand alone, burnt Derry, and murdered the
governor. He was hunted down and killed. A few
of his followers were hanged, and had places assigned
them in the Irish martyrology; and Ireland was
once more quiet. But forbearance was now ex-

F 2

68

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK hausted; and the systematic colonization of Ulster,
eatin long understood by English statesmen to be the

1636

only remedy for the chronic disorder, yet delayed in
mistaken tenderness, was at last resolved on. Though
times were changing, the theory of landowning as a
beneficial possession, as something yielding an annual
profit, which the owner is entitled to spend on his
own pleasures, had not yet superseded the more

ancient principle. The lord of an estate was still

essentially a tenant of the crown, entrusted with high

administrative powers for which he was liable to give
an account. When there was no standing army, and
every able-bodied man was called on, if necessary, to
defend his country or the law, the landlord was his

natural officer. A great nobleman could bring into
the field hundreds or thousands of retainers, who had
been trained to look to him as their leader, and to
whom he was the representative of authority. Mili-
tary power carried with it military obligations, and a
commander who betrayed his trust was exposed, justly
and necessarily, to the extreme penalties of treason.
The desirableness of governing the Irish, wherever
possible, through chiefs of their own race, had hitherto
indisposed the English Government in the highest
degree to inflict forfeiture. It was a measure to
which, except in desperate extremities, they had never
resorted. But England had determined also that Irish
anarchy should end: and if the Irish leaders showed
themselves hopelessly and radically incurable, their
opportunities of mischief must be taken away. In
the three southern provinces the Irish element had
been weakened. In Ulster it remained substantially
intact. - By this last treason of the two Earls and
their confederates six counties were escheated to the
crown—Donegal, Derry, ‘Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan,

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641,

and Armagh. Antrim and Down were already

69

CHAP.

partially occupied by Scots—Western Highlanders, asi hictes

who for three centuries had been forming settle-
ments in Ireland. They had been scarcely dis-
tinguishable hitherto from the native race, but they
were capable of being reclaimed. Their chief, Sir
Randal MacDonnell, or MacConnell, was created Earl
of Antrim. ‘The six escheated counties contained in
all two million acres. Of these a million and a half,
bog, forest. and mountain, were restored to the Irish.
The half million acres of fertile land were settled
with families of Scotch and English Protestants.

The long peace in England and the vast expan-
sion of practical energy which followed the Re-
formation had produced hundreds of thousands
of active enterprising men, who were looking for
openings to push their fortunes. They had been
turning their thoughts to America, but here in
Ireland was an America at their own doors, with the
soil ready for the plough. The grants were eagerly
taken up. Unlike the Norman conquerors, who
were merely military leaders, the new colonists
were farmers, merchants, weavers, mechanics, and
labourers. They went over to earn a livmg by
labour, in a land which had produced hitherto little
but banditti. They built towns and villages; they
established trades and manufactures; they enclosed
fields, raised farmhouses and homesteads where till
then there had been but robbers’ castles, wattled huts,
and mud cabins, or holes in the earth like rabbit bur-
rows : while, without artificial distinctions, they were
saved from degenerating into the native type by their
religion, then growing in its first enthusiasm into
a living power which pervaded their entire being.
Those who suffered were the chiefs, who were dis-

1636

BOOK
i.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

possessed by the forfeitures, they and their kerns and
their gallowglass, the idle lads of mettle, who counted
it shame to work, and looked on fighting and killing
as the only worthy occupation of man. ‘ The churles,’
‘the earth-tillers,’ those who desired to be industrious,
who by all writers on the state of Ireland, from the
Pander downwards, had been excepted in the general
condemnation—they were spared, and lived in peace,
scattered among the colonists, on taking an oath to
be loyal to the crown. If the meaning of govern-
ment be the protection of the honest and laborious,
and the punishment of knaves, not the smallest
gainers from the Ulster settlement were the worthy
among the Irish themselves, who were saved at last
from the intolerable oppression under which they and
their fathers from immemorial time had groaned.

Privileges and prohibitions, which had separated the

two races, were abolished, so far as statutes could
extinguish them, and Irish and Enelish were declared
equal in the eye of the law.’

4 ¢ Whereas in former times, after
the ‘conquest of this realm by his
majesty’s royal progenitors Kings

of England, the natives of this realm

of Trish blood, being descended of
‘those that did inherit and possess
this land before the said conquest,
were for the most part in continual
hostility with the English, and with
those that did descend of the Eng-
lish, and therefore the said Irish
were held and accounted and in
diverse statutes and records were
termed and called Irish enemies :
Forasmuch as the cause of the said
difference and of making the said
laws and statutes doth now cease,
in that all the natives and inhabit-
ants of this kingdom, without dif-
ference or distinction, are taken into
his majesty’s protection, and do now

live under one law, by means
whereof a perfect agreement is or
ought to be settled betwixt all his
majesty’s subjects in this realm:
And forasmuch as there is no better
means to settle peace and tran-
quillity in this kingdom, being
now inhabited with many worthy
persons born in his majesty’s several
kingdoms, than by abolishing the
said laws and giving them free
liberty to commerce and match
together, so that they may grow
into one nation, and there be an
utter oblivion and extinguishment
of all former difference and disorder
between them: be it enacted...
that all these laws be for ever
utterly repealed.’—Trish Statutes,
13 James I, cap. 5,

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

71

Then, for the first time, the natural wealth of omar.
Ireland began to reveal itself. Commerce sprung Sorte

up, as yet unhampered by navigation acts or dis-
abilities. Busy fingers were set at work on loom
and at spinning-wheel. Fields, fenced and drained,
grew yellow with rolling corn; and the vast herds
and flocks which had wandered at will on hill and
valley were turned to profitable account. A _live-
cattle trade was established with Bristol. Traders
from half the ports in Europe came to Cork for salt
fish, salt butter, and salt meat. The exquisite Irish
wool, which the peasants’ wives were learning to weave,
but which grew in an abundance far beyond their home
consumption, was exchanged in the south of Europe
for wine. Portugal and Spain were supplied from the
Irish forests with pipe-staves; and the Dutch had
their shipyards in Irish creeks and havens, where the
timber was excellent and cheap.’ Population, which
had remained stationary for a thousand years, began
suddenly and swiftly to expand. In 1580 the inhabit-
ants of Ireland were reckoned roughly at half a mil-
lion,” and the Protestants among them were too few
to be worth counting. In 1641 the population was
almost a million and a half,’ and among them were
two hundred and sixty thousand Protestants. When
left to themselves the Irish had killed each other
down in their perpetual wars, and the children
had died for want of food. The institution of the
policeman and the cultivation of the soil enabled a
race to multiply in geometrical progression, which
nature, by the habits with which she had endowed

1 Macpherson’s History of Com- MSS. Ireland, Record Office.
merce. 3 1,466,000.

2 ‘Report by A. Trollope, ad- 4 Petty’s Political Arithmetic,
dressed to Secretary Walsingham,’

16

9)

6

72

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book them, intended perhaps to preserve only in more
im
—— manageable numbers.

1636

The favourable picture had, indeed, another side,
If well with the earth-tillers, it was other than
well with those who had hitherto been lords para-
mount, and had lived at their own idle will. ‘ There
was peace,’ says the latest and most accomplished
exponent of the historical wrongs of Ireland,* ‘ but
it was the peace of despair; there was prosperity,
but among the supplanting strangers.’ An act of
Parliament, passed in. Strafford’s viceroyalty, shows
the class into whose souls the iron was entering.
‘Whereas,’ says that act,? ‘there are many young
gentlemen of this kingdom that have little or nothing
to live on of their own, and will not apply themselves
to labour, but live coshering in the country, cessing
themselves and their followers, their horses and their
greyhounds, upon the poorer inhabitants, sometimes
exacting money from them, to spare them and their
tenants and go elsewhere for their suppers and
breakfast, which the poor people dare not deny them

. and whereas by that lawless kind of life of these
idle young gentlemen and others, being commonly
active young men and such as seek to have many
followers and dependants, many other inconveniences
are likely to arise, for they are apt, on the least
occasion of disturbance, to rifle and make booty of
his majesty’s loyal subjects, and to be heads and
leaders of outlaws and rebels, and in the meantime
do and must support their excessive and expenseful
drinking and gaming by secret stealth or growing
into debt,’—justices of the peace were empowered to

1 The Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland, by John Prendergast.
2 10 & 11 Charles I. cap. 16.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

apprehend all such idle persons and commit them to
gaol till they could find sufficient securities for their
honest and quiet behaviour.

These young gentlemen, being the dispossessed heirs
of the forfeited estates, are held entitled, though they
were mischievous and idle, to be regarded with sym-
pathy, because deprived of their lawful inheritance.
Ireland would have benefited little from such owners
of her soil had they remained in occupation. But
the act describes, in reality, only the inveterate
and immemorial habits of so-called Irish gentlemen
before forfeiture was heard or thought of. Too vain
of their birth to work, and enabled by the custom of
the country to live on the plunder of the poor, they
were finding at last the law too strong for them.
The peasants whom they robbed were also Irish sub-
jects, whose protection is made England’s crime.

1 An expression in the act shows
that the law was becoming feared,
and that government was at last
a reality. A farmer who a century
before had refused to feed and lodge
a party of these people would have
been promptly hanged or shot. He
‘was still afraid to shut his doors

against them, but for another
reason. ‘The poor people,’ the act
of Parliament says, ‘dare not deny
them meat, drink, or money, for
fear of some scandalous rhyme or
song to be made on them, or some
worse inconyeniency.’

73

CHAP.
ive
—_—"

1636

74

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

Hos M®rANWHILE, though the Earls of Tyrconnell and
—— Tyrone had failed to repeal the penal laws, the

1608

Catholics remained substantially unmolested. There
was a full staff of archbishops and bishops. Chapels
sprung up on all sides. Monasteries were repaired
and filled with friars. Priests multiplied with the
growth of the people, and were distributed in parishes
without need of concealment. The Church throve
with the country, and, while able to complain of
persecution, practically suffered nothing from it.
Two-thirds of the lands in the four provinces still
remained in Catholic hands. In the House of Com-
mons, although their powers were controlled by the
representatives of the towns of the new settlements,
they returned nearly half the members. In the
Upper House they had a large majority. They were
strong enough to extort from Charles the First a
promise of a modification of the Supremacy Oath. It
was necessary to remind them by proclamation that
the Act of Uniformity remained on the statute book,
and that their religious liberties depended on the
Crown’s indulgence. Fifteen religious houses, which
they erected as if in defiance in Dublin itself, under
the eye of Government, were seized and condemned.
But these houses were soon restored. The proclama-
tions were ridiculed; the hesitation in enforcing the
law was construed into cowardice; and instead of
gratitude for the connivance which left them the free
exercise of their own forms of worship, they cherished

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

rather a firm and growing determination to wrench
the church lands and the cathedrals out of the hands
of their Anglican rivals.

Had the Protestants stood on even terms with them,
superior energy might have asserted its supremacy
by its own strength. Catholic landlords in the
North preferred English tenants to their own people,
when they felt in their purses the contrast between
the improving stranger and the slovenly and unprofit-
able Celt; while every Irishman who conformed to
Protestantism, adopted English habits, and became
English in interest as well, finding himself divided by
heresy from his countrymen, as effectually as if Eng-
lish blood was in his veins.

But the Catholics were one body. The Protestants
to their misfortune were two. Of the Ulster settlers
half were Scots and Presbyterians; the Scots in
Down and Antrim followed the fashiens of the new
comers introduced by James; and, among the
English undertakers, the Puritan element was power-
fully present.’

The peculiar conditions of England had arrested
the natural growth of the Reformation, and had
created an ecclesiastical policy, which even at home
was leading fast to civil war. The necessity of iden-
tical institutions had extended to Ireland the English
forms, but they were forms which could assume a
complexion either Catholic or Protestant. The
colonists of the North had been chosen from the
energetic middle classes in Scotland and England,
who had small love for bishops and hated shams;
and the bishops themselves, Archbishop Usher espe-

1 Londonderry, which was built the first the most Puritan town in

by the London Company, and set- Ireland.
tled by London people, was from

76

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

cially, the Primate, were so generous in their

eer sympathies, that but for the political ties which

1607

connected the established churches of England and
Ireland, they would have brought about of their own
accord a fusion with the Presbyterian congregations.
In the Ulster settlement, for many years after its
foundation, there was no practical distinction between
Churchman and Dissenter. Both were alike Calvinists
with a real belief, and there and there only Protes-
tantism took root in the soil, and became aggressive,
energetic, and strong.

The undertakers of Elizabeth in Munster and
Leinster sprung from another class. They were
the younger sons of the old country families ; they
had transported labourers from their fathers’ lands,
they had brought with them the feelings and habits
of the country party at home. Their creed was tra-
ditional, and the main article of it was hatred of
Puritans. They too called themselves Protestants, but
the vital heat of Protestantism had never been kindled
in their veins. The Anglicanism, which in England
had a meaning, in Ireland was never more than a
barren exotic; and, until the new comers in the North
had introduced another spirit, the Church of Ireland
had existed only as if to give point to the sarcasms of
the Catholics. One of the Dublin churches was the
Viceroy’s stable. The choir of another was a tennis
court, where the vicar acted as marker. The vaults
of Christ Church were used as tap-rooms, where
Catholics smoked, and drank, and jested; while the
communion service, feeble counterfeit of the mass,
was chaunted over their heads in the empty cathedral.’
When the feeling of religion revived, such a man as

1 Reid’s Aistory of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

Usher was irresistibly drawn in the direction where
life was showing itself.

The church theories of Laud and Charles, however,
were not of the sort which would submit to be cor-
rected by facts. The Episcopal Church of Ireland, it
was said, was the Church of St. Patrick, holding the
true Catholic faith, and administered by successors of
the Apostles. When it was seen in its majesty, when
it had cast out the accursed thing, the Genevan heresy,
which denied the sacraments, Popery would bend
before its authority, and acknowledge its claims.
The sore spot was Ulster, and in Ulster the reforms
were to commence. ‘Two episcopalian Scots, Robert
Echlin and John Leslie, were introduced into the
sees of Raphoe and Down; Bramhall, a creature of
Laud’s, was sent to Derry; and the Act of Uniformity,
which was left as a dead letter against the Catholics,
was enforced against the Presbyterian ministers. They
were required to obey the bishops, and introduce and
use the English Liturgy. All who refused—all, that
is, who were sincere and in earnest—were deprived of
their cures. A High Commission Court sate in Dub-
lin ; canons were passed for ecclesiastical government ;
and dissent under any Protestant form was utterly
prohibited. The Catholics were to be shown the true
model of a church which contained all that was most
precious in their own system, while it detested Cal-
vinism as heartily as themselves.

A shipload of the expelled ministers sailed for New
England to find there the liberty of conscience denied
them in the Old World. The vessel was driven back
by astorm. They re-landed, recovered courage, and
dispersed among their people, where they continued
privately to teach and preach. The Scots held sturdily

gi
CHAP.
Il.
———’

1607

78

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK together, encouraged by the attitude of the English
—— Parliament and the firm resolution among their people

1635

at home. Sterner measures became necessary. With
the temper of England and Scotland growing critical,
it became politically desirable to dragoon Ireland
into a more submissive attitude. Ireland, if there
were to be civil war, might be made at last useful to
the crown, the very Catholic spirit of it promising
for once to be of service, when Protestants were the
enemies to be crushed. .

It was with some such purpose that, in 1633, Went-
worth, better known as Earl of Strafford, was ap-
pointed to the Irish viceroyalty. Promises had been
already made to relax the Catholic disabilities. How
much could be safely done in this way—what reforms
could be introduced into the administration—how,
above all things, Ireland’s resources might be made
available for the service of the crown, could be de-
termined only on the spot by a competent judgment;
and the ablest soldier and statesman on whom the
King could rely gave his services for the purpose.
Wentworth brought to Dublin with him a large
intelligence, and the spirit of a great Englishman.
In Church matters he carried out the views of
Archbishop Laud. lLaud’s principles were, perhaps,
really his own; at any rate, the enforcement of
them seemed essential to his broad political aim.
A commission was sent down into Ulster. Such
ministers as could be found were arrested. A general
oath was demanded of the settlers. They were re-
quired to abjure the Scotch Covenant and to swear
implicit obedience to the King. To refuse was
treated as treason. Multitudes fled into the woods
to escape the visit of the commissioners, Some

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

went home to Scotland, others were sent to Dublin

79

CHAP.

iaais. ; IL.
and imprisoned there. Wentworth, it seemed, was ——-~

determined either to make them submit, or to drive
them out of the country. Rebel in the presence of
the Irish they could not ; and when the choice lay
between conformity and the loss of their estates, he
perhaps considered that he might calculate safely on
the result.

For Wentworth had not blinded himself to the
value of the Anglo-Scotch settlement. He saw Ire-
land with the eye of a born ruler, and whatever con-
cessions he might be prepared to make to conciliate
Catholics, he understood perfectly that it was only
by the presence of strong English colonies, laid down
in the middle of them, that their rebellious spirit
could be held in awe. He had no intention of open-
ing a door for anarchy to burst out again; and his
design was to carry the principles of colonization
a step further, and settle Connaught as Ulster had
been settled. North, south, and east, the English
interest was now comparatively strong. Connaught
was still Irish. Old abbeys continued unsuppressed
in Mayo and Galway and Roscommon, the lands of
which belonged in law to the crown. Few, if any,
of the gentlemen had availed themselves of James
the First’s invitation to surrender their lands, and
take them back under letters patent. They still held
under the Irish custom of tanistry, and had no title-
deeds to produce. The country lay waste, the habits
of disorder continued unbroken. If Connaught were
to become a useful province of the Empire—if, for
one thing, it was to yield taxes, and the King’s writ
was to pass current there—the spell must be broken
west of the Shannon, as it had been broken elsewhere.

1636

80

BOOK
ay
ee

1639

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The state of the tenures created an opportunity. A
commission was appointed to survey the lands, and to
trace and enquire into the titles of their professing
owners. In strict construction, four-fifths of Con-
naught was found to belong to the crown; and
Wentworth meditated taking advantage of the situ-
ation to make a new plantation. The intention,
scarcely concealed, following so soon on the confisca-
tion of the six counties, flung the Irish of the old
blood into a frenzy of rage. Religious indulgence
might satisfy the Anglo-Norman Catholics of the old
settlements. The passions of the true Irishman were
for the land, and he saw the land in large slices pass-
ing away from him tothe stranger. What to him was
King or Parliament, Calvinism or Anglicanism ?
The one fact, to which all else was nothing, was
coming home to his heart, that the Englishman, by
force or fraud, was filching from him the inheritance
of his fathers.

The manner of Wentworth’s proceedings was as
imperious as the matter was alarming. ‘The parties
in Ireland which he respected, and of which alone,
perhaps, he expected that any good could be made,
were the late English settlers and the Catholics of
English descent. The inquisition into titles was ex-
tended over the island. Claims were revived that
were indefinitely remote. Deeds and records had
perished in the Elizabethan rebellions, or had been
lost or destroyed in the savage carelessness of Irish
life. Yet the Viceroy insisted that the proofs must
be forthcoming, or the title could not be allowed ;
and jurymen, who in such cases failed to find for the
crown, were sent to meditate on their misdemeanours

in the county gaols.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

The Irish Parliament remonstrated. The King
had promised that no claim should be revived from
beyond sixty years. Wentworth considered that
such a concession was impolitic and uncalled for.

Ireland, in his eyes, was a conquered. country,. pos-

sessing no rights but such as he was inclined to
allow. Before he could have carried out. his policy,
he would have had to deal, at all events, with a
' native insurrection. Never till then. had: spoliation
so direct and unprovoked been attempted.

He had not, however, altogether miscalculated.
The dread of the English Puritans was even greater
than the indignation at the imperious Viceroy. In
the midst of his other work, Wentworth had expe-
rienced no difficulty in raising an army. Parliament
voted money freely. The Catholic peasants. enlisted
with eagerness, being willing, at all events, to be
armed and organized at the expense of the Govern-
ment. The levies were intended avowedly for service
in Scotland. The Scots, finding that the Irish were
to be let loose on them, threatened to send a force
to Ulster, and raise and arm their own people there.
The rumour spread that the Calvinist fanatics were
coming over to destroy the Catholics root and branch;
they gathered the more eagerly to Wentworth’s
standard; and, in the summer of 1640, when the
Scots were coming into England, eight thousand
Trish infantry and a thousand horse, recruited from
the most dangerous classes in Ireland, the ‘cosherers’
of the Act of Parliament, the marauding vagabonds
to whom industry, Protestantism, and England were
equally hateful ana virtually synonymous, were as-
sembled, ready for mischief, at Carrickfergus. The
straits to which the King was reduced recalled Went-

VOL. I. G

82

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book worth prematurely to England. The failure in the
_— North, and the attitude assumed by the Long Parlia-

1640

ment, prevented his return. Sir John Clotworthy, an
Ulster Presbyterian, whose wife had been persecuted
by the High Commission, joined Pym in demanding
that the Irish Viceroy should be brought to trial
He had meant—there could be no doubt of it

——to use his Irish army in crushing Scotch and

English liberty. He was impeached, tried for treason,
and executed. Sir Christopher Wandsworth, whom
he had left as Deputy, suddenly dying, the charge of
Treland fell to Sir John Parsons, the Master of the

‘Court of Wards, and Sir John Borlase, the Master of

the Ordnance—Puritans both of them, but men of no
local weight or influence. The Earl of Ormond com-

manded the army; and the army, while it held

together, was the real master of the country. The
English Parliament, however, furious at the use in-

tended for these troops, and not choosing that Ireland

should be at the mercy of Papists, extorted from

Charles an order that they should be disbanded. In

appearance there was immediate obedience. The
regiments dispersed. The arms were collected and
carried to Dublin. An operation which threatened

to be dangerous was accomplished without difficulty

and without objection. ‘The danger that remained
was of another kind. There was no longer any force
at all on which the Government could rely. Three

_ half-famished regiments were all that were left, and

Ireland was without a garrison.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

SECTION II.

83

WE are now upon the edge of the gravest event in CHAP.

II

Irish history, the turning-point on which all later ~~~

controversies between England and Ireland hinge.
The facts, real or alleged, are all before us; for the
excitement created was so terrible, that the most
minute particulars were searched into with agonized
curiosity. .orty volumes of depositions are preserved
in the library of Trinity College, which tell the tale
with perfect distinctness ; and, as the witnesses relate
one consistent story, they are dismissed by those who
are offended by their testimony as imaginary beings,
forgers, liars, and calumniators. The eagerness to
discredit the charge is a tacit confession how tre-
mendous is the guilt if it can be proved; the
most certain facts can be made doubtful if they are
stoutly and repeatedly denied; and not evidence but
sympathy or inclination determines the historical
beliefs of most of us. ‘Those who choose to think that
the massacre of 1641 was a dream will not change their
opinion. Those who see in that massacre the ex-
planation and the defence of the subsequent treatment
of Ireland, however unwilling to revive the memory
of scenes which rivalled in carnage the horrors of
St. Bartholomew, are compelled to repeat the evi-
dence once held to be unanswerable.

That a rebellion should have broken out at that
particular time was in itself so natural that a looker-
on might have predicted it with certainty.

The Irish, still passionately attached to their own

@ 2

1641

84

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book habits and their own creed, had seen the conquerors
ears Shon they had so long successfully held at bay, at

1641

last definitely established among them. Plantations of
aliens were in their midst, owning the lands which
had once been theirs, and growing rich and powerful.
Forays out of the Pale they could defy and smile
at. The Saxon bands came and went; crops might
be burnt and cattle lifted; but, when the invaders
were gone, the air closed behind them, and the losses
could be made good by answering raids into the
four counties. The colonists, on the other hand,
were an ever-present affront, whom, by all laws of
God and man, they were entitled, when they had
them at advantage, to destroy. The English interest
was growing ; their own was falling. Soul and body
they were alike being made slaves. The prelates
of an alien and heretic church had seized their
sanctuaries, daring to call themselves the represent-
atives of their own saints, and claiming ev officio
spiritual jurisdiction over them. Anglican might per-
secute Calvinist; the wolf might worry the wild dog:
to the true Catholic, wolf and dog were alike abhor-
rent; Anglican and Calvinist were equally heretics,
and the heretics were children of hell. England
offered them material prosperity; they did not care
for prosperity. England talked of order; the order of
England to them was tyranny and spoliation. Eng-
land might govern her own affairs in her own way.
What was Ireland toher! Bogs might be drained, and
forests fall, and the green Erin grow black under the
plough; towns might rise, and mills, and looms, and
warehouses; they were but badges of Irish servitude.
‘The Irish thought,’ said one of them, ‘ and will ever
think, the English government a yoke of slavery. They

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

were determined to shake off a chain under which for
a hundred years and more the whole nation had
groaned,’ !

In such a humour nothing was needed but oppor-
tunity, and they might have thought Providence itself
was inviting them, at that moment, to rise and free
themselves. There was no Viceroy and no army.
The Lords Justices, Parsons and Borlase, were un-
popular even among the English, and had no local in-
fluence or connections. The whole country had been
exasperated and alarmed by Strafford’s inquisitions.
No one knew whether he might not rise the next morn-
ing and find himself a landless outcast. The High
Church Commission and the political crisis in England
had set the Protestants quarrelling among themselves.
The gentlemen were for the King ; the Ulster settlers
were for the Dublin Government and the Long Parlia-
ment. There were eight thousand disbanded Catholic
soldiers in the country, collected with the view of
fighting Calvinists in Scotland, and far more willing
to undertake the same business at home. Lastly and
chiefly, ‘Hngland’s difficulty was Ireland’s oppor-
tunity.’ The war between the King and the Parlia-
ment was on the point of breaking out, and neither
side would have means or leisure to attend to Ireland.
The scattered handful of men which the Lords Jus-
tices could dispose of would be overcome at the first
effort; and, if it proved necessary or desirable to colour
the rising under a decent name, nothing could be
easier than to pretend that the troops were taking
arms in the King’s name and for the King’s service,
against the revolted Parliament. Add to this the

1 ¢Grave jugum sub quo a centum et quod excurrit annis tota natio
ingemiscit excutere statuunt.’

1641

86

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK natural fear, that if the Puritan party became domi-
ee ent in England the Catholic religion would be in

1641

danger of violent extinction; and that, with a com-
bination of conditions so propitious the Irish chiefs
should have designed a universal insurrection re-
quires no explanation. The miracle would have been
if they had remained quiet. __

But in so tangled a business there were many in-
terests and many intervening purposes. The native
Irish saw their way clearly. Protestants, Scotch
and English, Anglican and Puritan, were their uni-
versal and deadly enemies. On the other hand,
the Anglo-Normans of the Pale were Catholics, like
the Irish, but they had not forgotten their connection
with England. Ormond, though an Anglican, was
one of themselves; he was the chosen general of the
army which had been disbanded ; and again, most of
the English families who had settled in the South,
were ardent Royalists. Thus it was no easy matter
to agree on a common course. From the first
there can be traced two principles and two parties,
which continued divided throughout the whole re-
bellion and perplexed the action of it. The great
Catholic nobles—Lord Gormanston, Lord Fingal,
Lord Antrim, Lord Castlehaven—had no sympathy
with murder and pillage. They were gentlemen with
an honourable purpose, and loyal at heart to the
English crown. They believed that, by loyalty at
such a crisis, they could purchase the restoration of
the Catholic religion, and perhaps of the six con-
fiscated counties; but they had no intention of letting
the settlers be destroyed, or of staining their cause
with acts which the conscience of mankind would
condemn.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

No scruples of this kind restrained the kinsmen of
the dispossessed chiefs of Ulster, or those others of the
old blood who had been threatened by Strafford’s inqui-
sitions. T’o them the English were piratical and heretic
invaders, who were robbing them of their lands,

liberties, and faith—who had shown no mercy and
were entitled to none—whom by any and all means.
they were entitled to destroy from out of the midst:
of them. It mattered little to the O’Neills and
Maguyres who was king of England. ‘They desired

to be quit of England. If Charles turned Catholic, an
English king would still be an English: king. Catholic
or Protestant he would not restore the confiscated
counties. Ireland was theirs, to live in at their own

will and in their own way, and they meant to have it..
The aims of two parties so wide apart were neces-

sarily irreconcilable, yet each was willing to have
the assistance of the other for immediate measures
in opposition to the Puritans. [Each had. sufficient
confidence in its own resources to believe that it

could control the work when. the beginning was once

made.

With the Barons of the Pale the King himself was
in private communication. The Irish Parliament had
passed the vote by which the army had been raised,
avowedly to assist the Government against the revolt

of the Scots. When Strafford had been executed and.

the Parliament had forced Charles to dismiss the:

Irish troops, he was not to be blamed if in his ex-
treme difficulty he turned his eyes to such of his
subjects as seemed loyal and had promised effective
service. An Irish gentleman, one of the Burkes of
Clanrickarde, had gone over, to see and speak with the
King on the part of the Irish nobility, in the summer

&7

CHAP.
Pir
Se

1641

88

BOOK

“THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of 1641. The King sent him back with a letter of

ala credit,’ and a private message to the Earls of Ormond

1641

and Antrim, that they should keep the disbanded
men together, add if possible to their number, and,
when opportunity offered, should seize Dublin Castle
and give them back their arms.

Ormond, understanding better perhaps than his
master the danger of attempting such an enterprise,
hesitated to obey; and Antrim, at Ormond’s desire,
sent back Captain Digby, the Constable of Dunluce,
for more precise instructions. Charles repeated his
commands, even directing Antrim explicitly, if he
could collect the army, to declare openly against the
English Parliament.

Antrim at once communicated with the leading
Barons of the Pale and with the Ulster chiefs. His
intention, as he afterwards admitted, was to move
the Parliament at Dublin to act as the King desired,
and to vote formally for the reassembling of the army.
If the Lords Justices interfered, he meant to carry
out his master’s orders fully, take Dublin Castle, and
arrest everywhere the leading Protestants who might
threaten to be dangerous.”

‘The fools,’ Lord Antrim said, ‘well liking the
business, would not expect our time and manner for
ordering the work, but fell upon it without us, and
sooner and otherwise than we would have done,
taking to themselves and in their own way the
management of the work, and so spoiled it.’

‘The fools’ were the native Irish, who had other
and more practical objects than the Earl of Antrim.

1 ¢You are to repair to Ormond the Marquis of Antrim,’ Hibernia
and Antrim in Ireland, who are to Anglicana, Appendix, p. 49.
give credit to what you say to them * Tbid.
from us. C. R.’—‘ Information of

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

For years past there had been uneasy symptoms
that the volcanic elements were working towards a
new eruption. In 1634 Emer Macmahon, afterwards
the notorious Bishop of Clogher, informed Wentworth
that mischief was in the wind; he himself, as he said,
having been employed to feel the pulse of France

and Spain.

Flights of friars and priests, with old

soldiers who had served on the Continent, had been ob-
served latterly crossing back through England to Ire-
land.* Whispers were abroad that an insurrection

1 The Catholics had a majority
in the Irish Parliament, notwith-
standing the Act of Elizabeth. How
completely the Catholic Church
was organized in Ireland is very
little realized. Of practical intoler-
ance there was at this time none at
all. The Catholics were indulged
to the uttermost, and therefore
rebelled. The Irish Council, on
June 30, 1641, wrote to Sir Harry
Vane :—

‘We lately received a petition in
the name of the archbishop, bishop,
and clergy now assembled in Dub-
lin, wherein they complain that
they see in their dioceses a foreign
jurisdiction publicly exercised, and
swarms of Popish priests and friars
openly professing themselves by
words and habits, to the outdaring
of the law, the pressure of the sub-
ject, and the impovyerishing the
kingdom. And seeing that instead
of that due obedience which the
Popish pretended clergy ought to
have rendered to the law, they
break out into insolence and inordi-
nate assemblies, holding of convo-
cations, exercising jurisdiction, we
may not be silent, it being apparent
that such insolent beginnings may
proceed to further and so general
mischief as may prove the original

of dangerous alterations. At Dro-
gheda there is a house for a nunnery
lately erected, so spacious as it con-
tains four score windows of a side.
In and about this city are supposed
tu be many hundreds of Jesuits,
friars and priests, which extraordi-
nary convention of so many of them
cannot be for any good purpose.’—
‘The [rish Council to Sir H. Vane,
June 30.’ MSS, Record Office.

Enclosed in this letter was
a curious illustrative sketch of
the condition of the diocese of
Tuam :—

‘Doctor Laughlin Kaolly, titular
Archbishop of Tuam, is very public
among us. He presents himself
openly in general assemblies. He
travels up and down with great
companies. He is plentifully main-
tained, generally respected, feeds of
the best, and it is a strife among
the great ones who shall be happy
in being the host of such a guest.
Every church living in the pro-
vince of Connaught hath a Romish
priest as constantly as a Protestant
minister entitled or assigned there-
unto. The country suffers griev-
ously under the charge of a double
clergy — Protestant and Papist.
They have everywhere their mass-
houses, whereunto the people in

1641

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

was at hand; and, early in 1641, Sir Harry Vane
warned the Lords Justices to be on their guard.
Catholic preachers had been inveighing louder than
usual from their pulpits on the progress of heresy,
commenting on the supposed malignant intentions
of the English Parliament towards Ireland, and com-
mending vaguely to the prayers of the congregations
the success of some great design which was in hand
for the preservation of the faith.’ The Irish Parlia- _
ment, composed of Catholicsin nearly equal numbers,
the Catholics slightly predominating, sate late into the
summer. The members of the House of Commons
were the extremes of both parties, and were equally
bitter against Lord Strafford and the Government.
A knot of Catholic barristers, patriots of the familiar
type, had put themselves forward as the spokesmen
of Irish grievances; clamouring for self-government,

multitudes resort, and that not pri-
vately but in a public braving
manner.

‘The friars swarm fic illic et
ubique, and are often most in the
highways in their habits. In Dun-
more is a house consisting of a prior
and thirty friars, which have their
oratory, dormitory, refectory, &c.,
and observe the rites of their order
as fully as when they were in Spain.
Another abbey at Kilconnell, with
as many or more; and conspicuous
nunnery, wherein are many young
gentlewomen, daughters of lords,
knights, and the best of the coun-
try.

‘The titular Archbishop of Tuam
and his suffragans do publicly and
powerfully exercise jurisdiction,
and such obedience is given them
by the natives, that the jurisdiction
of our Church is altogether neg-
lected.

‘The nation, weary of the charge
of a double clergy, do much re-
pine at our ministers. They keep
back tithes, conceal their glebes,
deny them any place of residence,
where they might look to their
flocks. But, what is most grievous
to us, they do maliciously indict
them and their proctors atthe assizes,
and call them to the Parliament to
their utter undoing, for no other
cause but for receiving such cus-
toms as were antiently paid to their
predecessors. —‘ Remonstrances of
Grievances in the Province of
Tuam, June 12,1641.’ MSS. Re-
cord Office.

1 History of the Irish Rebellion,
by Sir John Temple. Temple was
made Master of the Rolls in Dublin
in 1640, and the contemporary of
all, and eyewitness of many, of the
scenes which he describes.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

ot

the repeal of Poynings’ Act, the dismissal of the cmap.
English garrisons, and the establishment of a militia ;
and the Protestant representatives, with the infatua-
tion which has so often distinguished Irish Protestant

politicians, had applauded them to the echo."

The

Chancellor Sir Richard Bolton, Chief Justice Low-
ther, Sir Geo. Radcliff, the Bishop of Derry (Bram-
hall), and the Bishop of Cork (Chappel) were

impeached.’

1 Colonel Audley Mervyn, of
Fermanagh, a Protestant, was the
most eloquent of the patriotic
orators in this Parliament. He
repented and atoned for his folly
in the suppression of the rebellion.
—Relation of Occurrences as pre-
sented to the House of Commons
m England, by Lieutenant-Colonel
Audley Mervyn, June 4, 1642.

* The Irish Parliament was so
intent on these impeachments that
it claimed to be the supreme
judicial court of Ireland, and
insisted that, by the constitution,
it had power of life and death.
The Lords Justices tried to tempo-
rize, but the Government party was
in a minority in both Houses. On
June 30, 1641, the Lords Justices
and Council wrote to Sir Harry
Vane :—

‘ What resolution they (the Par-
liament) will take for deferring or
not deferring the proceedings
against those persons we know not
as yet, but conceive that most of
the Papists in the House and some
of the Protestants incline to the
latter, whereby they are like to
carry it by majority of votes, for in
these two last sessions we find
many Protestants (and no Papists
at all, unless some few not able to
appear) removed from the House,

A. Committee of the Commons carried

and new elections ordered to be
made, and in some of their rooms
Papists brought in, which is a great
weakening of the Protestant party
in the House.’ — MSS. Ireland,
1641. Record Office.

Finding the impeachment
pressed, the Lords Justices were
obliged to meet it by a bill of
general pardon for all offences.
Government being completely para-
lyzed by the action of the two
Houses, and the Lords showing a
disposition to accept the pardon as
an alternative, the bill was sent
over for approval, with a request
that it might be instantly returned,

‘ We conceive it necessary to be
so at this time,’ the Council wrote
on July 1, ‘whereby confidence and
security may be rendered not only
to all ministers of the Crown
who are now very fearful in the
course of their employments, but
also to all his majesty’s subjects of
the kingdom in general. In this
act of free pardon persons im-
peached of treason in Parliament
here are included, which we
think fit to mention to you, to the
end his majesty may be acquainted
therewith as a thing we hope not
displeasing to him.’

Even to this pardon it was neces-
sary to make two exceptions, so

ie
—

1641

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the complaints of the House to London’—complaints
of injury to trade, monopolies, the High Commission
Court, inquisitions into titles and arbitrary powers;
and the Parliament declared itself in permanent
session till part at least of their requests were

granted.’

hateful the High Church bishops
had made themselves. A post-
script adds :—

_ ‘We conceive that if the Lord
Bishop of Derry and the Lord
Bishop of Cork be not excepted in
the pardon it will be the more dif-
ficult to pass it in both Houses.
Wherefore there is a clause inserted
in the pardon excepting them both
as to crimes, yet so as the treason
whereof the Bishop of Derry is im-
peached in Parliament stands par-
doned.’— MSS. Record Office, 1641.

The bill was conceded, but the
Parliament did not choose to wait for
itsreturn, but continued to press vio-
lently for the judicial sovereignty.
The two Houses passed a declara-
tion of rights, which Sir William
Parsons forwarded on July 21.

‘You see,’ he writes to Sir Harry
Vane, ‘with what vehemency and
a kind of eager postulation they
press for jurisdiction. The danger
threatened to the English and his
majesty’s servants in allowing them
jurisdiction in capital causes doth
daily more and more appear here,
and I doubt not is foreseen then.’
—‘Sir Wm. Parsons to Sir Harry
Vane, July 21, 1641.’ Ibid.

The invaluable letters of the
Lords Justices before and during
the rebellion, preserved in the Re-
cord Office, have never been pub-
lished, and dispose, with a ludi-
crous completeness, of the plea of
the Irish Catholics, that they took
arms to defend themselves against

the supposed Puritan tendencies of
the English governors. Throughout
the summer of 1641, when Parsons
and Borlase were charged with
meditating a persecution, their let-
ters display nothing but the most
profound alarm, and consciousness
of their helpless position.

1 Among the grievances pre-
sented by the Parliament was one
which showed how strongly the Irish
element was already in the ascend-
ant.

The Commons complained of ‘the
national distinction made in the late
plantations, by which it was pro-
vided that the Irish nation should be
debarred from purchasing or acquir-
ing estates of inheritance further
than at the first distribution of the
lands was assigned them,’

‘The object,’ the English Coun-
cil observes, ‘was that the British
undertakers should be maintained
at their first strength without
encroachment of the Irish upon
them to the lessening of their pro-
portion, so that none were allowed
to purchase but such as were of
English descent,’

The Council—again a remarkable
commentary on this supposed in-
tention of the Puritan English
Parliament to exterminate the
Irish nation—recommended that the
distinction should be abolished.—
‘Council Note, May 27,1641.’ Ibid.

* “We daily expect the coming
of the Connaught Act, and that of
Limitation, and the Parliament

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

93

Some uneasiness had been felt at the number of CHAP.

disbanded soldiers at large and in idleness.’

posal had been made to send them abroad into the
Spanish or Portuguese service, but objections were

raised and it was dropped.’

will not incline to hear of an ad-
journment until they come over.’—
‘Sir Adam Loftus to Sir Harry
Vane, July 24.’ MSS. Ireland, Re-
cord Office.

The Catholics insisted afterwards
clamorously on their loyalty
throughout to Charles the First.
Charles, in return for the Act of
Limitation and the surrender of his
rights on Connaught, had required a
better organization of the Customs
revenues. Loftus adds :—

‘If these acts pass the royal
assent before the King’s couriers be
likewise speeded, I fear if this can
be once finished, that which con-
cerns his majesty will have but
slow motion ; and therefore I think
it would stand with all the reason
that can be, that in the first place
those things which concern his
majesty might first be agitated, and
then what concerns the people fully
be completed. And in truth all
that is desired for his majesty is in
no way valuable in respect of those
great graces and bounties which
they now expect and make them-
selves sure of.’

1 There was a delay in disband-
ing them from want of money. On
May 12 the Lords Justices write :—
‘This kingdom is most fearfully
robbed and harassed by the soldiers
in every part where they come.
They go six or seven miles from
their garrisons, and rob houses, and
take all they meet with+on their
way, and do all the mischief that
can be. We have not had a penny

Antrim had not at that

these four weeks to give them.
There is no martial law to govern
them, which they knowing do what
they list. The people suffer (bear
with) much because they are
Papists, wherein there ts some mys-
tery, but certainly no good to us.—
‘The Lords Justices to Sir Harry
Vane, May 12.’ Ibid.

* Orders came in June to ship
part of the army for Portugal, and
transports came from England to
Cork harbour for them. The
Catholic clergy became immedi-
ately suspiciously busy in endea-
vouring to keep them at home...

The Council write on June 30 to
Vane :—

‘There was great underhand
labouring among the priests, friars,
and Jesuits to dissuade the dis-
banded soldiers from departing the
kingdom. On receipt of your letter
we sent orders to all the ports for
seizing all Popish books that shall
be brought in; as also to inform us
what number of Jesuits, priests, and
friars have arrived, and what num-
ber of soldiers who have had com-
mand abroad.’

On June 9 Captain Thomas Serle
deposed that ‘as he rode from
Dundalk to Drogheda in company
of Lieutenant Flower, he observed
in the highway near Dunleary
thirty or forty of the late dis-
banded army in a cluster. Also he
saw a man about fifty years old on
horseback, discoursing with them
in Irish. Lieutenant Flower, who
speaks the language, after some

A pro- bet agen

1641

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

time received his final orders from Charles. The Irish
committee lingered in England, but the Houses having
received assurances from them that their petitions
were granted, at the beginning of August there was
the usual separation for the harvest, and the session
was adjourned till November. Captain Digby re-
turned presently after ; and had the ‘ fools,’ as Lord
Antrim called them, remained quiet in the interval,
the King’s orders would have probably been carried
out, and Dublin Castle been successfully seized as soon
as Parliament reassembled.

The Catholic leaders meanwhile had talked over
their plans among themselves. At the beginning of
October,’ the leading Catholic clergy and laity met

conference with the man, told him
(Captain Serle) he conceived the
man was a Romish priest or friar,
for he had seen part of his hairy
vestment ; and besides, the priest
had declared to him that he had
advised the said soldiers on his
blessing, that none of them should
depart the kingdom to any foreign
employment, but rather they should
stay at home, though they lived
only on bread and milk, for that
there might be use for them here.”

‘ The same day he observed about
a thousand others of the said army
travelling the same way. —‘ Exami-
nation of Captain T. Serle, June 9.’
MSS. Ireland, 1641. Record Office.

On August 3, after the Par-
lament had decided that the sol-
diers were not to go, Parsons
writes :—

‘We send you the suit of Par-
liament, and reasons for the stay
of the men to be sent over seas.
We formerly wrote to your Honours
how the priests had laboured m that
business. Now you see the strong
influence of those priests upon all

public business here, in so much as ~
they are able to guide the whole
Parliament, the Papist votes being
now strongest, to such a motion
quite cross to his majesty’s com-
mands, which we often declared
unto them [the Catholic leaders
knew Charles’ secret wishes better
than the Lords Justices], specially
in a business which is really rather
against than for the public peace
and safety, and which few men of
understanding are not persuaded of,
save that they desire to keep as
strong a party here as they can for
other ends, chiefly if anything
touching religion should be in
earnest pressed upon them.’—‘ Sir
Wm. Parsons to Sir H. Vane, Au-
gust 3, 1641.’ Ibid.

' The priests had been busy with
their meetings all the summer.
‘In Whitsun week there was a
great assembly of them gathered
at the wood of Maynooth. Divers
gentlemen were solicited to meet
at that assembly, and some refused
to be there.’—‘ The Irish Council to
Sir H, Vane, June 30,’ Ibid.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

at a Franciscan abbey in Westmeath,’ to discuss a
question, on which their opinions were divided—the
course to be taken with the Protestant settlers who
were scattered over the country. That they must be
dispossessed was a matter of course; it was the
price of the co-operation of the Celts; but whether
by death or banishment was undecided. According
to the priests, heretics were disentitled to mercy.
The less violent party considered that massacres
were ugly things, and left an ill name behind
them. The Spanish princes, whose orthodoxy was
above suspicion, had not exterminated the Moors,
but had allowed them to return to Africa. More
savage measures might perhaps be displeasing to
God, and would certainly exasperate England in the
highest degree.

On the other side it was urged, that the example of
the Moors told for the opposite conclusion. Europe
had suffered ever since from the Algerine pirates,
who, had there been a general massacre, would never
have existed. Ireland would, at all events, have to
count on the worst that England could do. Banished
men might come back with swords in their hands ;
and the policy, at once wisest and safest, would be
to destroy them when the opportunity was in their
hands.

The majority at the meeting declined these violent
counsels. They determined to be loyal to the King,
to stand by him in his present difficulties, and expect
in return from his gratitude the re-establishment of
their religion and the restoration of the lands. The

1 Deposition of Henry Jones, ceived an account of this meeting
Dean of Kilmore, Hibernia Angli- from a Franciscan friar who was
cana, Appendix, 9. Dr. Jonesre- present. Cf. Temple, p. 129.

95

CHAP.
ae
_——

1641

96

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK minority departed unconvinced, resolved to take their
——~ own way.

1641

The natural chief of the Irish at this time was the
nephew of the Earl of Tyrone, Owen Rory O’Neill.
Owen Roe—so he was called—was in Flanders. The
confederates wrote to him. He promised to return and
place himself at their head as soon as the insurrection
had broken out. The command, meanwhile, fell to
his cousin, Sir Phelim, who had been educated in
England as a Protestant, but on coming back to his
estates had relapsed to the creed of his ancestors. At
Dublin, during the session, and afterwards in the
autumn, at Sir Phelim’s house in Ulster, the patriot
leaders had met and concerted their plans. The
chief conspirators in this separate distinctively Irish
council were Sir Philip himself, Lord Maguyre of
Fermanagh, an Irish peer, a youth of twenty-five ;
Philip O’Reilly, a lawyer and a popular speaker in
Parliament; Hugh MacMahon, and his brother Emer
the Vicar-General, afterwards Bishop of Clogher,?
Roger Moore, one of the Moores of Leax; and a friar
of Dundalk.

The Bishop of Clogher was the brain of the enter-
prise, and in the main directed the course which was
to be pursued. Acquainted, as the conspirators were,
with the views of Antrim and the Pale Lords, they
had made up their minds to act independently of
them, and render temporizing and half-measures im-
possible.

Rents and taxes were paid in Ireland on Novem-
ber 1. At the end of October the treasury at

1 Grandson of the Earl of Tyrone. 2¢Relation of the Lord Ma-
Hugh MacMahon was a gentleman guyre.’ LBorlase, History of the
of good fortune. Trish Rebellion, Appendix, p. 2.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

Dublin’ was empty. The tenant’s half-year’s rent
was in his own hand. His crops were housed. The
high winds at the fall of the year made communica-
tion with England at that time always uncertain, and
the autumn of 1641 was exceptionally wild. A blow
struck simultaneously and fiercely over the whole
North, without a note of warning, might crush the
English settlement and the English religion at once
and for ever. The priests were ready-made instru-
ments by which such a plot could be organized
without a trace of it going abroad; and Ulster, once
delivered, the rest of the island might be trusted to
follow the pattern. The seizure of Dublin Castle,
part of Antrim’s programme, was equally essential to
the plans of Sir Phelim O'Neill. Arms for nine
thousand men were in the cellars there, and the com-
mand of Dublin would be the command over Parlia-
ment and country.

October 23 was market day in Dublin, and strange
faces would attract no attention in the streets.
It was determined that, on October 23, Sir Phelim
should surprise Londonderry, Sir Henry O'Neill Car-
rickfergus, Sir Con Magennis Newry. Lord Maguyre
and Hugh Macmahon undertook the more difficult
enterprize at Dublin, while, in the whole North on
the same day, the Irish people were to rise and dis-
pose of the English settlers and their families. No
distinct directions were probably given about killing
them. An Irish mob let loose upon defenceless
enemies might be left to their own discretion in such
a matter. The order was to drive them from their
houses ; strip them—man, woman, and child—of their
property, strip them even of the clothes upon their
backs, to take such chances of life as the elements

VOL. I. H

98

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK would allow, in the late autumn, to human existence
| _ turned adrift amidst sleet and rain, without food or

1641

covering. The Scots, of whom there were several
thousand families in Ulster, were to be left, if pos-
sible, unmolested. To divide the interests of Scots
from English would make the work more easy ; and
there was a fear, perhaps, of offending the Earl of
Antrim, whose wife was herself a Protestant.

The secret was admirably kept. Sir William Cole, of
Fermanagh,' reported at the beginning of the month,”
that the Irish appeared restless. The meetings at
Sir Phelim’s house had been noticed, and Maguyre’s
movements had seemed mysterious. On the 21st
more exact information enabled Cole to take measures
for the safety of Enniskillen ; but the warning letter
which he despatched to the Lords Justices was inter-
cepted on the road. |

1 The Coles came to Ireland among the colonists of James the First,
and settled in Fermanagh in 1611, 2 October, 1641.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

SECTION IV.

On October 22 the Irish leaders repaired to their
posts. Lord Maguyre, Hugh Macmahon, and Roger
Moore came openly into Dublin, as if on ordinary
business. Their friends stole in under cover of the
market. The Government was so unconscious of
danger that no difficulty whatever was anticipated
in the surprise of the castle. When the arms were
secured, the intention was to call Parliament in-
stantly, and to raise an army in the King’sname. At
the last moment the conspiracy was revealed, but in
so strange a manner that the information was almost
discredited as an idle tale. On the night of the
22nd, an Irishman named Owen O’Conolly, who
had lived in the family of Sir John Clotworthy, had
been converted there, and was now a Presbyterian
elder, came in a strange excited state to Sir William
Parsons and told him, that in a few hours Dublin
Castle would be taken by rebels. His story was
that he had been drinking with Hugh MacMahon,
and that MacMahon had taken him into confidence,

and invited him to join.

about his business as a drunken fool.!

1 Such was the generally re-
ceived story. Parsons in his own
account, written within two days
of the event, says nothing of
Conolly being drunk, or of his
having disbelieved his account.

‘On Friday, the 22nd, at nine
o’clock,’ he writes, ‘Owen Conolly,
servant to Sir John Clotworthy,
came to me, the Lord Justice Par-

H

Parsons bade him to go
He retired

sons, In great secresy, as indeed the
case did require, and discovered
unto me a wicked and damnable
conspiracy, plotted and contrived
by the Irish Papists. The plot was,
on the then next morning, Satur-
day, October 23, being Ignatius’s
day, about nine o’clock, to surprise
the castle of Dublin, the principal
magazine of his majesty’s arms and

2

100

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book but held fast to the thought which was ever present
_— in his mind. As the night went on, and ‘he became

1641

more collected, he went back, and persisting in his
account obtained attention at last. ‘The castle gates
were closed and the watch manned; MacMahon and
Lord Maguyre were taken; and Roger Moore, and the
rest, finding that their stroke had missed, escaped
out of the town. Dublin was saved. Unhappily there

had been no Owen O’Conolly to sound the alarm in

the Ulster farmhouses. The Ulster farmers, dispersed,

surprised, and isolated, ‘became the helpless victims

of Irish ferocity on a scale on which it has rarely
had an opportunity of displaying itself.

It does not fall within the purpose of the present
history to relate circumstantially the scenes which fol-
lowed. Inasmuch, however, as Catholic historians

either deny their reality altogether, slur them over

as enormously exaggerated, or lay the blame on the
Protestants as the first beginners of violence; and
inasmuch as the justification of the subsequent policy
of England towards Ireland depends upon the truth
of events of which the recollection was kept alive for
a century by a solemn annual commemoration, it is
necessary to relate briefly the outline of those events
as recorded by eyewitnesses, who were examined in
Dublin, fresh from the scenes which they had witnessed,

munition ; and it was agreed among
them that, at the same hour, all
other his majesty’s forts and maga-
zines of arms in the‘kingdom should
‘be surprised by other of the con-
spirators. Further, that all the
Protestants and English through-
out the whole kingdom that would
not join them should be cut off,
and so those Papists should become
possessed of the Government .and

the kingdom at the same time.

‘ As soon as I heard that intelli-
gence I repaired to the Lord Jus-
tice Borlase. ‘We assembled the
Council, and having-sate in Council
all that night as also all the next
day, Oct. 23, we caused the castle
to be strengthened with armed
men,’ &¢.—‘ The Lords Justices to
the Earl of Leicester, October 25,
1641” MSS. Record Office.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

before commissioners ‘ of known integrity; men of
all stations and of both nations, whose evidence is the
eternal witness of blood which the Irish Catholics
have from that time to this been vainly trying to
wash away.’

On the morning of that fatal Saturday there
appeared, before the houses of the settlers and their
tenants, in the six escheated counties, gangs of
armed Irish, who demanded instant possession, and,
on being admitted, ejected the entire families, and
stripped most of them to the skin.

Many resisted and were killed; many, the young
vigorous men especially, who could save their own
lives by flight, sought shelter for their women and their
little ones in the houses of their Irish neighbours, with
whom they had hved in intimacy. The doors of their
neighbours were opened in seeming hospitality; but
within there were not human beings—not even human
savages—but ferocious beasts. ‘ The priests had so
charmed the Irish, and laid such bloody impressions
on them, as it was held a mortal sin to give relief or

1 The sworn depositions remain,
as I said, in Trinity College. Al-
ready, in Sir John Temple’s time,
the Catholics had begun to declaim
against ‘ these evidences of their
cruelty, and lively attestations
given in to perpetuate the memory
of them, to their eternal infamy.’—
Temple, Preface, p. 16. Dr. Curry
dismisses ‘the enormous heap of
malignity and nonsense,’ as he calls
it, on the ground of a supposed
discovery that, in ‘infinitely the
greater number’ of the depositions
the commissioners’ attestation of
them as ‘being duly sworn’ is
struck through with a pen, thus re-

ducing their value to random state-
ments.— Review of the Civil War in
Ireland, p. 176.. No doubt these
volumes of evidence were justly
painful to Dr. Curry. An exami-
nation of the originals, however,
shows that the erasures, so far from
being found in ‘infinitely the
greater number,’ are found in rela-
tively very few, and so far from
invalidating the authority of the
depositions, are rather a proof of
the scrupulous care with which the
commissioners distinguished be-
tween fact. and hearsay.—Compare
Reid, History of the Presbyterians
ix Lreland.

101

CHAP.
tr
——,——_———

1641,

.THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

protection to the English.’* Fugitives admitted to
shelter are sacred in the Arab tent or the Indian wig-
wam. These helpless ones were either betrayed to the
ruffians out of doors, or murdered by their hosts.
There were of course exceptions. An entire nation can-
not at once and universally put off the feelings which
connect them with their kind. Some families were
sent with escorts to the sea; nor does a universal
massacre appear at first to have been anywhere

deliberately designed.’

' Temple.

2 The contemporary accounts
agree mainly that, during the first
week, there were few or no deliber-
ate murders. On October 24, Lord
Chichester, writing from Belfast,
says that the Irish had taken Char-
lemont, Dungannon, Tonderagee,
and Newry, with all the military
stores in them. Fires were visible
all over the country; farms and
villages burning ; but, so far, Lord
Chichester could not learn that
‘they had slain more than one man.’
—‘ Lord Chichester to the King,
October 24, Belfast.’ MSS. Ireland,
Record Office.

All the accounts agreed, on the
other hand, that the pillaging,
stripping, and burning were uni-
versal. Colonel Audley Mervyn,
who was present in Ulster during
the first three months of the insur-
rection, says that ‘they were sur-
prised so suddenly that the Irish
servant, who overnight was undres-
sing his master, the next morning
was stripping master and mistress.
In the twinkling of an eye, corpora-
tions, towns, villages were blazing ;
men, women, and children, of all
ranks, exposed by hundreds naked
on the mountains, and dying of cold.’

But the forbearance, such as it
might be, was soon ended.

Passion, however, was exas-

‘Nakedness and famine,’ Colonel
Mervyn says, ‘were judged over-
slow executioners. ‘Then entered
the sword, destroying at first with
the scabbard on, the rebels, under
pretence of convoy, inviting the
scattered and hidden Protestants
intoa body, that so they might make
each surviving man an executor to
the last murdered in his presence,
and so the whole line one by one
extinguished ; the Irish priest, as
ordinary, administered for all,

‘ Out of the county of Fermanagh,
one of the best planted counties with
English, I could never give account
of twenty men escaped, except,
which ts most improbable, they should
Jiee to Dublin. Having enquired from
prisoners by name for such and such,
they have informed me they were ail
massacred. The Blackwater, in
Tyrone, had its streams dyed in
blood, there being at one time 200
souls murdered on the bridge and
flung down the river.’—Zelation
of Occurrences, by Colonel Audley
Mervyn.

On December 1—I am parti-
cular about these dates, because
it is insisted that the story of
the massacre was an afterthought,
made up in the following year to
justify the confiscation of the estates
of the insurgents—on December 1

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

perated by the failure of parts of the scheme, which
would have given the leaders political control. The
ill-success at Dublin was not the only disappointment.
Sir Wm. Cole saved Enniskillen. Naked men, flying
for their lives, carried the alarm to Derry, Coleraine,
and Carrickfergus, and the inhabitants had time to
close their gates. Murder, the Irish writers say, was
begun only in retaliation. The first blood, they
affirm, was shed at Island Magee, early in November,
when three thousand Catholics were killed by the

garrison of Carrickfergus.’

a petition was presented to the
English Parliament, signed by
the Irish Council, stating that
there were then 40,000 rebels in
the field. ‘Their tyranny,’ says
this document, ‘is so great, that
they put both man, woman, and
child that are Protestants to the
sword, not sparing either age, sex,
degree, or reputation. They have
stripped naked many Protestants,
and so sent them to the city—men
and women. They have ravished
many virgins and women before
their husbands’ faces, and taken
their children and dashed their
brains against the walls in the sight
of their parents, and at length
destroyed them likewise without
pity or humanity.’

On December 14 the following
letter from Ireland was read in the
English Parliament :—

‘All I can tell you is the mise-
rable state we continue under, for
the rebels daily increase in men and
munition in all parts, except the
province of Munster, exercising all
manner of cruelties, and striving
who can be most barbarously exqui-
site in tormenting the poor Pro-
testants, cutting off their ears,
fingers, and hands, plucking out

Were this story true,

their eyes, boiling the hands of
little children before their mothers’
faces, stripping women naked and
ripping them up,’ &c.

Even Richard Beling, the pas-
sionate defender of the Catholics,
one of the authorities for the charge
that Parsons and Borlase did not try
to stop the rebellion, but let it ex-
tend forthe sake of the expected con-
fiscations, half confirms, in shame,

Sir Phelim O’Neill’s barbarities.

‘O’Neillus,’ he says, ‘ Neurium:
nec”

aliasque munitiones cepit,
consternatus animo dum Baronis
Maguyre sortem rescit arma abjicit.
Sed ad vindictam potius respiciens
plures in sua Provincia turbas ac
tragoedias excitat, paucisque cum
copiis iisque inermibus plurima
preestat contra ejus  provincie
Anglos et Scotos multum animo
consternatos, etiam minus si vera
referuntur in Catholico viro pro-
banda.’ — Vindicie Catholicorum
Hibernia, by Richard Beling, 1650.

1 The Irish defences have taken
many forms. Nicholas French,
titular Bishop of Ferns, in the book
in which he compares Ireland under
the Cromwellians to the Bleeding
Iphigenia, insists with admirable
audacity, that there had been at first

1641

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

there is something naive in the complaint that soldiers
appointed to keep the peace should have used strong

no rebellion at all—only a stir of a
few discontented people, which was
converted afterwards into a national
rising by the malicious misrepresen-
tations of the Lords Justices.

‘It is objected,’ he says, ‘that
the Irish were the first aggressors.
The objection is easily answered.
It is a common doctrine of divines,
that it is lawful to prevent an evil
that cannot be otherwise avoided
than by preventing. I see you
taking your pistol in your hand,
cocking it to shoot at me. In that
case it is lawful for me to discharge
my pistol and kill you. This was
the case of the confederate Catho-
lics. There was no other door open
for them but by preventing the
Presbyterians’ bloody design.’—
The Bleeding Iphigenia, by the
Right Rev. N. French, Bishop of
Ferns, 1674. :

Compare with this daring asser-
tion a letter written on the spot
and at the time by Sir John Temple
to Charles the First, describing the
actions of these ‘ few insignificant
people,’ and the real feeling about
it of the Dublin Government. The
date is December 12, 1641 :—

‘IT humbly beseech your majesty
to give me leave to represent to you
the miserable condition of this your
kingdom, which lies now despe-
rately bleeding and will expire
under the weight of the present
calamity, unless your majesty shall
apply some powerful remedy. The
whole state lies now at stake, and
our distempers are grown to that
height as they will not much longer
attend our expected supplies. We
are brought so low as unless suc-
cours presently arrive we must here
undoubtedly perish, and your

majesty be put to a far greater
expense of blood and treasure for
the recovery of this kingdom than
your royal progenitors were in the
first conquest of it. The whole
province of Ulster is entirely in
possession of the rebels, except that
part which is possessed by the Scots,
who stand upon their guard, and for
want of arms and commanders dare
not adventure to attempt anything
of moment against the rebels. A
great part of Connaught is likewise
at their devotion, and the whole
province of Munster not only
wavering but already hath in several
parts made a defection, and now,
to render our condition desperate
here in the city, the Lords of the
Pale stand upon their guard, have |
entertained several parlies with the
rebels of Ulster, and all their
tenants and followers inhabiting in
these counties are not only large
contributors to their subsistence
here, but do themselves rob and
despoil the English up to the very
gates of Dublin.

‘ But that which makes this re-
bellion more dangerous and formi-
dable, and indeed makes it differ
from all others that have heretofore
happened in this kingdom, is that
they have profaned your sacred
name, and infused into the belief
of the people that what they do is
not only by your majesty’s avow-
ment, but by commission under your
majesty’s signature. Besides, the
cause of their taking arms they
pretend to be religion, wherewith
their priests and Jesuits have with
so great artifice and cunning enter-
tained them, making them believe
that the Romish religion was pre-
sently to be rooted out here, that

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

measures when the country was in the hands of bands
of robbers, who were confessedly plundering the

entire province.

Every detail of that business, how-

ever, is preserved, and can be traced to the minutest
fibre of it. The date was not November but January.

horrid persecutions were now in-
tended, and cruel massacres to be
suddenly executed upon all pro-
fessors of the same. By these and
other delusions they have drawn
together infinite multitudes of
people, and caused them to take
arms and an oath for the defence of
their religion and the delivery of
the kingdom from the present
government, which they resolve no
longer to endure, but will, as they
say, under your majesty, have a
governor designed unto them out
of their own nation.

‘Thus enraged and armed by
these pretences, they march on,
furiously destroying all the Kng-
lish, sparing neither sex nor age,
throughout the kingdom, most bar-
barously murdering them, and that
with greater cruelty than ever was
yet used among Turks and infidels.
I will not trouble your majesty
with the sad story of our miseries
here. Many thousands of our nation
are already perished under their
cruel hands, and the pocr remainder
of them go up and down desolate,
naked, and most miserably afflicted
with cold and hunger, all inns and
other places in the country being
prohibited, under deep penalties, to
entertain or give any kind of relief
to them, so as here we sit, wearied
with the most lamentable com-
plaints and fearful outcries of our
poor distressed countrymen, and
have no means to afford them any
redress, nor indeed any great hopes
long to preserve ourselves and this

city from the fury of the rebels who
threaten us with ruin and desola-
tion.

‘The Lords Justices have not
been wanting to use the best means
they could for the preservation of
this place, not only by the most
earnest representations of their con-
dition here, and the impossibility to
subsist without succour out of Eng-
land, but by raising of men and
gathering together such forces as
the place could afford. Yet, not-
withstanding all their endeavours
(besides the 2,000 men under Sir
H. Tichborne now besieged in
Drogheda), they are not able to
bring into the field above 8,000
men, both horse and foot, most of
them citizens, many of them Irish,
who, we have just cause to suspect,
will, on the first encounter, desert
and carry over their arms to the
rebels.

‘ In this position we daily expect
to be besieged by strange multi-
tudes of people, who have already
come from all parts, and have on all
sides encompassed this city, which
is of itself no ways defensible ; and
if it were, yet they will hinder our
markets and so bring a famine
among us, which at this present
they may the more easily effect by
reason that many thousands of the
despoiled English women and chil-
dren are now come in to take sanc-
tuary among us.’—‘Sir John Temple
to the King, December 12, 1641,’
MSS, Record Office.

1641

“106

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND. ©

BOOK Alaster Macdonnell had destroyed some English fami-
—_*_. lies in their beds at Kilrea. Seventy or eighty old men,

1641

women, and children, had been killed on the road by
the same party near Ballintoy and Oldstown. On the
Sunday following, January 9, a party of the expelled
farmers, maddened by their losses, accompanied by a
few soldiers from Carrickfergus, slew in revenge thirty
Catholics at Island Magee.* Thirty persons put to
death, in the frenzy of provoked rage, on January 9,
1642, when the cries of perishing men and women
were going up from every corner of Ulster, have been
converted into three thousand at the beginning of
November, and the crimes of the Irish represented as
the self-defence of innocent victims defending them-
selves against unprovoked assassination. When will
the Irish Catholics, when will the Roman Catholics,
learn that wounds will never heal which are skinned
with lying? Not till they have done penance, all of
them, by frank confession and humiliation—the Irish
for their crimes in their own island—the Catholics
generally for their yet greater crimes throughout the
civilized world—can the past be forgotten, and their
lawful claims on the conscience of mankind be equi-
tably considered.

Forbearance did not last beyond a few days, if so
long. Rallying from their first surprise, the Pro-
testants gathered into bodies and made fight; and
from that moment the conduct of the rebellion fell
entirely into the hands of the most violent. Charle-
mont Castle, the strongest fortress in Ulster, was

1 The particulars are given quote this extravagant story froma
exactly by Dr. Reid, History of the Lord Clarendon. Lord Clarendon’s
Presbyterian Church im Ireland, imagination was capable of a wide

vol. i. pp. 826, 327. The Catholics, flight, when a stone could be
it is to be admitted, are able to thrown at Presbyterians.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

surprised on the fatal 23rd of October by Sir Phelim
O’Neill. Lord Caulfield, who was taken there, was
afterwards murdered.’ A deed being found in the
muniment room with the great seal upon it, Sir
Phelim forged a commission from Charles, attached
the seal, and went forward in the King’s name. In
a fortnight, with the exception of the few places men-
tioned as having escaped, every town, village, fort, or
private house belonging to a Protestant in the six
counties and in Down and Monaghan was in the
hands of the insurgents, while the roads were covered
with bands of miserable fugitives dragging themselves
either towards Dublin, or Derry, or Carrickfergus, pur-
sued and harassed as they went by bands of wretches,
who were hunting them like starved jackals. Mur-
der when the spirit of it has gone abroad becomes a
passion; and man grows more ferocious than a beast
of prey. Savage creatures of both sexes, yelping in
chorus, and brandishing their skenes ; boys practising
their young hands in stabbing and _ torturing the
English children—these were the scenes which were
witnessed daily through all parts of Ulster. The
fury extended even to the farm-stock, and sheep
and oxen were slaughtered, not for food, but in
the blindness of rage. The distinction between Scots
and English soon vanished. Jteligion was made the
new dividing line, and the one crime was to be
a Protestant. The escorts proved in most cases

1 ‘Not by Sir Phelim’s order, or
with his consent. Lord Caul-
field and his family were carried as
prisoners to Sir Phelim O’Neill’s
house, and Lord Caulfield, in Sir
Phelim’s absence, was shot dead by
his foster brother.’ ‘Sir Phelim

on his return,’ says a contemporary
writer, ‘caused the foster brother
and two or three villains more to
be hanged.’—Relation touching the
Present State of Ireland. London,
1641.

108

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book but gangs of assassins. In the wildest of remem-
—*_ bered winters the shivering fugitives were goaded

1641

along the highways stark naked and foodless. If
some, happier than the rest, found a few rags to
throw about them, they were torn instantly away.
If others, in natural modesty, twisted straw ropes
round their waists, the straw was set on fire. When
the tired little ones dropped behind, the escort lashed
the parents forward, and the children were left to die.
One witness, Adam Clover, of Slonory in Cavan,
swore that he saw a woman who had been thus de-
serted, set upon by three Irish women, who stripped
her naked in frost and snow. She fell in labour
under their hands, and she and her child died.’
Many were buried alive. Those who died first were
never buried, but were left to be devoured by dogs,
and rats, and swine. Some were driven into rivers
and drowned, some hanged, some mutilated, some
ripped with knives. The priests told the people
‘that the Protestants were worse than dogs, they
were devils and served the devil, and the killing of
them was a meritorious act.’ One wretch stabbed a
woman with a baby in her arms, and left the infant
in mockery on its dead mother’s breast, bidding it
‘Suck, English bastard.’ The insurgents swore in their
madness they would not leave English man, woman, or
child alive in Ireland. They flung babies into boil-
ing pots, or tossed them into the ditches to the pigs.
They put out grown men’s eyes, turned them adrift
to wander, and starved them to death. Two cowboys

1 Temple. James Maxwell. His wife, Grizzel

2 Robert Maxwell, Archdeacon of Maxwell, being in labour, they
Down, afterwards Bishop of Kil- stripped her naked, and drew her an

more, deposed that, by Sir Phelim’s arrow flight to the Blackwater and
order, they murdered his brother drowned her. They cut a collop

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

boasted of having murdered thirty women and chil-
dren, and a lad was heard swearing that his arm was
so tired with killing, that he could scarce lift his
hand above his head.

The towns could not hold the numbers which
flocked into them, and the plague came to add to
the general horrors. In Coleraine, in four months,
six thousand were said to have died of the pesti-
lence alone.’ The scenes in Dublin were still more
frightful. Sir John Temple was so affected by the
terrible spectacle passing under his own eyes, that
his language in describing it rises into a tone of
profound and tragic solemnity.

‘Multitudes of English daily came up in troops,
stripped and miserably despoiled; persons of good
rank and quality, covered over with old rags, and
even without any covering but a little twisted straw
to hide their nakedness. Wives came lamenting the
murder of their husbands, mothers of their children
barbarously destroyed before their faces. Some,
overwearied with long travel and so surbated,’? came
creeping on their knees; others, frozen with cold,
ready to die in the streets. The city was thus
filled with most lamentable spectacles of sorrow,
which in great numbers wandered up and down in
all parts, desolate, forsaken, having no place to lay

out of each buttock of Mr. Watson,
and afterwards roasted him alive.
They threw Mr. Starkey and his two
daughters into a turf pit. They cut
the flesh off living English cattle to
make them die in torment. Max-
well knew a boy that killed fifteen
men with a skene, they being dis-
armed, and most of them in the
stocks,...A woman killed seven

men and women ina morning, and
the Popish children used to kill the
Protestant children with lath swords
well sharpened, &c. &c.— Hibernia
Anglicana, Appendix, p. 10.

1 Reid. But in all these cases
numbers must be received with
caution.

2 The feet too bruised for walk-
ing.

110

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK their heads on, no clothing to cover them, no food to
_*_ fill their hungry bellies. The Popish inhabitants

1641

refused to minister the least comfort to them, so as
those sad creatures appeared like ghosts in every
street. Barns, stables, and outhouses were filled
with them, yet many lay in the open streets, and
there miserably perished. The churches were the
common receptacles of the meaner sort of them, who
stood there in most doleful posture, as objects of
charity, in so great multitude as there was scarce
passage with them. Those of better quality, who
could not pass themselves to be common beggars, crept
into private places; and some that had not private
friends wasted silently away and died without noise.
So bitter was the remembrance of their former
condition, and so insupportable the burden of their
present calamity to many of them as they refused to
be comforted. I have known some that lay almost
naked, and having clothes sent, laid them by, refusing
to put them on; others that would not stir to fetch
themselves food, though they knew where it stood
ready for them, but they continued to lie nastily in
their own rags, and even in their own dung; and so,
worn out with the misery of the journey and cruel
usage, having their spirits bent, their bodies wasted,
and their senses failing, lay here pitifully languishing;
and soon after they had recovered this town, very
many of them died, leaving their bodies as monu-
ments of the most inhuman cruelties used towards
them.’ *

The circumstantial minuteness of the picture is
itself a guarantee of its fidelity. Far the larger
portion of these miserable people died. The Dublin

1 Temple, pp. 93, 94,

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

churchyards could not hold the multitudes that were

LL

CHAP.
mit

crowding into them, and two large fields were en- ——-~

closed as cemeteries before the forlorn wretches could
find rest even for their bones.

Of the numbers that perished it is rash to offer so
much asa conjecture. In the midst of excitement
so terrible, extreme exaggeration was inevitable,
and the accounts were more than usually hard to
check, because the Catholics in their first triumph
Were as eager to make the most of their success
as the Protestants to magnify their calamity. In
the first horror it was said, that 200,000 persons
had perished in six months. For these enormous
figures the Catholic priests were responsible. They
returned the numbers of the killed in their several
parishes up to March 1642, as 154,000.1. To these
may have been conjecturally added the crowds who
died of exposure, want, or the plague, in Dublin
and the other towns. ‘Sir John Temple considered
that 150,000 perished in two months, or 300,000 in
two years. At the trial of Lord Maguyre, the figures
-were sworn at 152,000. Such guesses, for they could
have been little more, prove only that in the presence
of occurrences exceptionally horrible the balance of
reason was overturned. Clarendon, on cooler reflec-
tion, reduced the number to 40,000. Sir William
Petty, followed by Carte, to 37,000. Even these figures
will seem too large when it is remembered how ap-
palling is the impression created by the slaughter in

1 ¢They murdered, up tothe end March 16, 1643.’ Hibernia Angl-
of March last, of men, women, and cana, Appendix, p. 4. The same
children, 154,000, as is acknow- number is mentioned by the Bishop
ledged by the priests appointed to of Kilmore as accepted in Sir

collect the numbers.’—‘ The Lords Phelim’s camp.—Zdid. p. 10.
Justices and Council to the King,

1641

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

cold blood of innocent unresisting people, how little
rage and terror can be depended on for cool observa-
tion, and how inevitably the murdered were con-
founded afterwards with the enormous multitudes
which indisputably perished in the civil war which
followed. The evidence proves no more than that
atrocities had been committed on a scale too vast to
be exactly comprehended, while the judgment was
still further confounded by the fiendish malignity of

the details.’

The confused and furious struggle that ensued

would require a separate history.

1 A moderate and possible esti-
mate of the number of those who
were killed in the first two months
of the rebellion is contained in ‘4
True and Credible Relation of the
Massacre of the English Protestants
wn Ireland; by a gentleman who
was eyewitness of most of the pas-
sages which he describes; who was
forced, with his wife, to abandon
house, estate, and country, for fear
of the rebels, and arrived in London
January 15, 1642.’ Printed: Lon-
don, 1642,

This writer says :—

‘They have murdered and
starved to death of the English in
the Province of Ulster and other
provinces, of men, women, and
children, above 20,000. They have
stripped ladies and gentlewomen,
virgins and babes, old and young,
naked aseverthey were born, turning
them into the open fields, Many
hundreds have been found dead in
ditches with cold and want of food
and rayment. As for the Protest-
ant ministers, they hang them up,
then cut off their heads, afterwards
quarter them, and then dismember
them, stopping their mouths there-
with. Many of their wives they

* The purpose of
have ravished in their sight before
the multitude, stripping them
naked to the view of their wicked
companions, taunting and mocking
them with reproachful words, send-
ing them away in such shameless
manner, that most of them have
died for grief.

‘The priests and Jesuits com-
monly anoint the rebels with their
sacrament of the unction before
they go to murder and rob, assur-
ing them for their meritorous ser-
vice, if they chance to be killed,
they shall escape purgatory and go
to heaven immediately. . .. Five
hundred English at Belturbet were
stripped naked and turned out in the
bitter cold, without a single rag to
eover them. ... They report and
allege that religion is the cause of
this war; but that is false, for they
have had too much liberty and free-
dom of conscience in Ireland, and
that hath made them rebel.’

* In the spring of 1642 the King
himself spoke of going over, uneasy
perhaps at the terrible results of his
correspondence with Antrim and
Ormond. The Long Parliament de-
clined to trust him. Sir John Tem-
ple, on April 25, when the King’s

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

the present work demands no more than the briefest
sketch of the leading incidents. It is almost enough
to say, that the blood spilt in the winter of 1641-2
was not washed out till, according to the elaborate
computation of Sir William Petty,’ out of an entire
population of a million and a half, more than half a
million had, by sword, famine, and pestilence, been
miserably destroyed.

The conspiracy had spread over the island, and the
southern provinces soon followed suit with Ulster.
There was no second surprise, and scanty as they
were in number, the Protestants were not long in
making the insurgents feel that their game was not
yet won. Wicklow and Wexford broke out in
November. The expelled colonists in Dublin, burn-
ing for revenge, were drilled and armed; Sir Charles
Coote, of Castle Coote, a veteran from the siege of
Kingsale, led a few hundreds of them into the Wick-
low mountains, and made free use there of shot and
halter. But want of means pinioned the Lord Jus-

coming was still talked of, wrote
to some one, it is uncertain who :—

‘If his majesty hold his resolu-
tion to come over to this kingdom
to suppress the rebellion, and the
Parliament consent to it, I hope he
will come so well furnished with
men and money as we shall go on
gloriously to finish the work. I
must not impart to you my own
private thoughts at this distance ;
yet let me tell you that I cannot but
with much regret consider how
fatal this kingdom has been to all
the kings of England that have set
their foot within theisle. I wish that
and many other particulars of far
higher consequence may be seriously

VOL. I.

laid to heart before his majesty fix
upon this journey. ... If our
forces were come I am persuaded
we should have a sudden end of the
war. The destruction of the rebels
now certainly draws near. They
are of the devil, and, like him, rage
most furiously towards their latter
end. ‘They now exceed themselves
in the barbarous cruelty they exer-
cise upon the English. The Lord,
I hope, will be pleased to put an
end to them. —MSS. Ireland, Re-
cord Office.

Temple thought the rebellion was
near its end in April, 1642; it had
still ten years to continue.

1 Political Arithmetic of Ireland,

113

CHAP.
Li
eee

1641

114

BOOK
I.
Se

1642

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

tices to Dublin and the immediate neighbourhood.
The Lords of the. Pale made Coote’s severities an
excuse for pretending to believe that there was to be
a massacre of the Catholics. They too joined the
insurrection ; and the whole country was in flame
from Dunluce to Cape Clear.’

In England the effect was terrible. The bitterest
invectives of the Puritans against the scarlet woman
and her maintainers seemed justified by their new
St. Bartholomew. Shocked at the catastrophe which
he had assisted in forwarding, and to clear himself
of all suspicion of complicity, the King made over
to the Long Parliament the entire management of
Ireland. A few companies of soldiers were sent over
at once. To raise a more sufficient force, two million
acres and a half of the rebels’ lands were declared
forfeited, with Charles’s consent, and were offered at
easy rates to adventurers who were willing to advance
money on the security of these estates. The bonds
were taken up; an army was raised and sent to Bristol
under Lord Wharton, to be transported to Dublin.
Unhappily the war broke out in England before they
could sail. The troops were detained for home ser-
vice, and seven years passed before the Long Parlia-
ment was again in a position to pay effective attention
to Ireland.

1 ¢ This county, the least disloyal
in Ireland, is in general revolt; the
English most miserable, fallen from
plenty on a sudden to so much
poverty that they own nothing.
Every Irishman now declares him-
self a rebel, and only Kingsale,
Cork, and Youghal, kept in awe by
the castles, stand out for the King.
There was a meeting on Tuesday

last of the chief men of these parts,
most of which pretended to be good
subjects. They have all taken oaths
to extirpate the English. There is
very little quarter given of either
side, and nothing to be expected but
destruction.’—‘ Sir H. Stradling to
Sir John Pennington, from King-
sale, March 6’ MSS. Record
Office.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

Lord Ormond meanwhile commanded there for
the King; and Ormond’s own endeavour was not
to punish the massacre, but to veil it, make peace
with the Irish, and to renew the scheme which Sir
Phelim’s haste had marred.

Infinite and intricate negociations followed. The
English Parliament being occupied with fighting the
King, the Scots sent a force (England providing’ the
money ) under General Monro, which gradually drove
the rebels out of Ulster. Monro, declining to take
orders from Ormond, contented himself with holding
the ground which he had gained. The Catholics,
meanwhile, established a council at Kilkenny, and
undertook in form the government of Ireland, and,
with the Pope’s blessing on their gallant efforts, ‘ to
extirpate and root out from among them the workers
of iniquity.”

To this Kilkenny Council Ormond’s efforts were
now addressed. Could Ormond but come to an under-
standing with them, out of their united forces he might
lead an army to England, which might dictate terms
to the Parliament. Religion was of course the diffi-
culty. The Irish Council demanded the restoration
of the Catholic Church to its pre-reformation splen-
dour and privileges. The King, though ready to
promise unlimited toleration, could go no further,
without alienating hopelessly such friends as remained
to him in England.

The Irish Catholic Peers understood and allowed
for the difficulty, and were ready to meet Ormond
half way. The Clergy, standing on Providence and
Divine right, would abate no tittle of their pretensions ;

+ Hibernia Anglicana, Appendix, p. 15.
I 2

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and the Pope, to sustain their resolution, sent them
a Legate, John Baptiste Rinuccini, Prince Archbishop
of Firmo, with arms, powder, Spanish dollars, and a
supply of Italian priests. The Legate and his chap-
lains ran a near chance of swinging at an English
yard arm. Captain Plunket, in a ship belonging to
the Parliament, chased him up the Kenmare river,
and would have caught him but for the breaking out
of an accidental fire. He landed safe, and was re-
ceived with becoming honour at Kilkenny. But the
differences ‘remained which had shown themselves at

the meeting at the Westmeath abbey. The Lords
and Gentlemen who, though Catholic, were of English
blood or breeding, were for peace with the King,

and the Legate would have no peace till the Church
had her own again, threatening, if the Council
were obstinate, to take the bishops to Italy with ©
him and leave the kingdom unshepherded. The
King’s double dealing came to the Legate’s help.
More eager than-ever, as the war went against him,
for a peace which would bring him the swords
of the Irish Catholics, he had empowered Ormond
to treat on conditions which he could acknowledge to
the world; and at the same time he had sent the Earl
of Glamorgan with other conditions, pledging him-
self, if only the secret were kept till the war was
over, to grant all that the clergy demanded. He
had gone so far as himself to write to the Legate,
promising to confirm whatever Glamorgan and he
might agree on, and thus fortified the Archbishop of

course insisted on the most complete concessions.

The secret was betrayed. The Glamorgan articles
were published, and Charles was forced to deny their
authenticity. The question became thus hopelessly

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

entangled. ‘Two Catholic parties were formed, follow-
ing the lines of division which had existed from the
first. The native Irish went with the Legate and the
priests, and had their own army, under Owen Roe
O’ Neill, who came over as he promised.. The Council
of Kilkenny had another army, composed of the Pale
Lords and their retainers, still at issue with the Legate,
but staggering under threats of excommunication.
Ormond maintained himself with difficulty in Dublin,
supported by the Church of England loyalists. Ulster
was garrisoned by Monro and the Scots. To these
four parties and their various forces, whom the mise-
rable country was. compelled to support, a fifth was
now to be added.

The war in England being ended by the surren-
der of the King, Ormond found his own position
no longer tenable. ‘The Pale Lords were too weak
for the Legate and the Irish, and concluding honour-
ably that it was better that Ireland should be
governed by the Parliament than fall into the hands
of the faction on which lay the guilt of the murders
of 1641, Ormond surrendered Dublin to the Parlia-
ment, and left the kingdom. Colonel Michael Jones,
one of the most distinguished officers in the Parlia-
ment’s service, came over with strong reinforcements
in the spring of 1647, reorganized the remnants of
troops which Ormond left behind him, and, after
trying his strength with General Preston and the
Kilkenny army in two slight skirmishes, caught
Preston at advantage at Dungan Hill, hunted his
whole army into a bog, and cut it to pieces. The
defeat cleared the confusion. The Kilkenny Council
broke finally with the native Irish. The Legate with-
drew to Owen Roe, preaching damnation to the traitors

]

18

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

who were deserting the cause of Christ ; and soon.

Ya after he shook the dust from his feet and returned

go*

1649

to Italy. Ormond came back at the invitation of
the Council; leaving Owen Roe to his own devices,
the Catholic Lords made a final peace with the King,
and with Ormond as his representative, and prepared
to act against the common enemy.

Events in England appeared to favour their pro-
spects. The ascendancy of Cromwell and the army
created the same agitation among the Ulster Presby-
terians as it had caused in England and Scotland.
They failed to see that Cromwell,’and Cromwell only,
could give effect to what was true in Presbyterianism ;

—that they were fighting for the husk, while the

substance was with the Independents and the Lord
General; and, on the news of the King’s execution,
half Monro’s soldiers declared openly for Charles the
Second. Prince Rupert landed at Kingsale, and the
broken remains of the Cavaliers came over in thou-

sands to assist In saving Ireland. The peace had come

too late to save Charles; but it seemed for a moment

as if a coalition of enemies might revenge his death,

and that Catholic, Royalist, and Presbyterian, united
in common loyalty to the name of a king, would, in
Ireland at least, carry all before it. Ormond, with
Lord Taafe and the Earl of Castlehaven,’ led eighteen
thousand men into the Pale, seized. Drogheda and
Dundalk, and proceeded to besiege Jones in Dublin.
Ormond was in haste, for he knew that he had no time.

~Cromwell, when his work in England was over, had

accepted the Irish command, and was preparing to
put a close at last on these scenes of disgrace and
shame.

1 1649,

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

Owen Roe and his Irish still held aloof. With the
Kilkenny Lords his quarrel was irreconcilable ; and,
forming a clearer estimate than others of Cromwell’s
strength, he endeavoured to make a separate peace for
himself. It was a crisis in which English statesmen
cared more for principle than policy. At other times,
before and since, such a chance of dividing Irish in-
terests would have been snatched at. But the stern
answer came back from the Parliament, ‘that the
innocent blood which had been shed in Ireland was
too fresh in their memory, and that House did detest
and abhor the thought of closing with any party of
Popish rebels.’ To an ear which could still hear,
these words were as the doom of the judgement
day. Owen Roe perhaps felt it so, for he soon after
died, and was spared the sight of the vengeance now
coming for the atrocities of his kinsman, which none
had condemned more bitterly than he. Ormond re-
ceived before Dublin the same lesson in another form,
though he was less quick in perceiving its meaning.
A few regiments of the approaching English army
having arrived before the rest, Colonel Jones, thus
strengthened, sallied out on Ormond’s camp at Rath-
mines,! defeated him, took his artillery with two thou-
sand prisoners, and utterly routed him. The siege
was raised in haste. A fortnight later Cromwell
had landed. |

1 August 2, 1649.

” Bi»

120

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

Justice to Ireland—justice in all times and places—
means protection and encouragement to the indus-
trious, the honest, and the worthy ; repression and
punishment of the idle and the mutinous, who prefer
to live at their own wills on the spoil of other men’s
labours.

The ‘earth-tillers’ of Ireland had, from imme-
morial time, been the drudges and the victims of those
of their own race who, thinking it scorn to work, had
been supported by others’ toil—who, calling them-
selves rulers, were in no point morally superior to
their own wolves, and had nevertheless usurped to’
themselves the name of the Irish nation, claimed
before the world to be the representatives of their
countrymen, and, while clamouring over their wrongs,
had meant only at bottom that they were deprived of
their own power to oppress.

It is in human nature, and beyond others in the
Trish form of human nature, that men should obey
and honour their born superiors, however worth-
less those superiors may be. Yet there is in the
Irishman’s nature also a special appreciation of just
dealing; and though the Celtic peasant is said to
prefer the tyranny of his own chiefs to the orderly
rule of the stranger, the experiment which of these
two feelings is the stronger has as yet scarcely
had fair trial. Justice, in the true sense, has been
the last expedient to which England has had re-
course in her efforts to harmonize her relations

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

121

with her wayward dependency. She has taken those cuHapP.
who have made the loudest noise at their own esti- ~~~

mation. She has regarded the patriot orator, the
rebel, and the assassin as the representatives of Ire-
land. She has thought alternately, and with equal
unsuccess, how she can coerce or conciliate those
who give her trouble. How to encourage industry
and honest labour, how to prevent oppression and
save the working peasant from being pillaged by vio-
lence or unjust law, she has rarely troubled herself
to consider.

For the first and last time a government was about
to be established in Ireland which, for the ten years
that it endured, was to administer the country in the
sole interests of honest labour—where the toiler was to
reap the fruit of his toil, the idle and the vicious to
reap the fruit of their devices. ‘The perverseness of
tradition has made these years a byeword of tyranny.
They form the blackest page in Irish annals. The
victims of the Cromwellian settlement have had the
making of the history, and English carelessness and
prejudice have given them possession of the field. But
the last word is not yet spoken, and the Irish poor
will learn one day who have been their true friends
—they have not been troubled with very many.

Before government could begin, however, Ireland
had first to be conquered; and had Irish patriotism
been more than a name, the conquest would have
been impossible. The Confederate Catholics had repre-
sented themselves in one of their first programmes
as able, if united, to bring 200,000 men into the field.
Their factions were at last over. Owen Roe’s fol-
lowers, seeing no escape open to them, made up

their quarrel with the Kilkenny lords. All the force

1649

122

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

which Catholic and Anglo-Catholic Ireland could

—*— provide was at Ormond’s disposition ; and the Rath-

1649

mines defeat had drawn closer the discordant parties.
The Ulster Scots had been driven into frenzy by the
execution of Charles the First. The English soldiers
in Ormond’s army were some of the very best and
most determined that the Royalist party could furnish.
The Parliament held not an inch of land beyond
Dublin and Londonderry walls, and an invading
force would have to carry its supplies with it through
every mile of its advance. With these prospects,
Oliver Cromwell landed on Dublin quay on 15th Au-
gust, 1649. The force which he brought with him
was small—nine thousand infantry and four thousand
horse. They were not soldiers merely: they had
entered the service on the understanding, that their
wages were to be Irish lands. They were to take
the place of those among the native proprietors
who by rebellion had forfeited their holdings. A
vast military Protestant settlement, extended over
the whole fertile parts of the island, was to termi-
nate the Irish difficulty at once and for ever. After
stepping on shore, the Lord General made a speech to
the remnant of the ruined colonists. As God, he said,
had brought him thither in safety, he doubted not
by Divine Providence to restore them to their just
liberties and properties. To all who were zealous
for the establishing of truth and peace, to all who
would assist in restoring the bleeding Ireland to
its former tranquillity, he promised favour and
protection from the Parliament. General Jones’s
troops had fallen already into Irish habits. Wages,
as usual, had been irregularly paid, and the soldiers,
according to immemorial custom, had paid them-

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

selves by taking what they wanted. Cromwell’s

123

CHAP.

first act was to publish, as a standing army order, as

that no violence should be done to any persons not
in arms with the enemy ; that soldiers taking goods
without payment should be punished according to
the articles of war; and that officers who allowed
the rule to be disobeyed should forfeit their com-
missions.’

A fortnight sufficed for preparation. Ormond’s
army lay in strong positions in and about Trim.
Several of the best regiments, almost wholly English,
had been thrown into Drogheda under Sir Arthur
Ashton, late governor of Reading. The safe keeping
of an open port was of great consequence. The best
skill in the Royalist service had been employed
to make the defences impregnable; and Sir Arthur
assured Ormond that he need be under no un-
easiness. Though Drogheda would naturally be
Cromwell’s first object, Ashton undertook to hold it
against any force which could be brought against
him till the winter rains compelled the raising of
the siege; and he was a man who might be relied
on to make good his words. On 8rd September
Cromwell appeared under the walls. He waited
a week, expecting that Ormond would attempt a
diversion, and give him an opportunity of forcing
an action in the field. Ormond, trusting to Ashton’s
promise, did not move. The English guns were
placed in position. On Monday, 9th September,
they opened fire, and a summons was sent in to
the governor to deliver over the town to the Parlia-
ment. No answer was returned; the guns having

1 Letters and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell, Carlyle, vol. ii. p. 161.

1649

Sept. 3.

Sept. 9.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

broken a way, on Tuesday, at five in the afternoon,
the Parliament troops advanced to the assault. The
garrison fought with extreme courage. ‘Twice after
forcing their way into the town the storming parties
were beaten back through the breach. The third
time, as the light was waning, Cromwell led them up
in person, forced Ashton upon his inner lines, stormed
those lines in turn, and before night fell was master of
Drogheda. The summons to surrender having been
refused, the order was to put every man found in
arms to the sword. It was almost literally obeyed.
A few score held out till the morning in two detached
towers, and then surrendered at discretion. Every
tenth man was shot; the remainder were sent to the

penal settlement at Barbadoes.*

1 The Irish histories say that
there was an indiscriminate mas-
sacre of men, women, and children.
Cromwell’s own account mentions
only men in arms and priests who,
as having been the instigators of the
worst crimes, were held less inno-
cent than those who had committed
them. It is possible that, in such a
scene, women and children may have
been accidentally killed ; but there

- is no evidence of it from an eyewit-

ness, and only general rumours and
reports at second hand. Of authen-
tic evidence, in addition to Crom-
wells own letters, two documents,
one of them from a Royalist, dis-
prove conclusively the story of a
general massacre.

A printed official list of officers
and soldiers slain at the storming of
Drogheda, supplied to the Parlia-
ment, brings the number to nearly
3,000, besides many inhabitants,

The citizens in these instances
fought by the side of the troops,
and shared their fate.

A letter from an eyewitness to
the Marquis of Newcastle says :—
‘Ashton doubted not of finding
Cromwell play a while, as certainly
he had done had not Colonel Wales’
regiment, after the enemy had been
twice repulsed, on the unfortunate
loss of their colonel in the third
assault, beensodismayed as to listen
before they had need to the enemy
offering them quarter, and admitted
them on those terms, thereby be-
traying themselves and their fellow-
countrymen to the slaughter; for
Cromwell, heing master of the
town, and told by Jones that he
had now in his hands the flower of
the Irish army, gave orders to have
all that werein arms put to the sword,
There were butchered near 3,000
soldiers, and those reputed the best
the kingdom afforded, in whose fate
there is sadly observable how great
a number of them were guilty of the
breach of the unlucky agreement
made two years before, between
Lord Clanrickarde and the Leinster

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

‘T am persuaded,’ wrote Cromwell, ‘ that this is a

125

CHAP.

righteous judgement of God upon these barbarous a

wretches, who have imbrued their hands in so much
innocent blood, and that it will tend to prevent the
effusion of blood for the future, which are the satis-
factory grounds to such actions, which otherwise
could not but work remorse and regret.’!

History, ever eloquent in favour of the losing cause
—history, which has permitted the massacre of 1641
to be forgotten, or palliated, or denied—has held up
the storming of Drogheda to eternal execration. The
English, ever ready, when confronted with similar
problems in India or elsewhere, to use the same
remedy on lighter provocation, yet make a compro-
mise with their consciences, and, when the severity is
over, and the fruits of it in peace and order are
gathered and enjoyed, agree usually or always to ex-
claim against the needless cruelty. The Irish insur-
rection had cost nearly six hundred thousand lives.
Those who had suffered most had been those for whom
pity was most deserved—the weak, the sick, and the
helpless. It was necessary to end such horrible
scenes, and to end them swiftly; for every hour’s
delay only prolonged the misery. The Drogheda
garrison suffered no more than the letter of the laws

army, at Sir Nicholas Whyte’s
castle of Leixleap, several of those
that survived having perished since,
and few or none escaped some re-
markable affliction. The massacre
of Drogheda lopped off a principal
limb of my lord’s army.

For the treachery at Leixleap,
see Borlase’s History of the Irish
Rebellion, p. 171.

Beling, mentioning the storming

of Drogheda, says that the whole
number of soldiers and citizens slain
amounted to about 4,000. The
soldiers and officers killed were
about 38,000; so that, if Beling’s
account is accurate, and it will cer-
tainly not be understated, the so-
called wholesale massacre is re-
duced within narrow dimensions.

1 Letters and Speeches of Oliver
Cromwell, vol. ii. p. 177.

1649

126

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK of war permitted; and the wisdom of making a severe
i e e ey e .
—— example was signally justified m its consequences.

1649

Happier far would it have been for Ireland if, forty
years later, there had been a second Cromwell before
Limerick.

Ormond’s army fell back as if stunned. Dundalk
and Trim, taught by frightful experience, surrendered
at the first summons. Wexford was the most im-
portant position held by the Irish on the eastern
coast after Drogheda. Wexford pirates harassed the
communication with England. The Catholic inhabit-
ants had lately distinguished themselves by special
acts of cruelty and ferocity. They had filled a hulk
with Protestant prisoners, and had sunk it in the
harbour there. They had imprisoned others in a
Catholic chapel and starved them to death.t

To Wexford Cromwell next addressed himself. On
the way he had occasion to show that his orders
against pillage were meant in earnest. ‘T'wo soldiers
stole a fowl from a peasant’s cabin, and were at once
hanged. Arrived before the gates he sent a summons
as before, with a promise that if the place was given
up at once the lives of everyone should be spared.
Not silent, like Ashton, but scarcely less imprudent,
the governor demanded security for lands and goods,
the maintenance in authority of the Catholic bishop,
protection for the religious houses, and generally
all privileges which Catholics could desire. Crom-
well’s stern reply was an order to surrender in an
hour. The hour passed; the gates were not opened,
The town was stormed, and the garrison once more
was put to the sword.’

1 Letters and Speeches, vol. ii. * One or more of the priests was
p. 197. killed in the chapel in which the

+

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

‘T could wish, for their own good,’ said Cromwell,
‘they had been more moderate in the terms which
they demanded.’

These two terrible blows virtually ended the war.
Man for man, in a good cause, and under discipline
and command, the Irish were a match for any soldiers
in the world. Powerless only at home, disabled by
the consciousness of wrong-doing, like law-breakers
taken by the policeman, they were first bewildered,
then, as they collected their senses, they recognized
that they had to do with a person whom they neither
dared encounter in the field, nor could deceive or
trifle with in the game of words. Rebellion was
played out, and they had to choose between submis-
sion and death. General Taafe! attempted, before
surrendering Ross, to stipulate for liberty of con-
science. ‘I meddle with no man’s conscience,’ Crom-
well answered ; ‘ but if by liberty of conscience you
mean liberty to exercise the mass, I judge it best to
use plain dealing, and let you know that, where the
Parliament of England has power, that will not be
allowed.’* General Taafe had to accept the sentence,
and go his way. ‘The mass, as a superstitious form
of religious ritual, it might be lawful, and even right
to tolerate. The mass, as the symbol of a Church
whose supreme pontiff’ had applauded the insurrec-
tion of 1641, as his predecessor had applauded the
massacre of St. Bartholomew, it was not legitimate
only, but necessary, to interdict, till the adherents of
it retired from a position which was intolerable in
civilized society.

Protestants had been murdered— killed at Drogheda.

Letters and Speeches, vol. ii. p. 197. 2 Letters and Speeches, vol. ii.
1 Lucas, Lord Taafe’s second son. _ p. 203.

His brother, a priest, had been 8 Hibernia Anglicana, App. p. 15.

128

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The English of Munster, who had hitherto held with

—.— Ormond, seeing now how events were turning, with

1650

one consent went over to the conqueror. Sir Charles
Coote, in December, reduced the northern Presby-
terians. The Catholic bishops, in assumed horror of
rebellion, continued to shriek against ‘ the malignant
murder of King Charles.’ Emer MacMahon, Bishop
of Clogher, joint conspirator with Sir Phelim O'Neill,
made head in Coleraine. Coote set upon him, de-
feated and took him prisoner, and the next day hung
him, and set his head on the gates of Londonderry.
Cromwell himself, after breaking the neck of the coali-
tion, went back to England; but others were easily
able to finish the meal which Cromwell had carved.
Ormond, now desperate, a second time left Ireland.
Prince Rupert had gone long before. Clanrickarde
still struggled feebly ; but those who were loudest
for fighting to the last were maneuvring secretly to
make private terms for themselves. ‘ The Irish,’ said
Castlehaven, ‘ are so false that nobody is to be trusted ;
either the husband or the wife are treating with the
enemy, and in their camp.’ The Duke of Lorraine
was appealed to passionately for help in the name of
the young King. The Duke answered coolly, ‘ that
his majesty had nothing in Ireland to treat for.’ In
the spring of 1652, Galway, the last stronghold which
the Irish held, capitulated to Coote. Ross Castle, on
Killarney, continued defiant, and was thought impreg-
nable; but Ludlow carried a vessel over the moun-
tains in pieces, launched and armed it, and Ross gave
in. Lord Muskerry and Lord Westmeath, who were
in the mountains, laid down their arms, and all was
over.

The remnant of the Ulster murderers who had

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641, 129

survived the wars, remained to be brought to late cmap.
justice. A High Court of Justice, under General —*:_
Fleetwood, was held at Kilkenny, in the hall of 1652
the assembly, to try them. Sir Phelim O'Neill and

two hundred others were convicted and executed.

All the rest had been consumed in a war, the waste

of life in which, compared with the population of the
country exposed to its ravages, stands unparalleled

in the annals of mankind.

VOL. I. K

130

BOOK
if
eee ee”

1652-60

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

IRELAND was now a blank sheet of paper, on which
the English Commonwealth might write what charac-
ters they pleased. ‘Owing to the double character
which the rebellion had assumed, there was scarcely

‘a Catholic landowner who had not, in one form or

other, exposed his property to confiscation. The

royalist English families who had gone with Ormond

were in no better condition; and it was neither

reasonable nor tolerable that the cost of restoring

peace should be thrown on the taxpayers of England.
The common sense of all nations declares, that those
who risk the game of insurrection shall pay the penalty °

of failure, and the ‘enormous misery created by civil

war renders the punishment of it imperative on the

conquerors. ‘The generosity of motive, or the mis-

taken sense of duty, which may prompt men to take
‘arms against their government, exempts them from
the personal detestation which is the due of baser
criminals ; but the character of those misleading in-
fluences makes severity more necessary, as a counter-
weight to imaginative seductions. No government
deserves to exist which permits those who have defied
its authority to suffer no worse consequences than
disappointment, and to remain with unimpaired means
to renew the struggle at another opportunity.

The character of landed tenures—it cannot be too
often repeated—renders forfeiture the appropriate
retribution. Private ownership in land is permitted
because Government cannot be omnipresent, and per-

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

sonal interest is found, on the whole, an adequate
security that land so held shall be administered to the
general advantage. But seeing that men are born
into the world without their own wills, and, being in
the world, they must live upon the earth’s surface, or
they cannot live at all, no individual, or set of indi-
viduals, can hold over land that personal and irre-
sponsible right which is allowed them in things of
less universal necessity. They may obtain estates by
purchase. They may receive them as rewards of
service, or inherit them from their ancestors. But
the possession, however acquired, carries with it
honourable and inseparable consequences in the re-
spect, the deference, or even positive obedience which
the possessor receives from the dependants by whose
hands those estates are cultivated, and with the pri-
vilege is involved the responsibility. To some extent
at present—to a far greater extent two centuries ago
—the owner of the soil was the master of the fortunes
and the guide of the allegiance of his tenants. He
was an officer of the commonwealth—the natural
governor of tens, hundreds, or thousands of human
beings committed to his charge. If he was false to his
trust, the sovereign power resumed its rights, which
it had never parted with ; and either sold or gave his
interest, and his authority along with it, to others who
would better discharge the duties expected of them.
Times are changing, and such theories may be pass-
ing out of date. At best they could never be acted
upon more than approximately. In violent convul-
sions however, when existing organizations are torn
in pieces, principles form the only guide. The Irish
proprietors had become intolerable. ‘They were dis-
missed, and their room was supplied by better men.
K 2

1381

CHAP.
II.

1652-60

132

BOOK
if

1652-60

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

It will be remembered that, in 1642, the English
Parliament, in consequence of the dimensions which
the rebellion had then assumed, confiscated between
two and three million acres of Irish soil. Debenture
bonds were issued payable in land when the country
should be reconquered. Bonds fora million acres had
been taken up, and money had been raised on them,
for the troops sent to Ireland previous to Cromwell’s
arrival. Similar debentures were issued afterwards
for Cromwell's own army, not thrown upon the
market like the first, but given to the soldiers in lieu
of their pay, and the time was come when all these en-
oagements were to be redeemed. ‘The intention was,
that the men who conquered Ireland should remain
to hold it. The country was to be occupied, in old
Roman fashion, by military colonies.

The scheme, though admirable in conception, could
only be executed eipereleg Many of the soldiers,
in want of money, had sold their bonds. Keen-eyed
capitalists, like Dr. Petty, hung about the army, and
the sale of debentures became a trade. The officers
bought from the men, the men bought from one
another. The thrifty and prudent kept their claims,
the improvident and careless were weeded out. Vast
numbers, however, remained. Adventurers came from
England to take the place of those who were unwilling
to stay. ‘There was a fair prospect that Munster and
Leinster might be settled and occupied as completely
as the six counties had been. The whole country was
carefully surveyed; and a court was established to
examine the claims, and assign every bondholder his
share.

The principles of the Cromwellian settlement were
generally these. ‘The surviving population was esti-

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

mated by Dr. Petty at about 850,000, of whom
150,000 were English and Scots. Experience had
shown too repeatédly that when the English and Irish
were intermixed, the distinctive English character in
a few generations was lost. ‘To prevent a recurrence
of a transformation so subtle and so dangerous,
Cromwell determined to make Connaught into a
second Wales. The Western province had a natural
boundary in the Shannon. Beyond this deep and
effectual barrier, the families of the chiefs, the lead-
ing members of the Irish race—the middle and upper
classes, as we should call them, from whose ranks
the worst elements of disorder arose—might receive an
equivalent for the lands of which they were deprived.
There living among themselves they might die out
or multiply as their lot might be. A line of physical
demarcation would then be drawn between the Teu-
tonic and Celtic population. Ulster, Munster, and
Leinster would be the exclusive possession of Protes-
tant English and Protestant Scots, reinforced, it
might be, by Calvinist fugitives from the Continent.
The Irish peasantry might be trusted to remain
under their new masters, if the chiefs of their own
blood were removed; and with peace, order, and
good government, and protected from spoliation, they
might be expected to conform, at no distant time, to
the habits, language, and religion of their conquerors.

The ‘ Swordsmen,’ those who had been out in the
war, were offered the alternative of Connaught or
exile. Some chose the first, the larger number chose
the second, and went, with the most devoted of their
followers, into the French, Spanish, and Austrian
services. The Catholic priests were more sharply
dealt with. They were declared, in a sweeping

133

CHAP.
II.

Sa

1652-60

134

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK judgement, guilty of high treason, and ordered to

a depart.

1652-60

A thousand of them hastened away of
themselves ; but as many or more remained, and
it was a question what to do with them. At first,
such of them as did not remove of their own accord
were put on board vessels bound for Spain. This
proving no deterrent, they were sent to the Barbadoes
settlement. Finally, when the numbers arrested were
too great to be so provided for, they were removed
to two islands in the Atlantic, the Isle of Arran and
Inis Bofin, where cabins were built for them, and
they were allowed sixpence a day for their mainten-
ance.’

On these principles Ireland was laid out and re-
settled by Cromwell’s officers. In the apportionment
of the claims the soldiers were asked whether their
lands should be selected by authority for them, or
divided by lot. They answered remarkably, ‘ that
they would rather take a lot upon a barren mountain
as from the Lord, than a portion in the most fruitful
valley upon their own choice.’ Both methods were
adopted in the final decision. The regiments were
kept together in bodies; the lot determined the
situation of individuals. ‘They were settled down
regiment by regiment, troop by troop, company
by company, almost on the lands they had con-
quered.’* ‘The peasants remained under them in their

1 I cannot pass over this part
of my narrative without making
my acknowledgments to Mr. Pren-
dergast, to whose personal courtesy
I am deeply indebted, and to whose
impartiality and candour in his
volume on the Cromwellian settle-
ment I can offer no higher praise
than by saying, that the perusal of it

has left on my mind an impression
precisely opposite to that of Mr.
Prendergast himself. He writes as
an Irish patriot—I as an English-
man; but the difference between us
is, not on the facts, but on the
opinion, to be formed about them,
2 Prendergast.

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

natural homes, as their under-tenants, or farm ser-
vants. They built and planted, they drained and
ploughed. They went to work with heart and will
in the homes which they had earned ; and, by the

natural enchantment which gives to order and in-

dustry its immediate and admirable reward, the face

of Ireland began, once more, to wear a look of quiet
and prosperity.

The disorderly elements could not, at once and.
altogether, be removed. In inaccessible hiding-places
—in the bogs and mountains, and still enormous
forests—hbands of outlaws who had escaped Connaught

lurked, under the name of Tories, and continued a war

of plunder and assassination.’ Their extirpation was a
tedious process. The leaders were identified, and out-
lawed by name, and, when they refused to give them-
selves up, a price was set upon their heads, which their
own comrades were willing to earn. ‘ The Irish bring
them in,’ said Major Morgan.. ‘ Brothers and cousins
cut one another’s throats.’ It was a hateful method,
yet, under the circumstances, an inevitable one. The
colonists found themselves shot at in the woods and
fields, and their farmsteads burnt over their heads.

1 ¢Accustomed,’ says Mr. Pren-
dergast, ‘to their own submissive
rural classes, who represented the
defeated and subdued Saxons, the
English expected that the Irish.
would submit. They little knew
the hearts, full of the noblest fire,
that beat under the poorest rags in.
Ireland.’

‘Father Plunket,’ Mr. Prender-
gast continues, ‘a friar of English
race,’ was employed to persuade the
_ people into quiet. ‘He reported
they would rather pull God out of
his throne, or throw themselves

headlong into: the sea, than become
loyal to: the crown of England.’
Such a state of feeling implies,
no doubt, extraordinary ill-success
on. the part of the English in their
task of governing Ireland. But
anarchical insubordination is neither
a noble quality in itself, nor is it
ever successful in obtaining its ends.
Hearts really ‘full of the noblest
fire,’ when they cannot resist
honourably, understand how to
yield manfully. The road to free-
dom has never been found to lie
through murder and incendiarism.

135

CHAP.
II.
—_-—_—"

1652-60

136
BOOK
1,

1652-60

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

They used the readiest means of ridding themselves
of enemies whom they regarded as no better than wild
animals—wild animals, or even worse. Yet even these
poor wretches scarcely deserve the sarcasm of their
modern champion. ‘No wonder they betrayed each
other,’ says Mr. Prendergast, ‘when there was no
longer any public cause to maintain.’

Such was the Cromwellian settlement of Ireland—
unrelentingly severe on the authors of the chronic
misery under which the island had so long lain para-
lysed, infinitely favourable to her future prospects
if the wound, at last cauterised, was never allowed to
reopen. ‘he owners of the soil had forfeited their
rights, and were deprived of them. The religion out
of which the worst of their crimes had originated was
proscribed. These two things accomplished, Ireland
was identified with England, and made a full parti-
cipator in every advantage which England possessed.
The separate Parlament—fruitful mother of so much
mischief—was swept away. ‘he Irish representatives
came to Westminster, and the two countries were made
one under Cromwell’s administration. For the first
and last time, the sole object of the English Govern-
ment was to further, to the utmost possible degree, the
advancement and prosperity of Irish industry. Even
the expatriation to Connaught was conceived and
carried out in no ill-will to those who were removed.
“No one,’ says Clarendon, ‘was exported who had
not forfeited his lite by rebellion; and it was the only
way to save them from utter destruction: for such was
their humour, that no English man or woman could
stray a mile from their homes, but they were found
murdered or stripped by the Irish, who lay in wait for
them; so that the soldiers, if they had been allowed to

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

remain in the country, would have risen upon them

137

CHAP.
LE

and totally destroyed them.’' There were plenty of ——-~—

persons, with Scripture arguments to back them, who
advocated harsher work. ‘ The object,’ said a Peti-
tion of Officers, ‘is to prevent those of natural prin-
ciples? from being one with the Irish as well in
affinity as idolatry, as many thousands did who came
over in Queen Elizabeth’s time, many of whom have
had a hand in the murders and massacre. The
order to the Israelites was to root out the heathen,
lest they should cause them to forsake the Lord their
God.’

The argument was apposite, and, as the event
proved, not ill-grounded. But had Cromwell’s mode
of government been persisted in—had there been no
relapse into the old combination of iniquity and
feebleness—events would have justified his resolution.
He meant to rule Ireland for Ireland’s good, and all
testimony agrees that Ireland never prospered as she
prospered in the years of the Protectorate. He
yielded nothing which he held essential. He allowed
no penal statutes to be hung out, like scarecrows,
to be a jest and mockery. The execution of the
soldiers who stole the fowl was the symbol of the
entire administration. He allowed no wrong-doing—
no tyrannous oppression of the poor. Ireland’s in-
terests were not sacrificed to England’s commercial
jealousies. A prosperous woollen manufacture had
been set on foot by James the First’s colonists. The
British weaving interest took alarm, and Strafford, to
please England and weaken Ireland, destroyed the
trade.’ Cromwell, recognizing no difference between

1 Life of Clarendon, vol. ii. p. 42. 8 <The Irish have wool in great
* I.e, men without saving grace. quantities, and if they should manv-

1652-60

138

BOOK
iy

yx"

1652-60

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the two countries, removed Strafford’s obstructions,
encouraged manufactures of every description, and
gave entire liberty of trade.t The vice of Ireland
was idleness ; therefore, by all means, he stimulated
industry. He abolished licence, which the Irish mis-
called liberty. He gave them, instead, the true
liberty of law and wise direction ; and he refused to
sacrifice to English selfishness any single real benefit
which it was in his power to confer.

Unguentem pungit, pungentem Hibernicus ungit. So
said a Hibernian proverb. The worst means of
governing the Irish is to give them their own way.
In concession they see only fear, and those that fear
them they hate and despise. Coercion succeeds
better: they respect a master hand, though it be a.
hard and cruel one. But let authority be just as well
as strong, give an Irishman a just master, and he-
will follow him to the world’s end. Cromwell alone,
of all Irish governors, understood this central prin-
ciple of Irish management. He was gone before
his administration could bear fruit in the feeling
of the people, and history remembers only in him
the avenger of the massacre. Yet, three years only
after the settlement, General Fleetwood could write
that the country was perfectly quiet; English people,
if they would come over and buy land, would find

facture it themselves the English
would not only lose the profit they
made by indraping the Irish wool,
and his majesty suffer in his cus-
toms, but it was feared the Irish
would at last beat them out
of the trade itself by underselling
them. He considered further that,
in reason of state, so long as the
Trish did not indrape their own

wool, they must of necessity fetch
their clothing from England, and
consequently in a sort depend
on it for their livelihood, and be
disabled to cast off that dependence
without nakedness to themselves
and their children.’—Carte’s Ov-
mond.

* Arthur Young on Ireland, vol.
WaDeli cy

THE INSURRECTION OF 1641.

139

Ireland little different from home ; considering what cuap.

EE

the devastation had been, the ‘plenty’ that had ——-~~—

sprung up was ‘ wonderful.’!
sorts, Munster Royalists as well as the new settlers,
submitted heartily and loyally. The Presbyterians
remained unforgiving,” but they were left unmolested,
by-and-by to reap as they had sown. The well-dis-
posed among the Irish were reconciled sooner than
might have been expected to a rule which gave them
the reality of protection. Not a few of the old
sort, who had escaped the weeding, were taking
advantage of openings that offered themselves, and
renting lands from settlers who wished to return to
England.? Priests and dispossessed proprietors were
hiding in diseuise among the tribes, making mischief
where they were able. But the peasantry seemed proof
against seduction. ‘The mere husbandmen,’ wrote
Dr. Jones* to Fleetwood, ‘being now in very good
condition, will hardly be driven into action. What
their priests may persuade them to I know not; I
am confident the gentry will never be able to move
them from their resolution to enjoy their present ease

1 ‘Fleetwood to Thurloe, June This man hath taken six or seven

18, 1655.’— Thurloe Papers.

2 ¢QOur dissenting, but I hope
godly, friends in this country carry
such a jealousy with the present
magistracy and ministry as I am
weary of hoping for accommodation:
everywhere they are unanimous
and fixed in separating from us even
to the ordinance of hearing the
Word.’ —‘ Nathaniel Brewster to
Thurloe, October 12, 1656.’

3 ‘Here is one Marcus O’Decies,
who has been a notable trooper and
lieutenant of foot in the Irish army.

great townlands from several land-
lords, but lying together, whereby
he hath many patrons to excuse his
transportation. Those lands he
hath planted all with strangers un-
known in these parts. They behave
themselves proudly, not like other
churls, and under colour of plough-
ing are able to make up among
them a reasonable good troop of
horse.’-—‘ Dr. H. Jones to Fleet-
wood, Dublin, January 25, 1656-7,’
Thurloe Papers.
4 Afterwards Bishop of Meath.

The English of all 1652-60

140

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and quiet as long as by the State it shall be permitted

Re RR aye ateiaat bas

1652-60

Had the system thus established been continued
for a few more years, the industrial advantages of
Ireland, the abundance of soil, the cheapness of
labour, the boundless quantities of admirable wool,
the unrivalled rivers and harbours, could not have
failed to have attracted thither energetic men from
all countries, who, in turning the national resources
to account, would have acquired permanent mastery
over the old inhabitants. Romanism, sternly re-
pressed, must have died out, as Protestantism died
in Spain and Italy. Industry was everywhere alive,
creating wealth and comfort, order and organization.
Intelligent and just authority laid an effectual bridle
on temptation to rebellion, and the progress made by
Ireland in the following century, when the most
beneficial of these conditions was unhappily absent,
and only the most galling were retained, encourages a
belief that, had Cromwell’s principles been accepted
as the permanent rule of Irish administration, the
lines of difference between the two countries, now as
marked as ever, and almost as threatening, would
have long ago disappeared.

1 Thurloe Papers.

THE REVOLUTION.

CHAPTER III.
THE REVOLUTION.
SECTION I.

Tue problem which presented itself on the Restora-

141

CHAP,
Iil

tion of the Stuarts was incapable of equitable solution, ——~—

The Anglo-Irish leaders of the rebellion of 1641,
who, previous to the rising, had undoubtedly received
encouragement from Charles the First—who, in the
course of the civil war, had given money and sent
regiments to England to fight on the royal side, and
had received their final defeat from Cromwell himself,
expected naturally to be restored to their estates, and
to see the Parliamentary adventurers, and the soldiers
who had been the instruments of their oppression,
flung out from the lands which they had usurped.
The perplexed and Protean insurrection had settled
itself at last into the form which, as originally designed,
it was to have assumed from the first—a defence of the
Crown against the Parliament. All parties and both
religions had accepted the King’s viceroy as their
leader. The wreck of the Royal army had crossed
from England, and had received their last overthrow
in the Irish ranks, and in defending Irish towns.
Even the Nuncio himself, the leader of the party most
bitterly antagonistic to England, had been recognized
by Charles as a friend.

All factions—Ormond’s own original Royalists, the

1660

142

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK Lords of the Pale, and the Irish of Owen Roe—had

_*— been included in a common confiscation. All guilty

1660

alike in the eyes of the Commonwealth, they expected
to be regarded in the Restoration as alike deserving
reward; or, if not reward, at least replacement in the
properties which they had lost in the King’s service.

It was no less true, on the other hand, that the
rebellion, whatever the differences of opinion among
its chiefs, had been at its commencement a revolt of
Treland against England, and as such denounced and
disavowed by the King himself. It had been a fero-
cious effort of the Irish race to shake off English
authority, to exterminate the English settlers and the
Protestant religion. It had been attended by horrors
and atrocities which had burnt themselves indelibly
into every Saxon memory; and the Cromwellian
conquest had been in fact a resubjugation of Ireland
by England, and in the name of England. English
authority had been, for the first time, completely
established over the whole island, and it was as little
likely that England would consent to part with the
fruits of a victory so precious and so dearly bought,
as that the English settled there would yield up,
without a struggle, their just reward for the blood
which they had sacrificed. The Cromwellians could
only be ejected by arming the native Irish against
them; and the bare attempt or mention of such a step
would have cost Charles his hardly recovered crown.
By all technical forms—by engagements written and
spoken—by the indisputable truth that, before their
final defeat, they had all been accepted by the King
as loyal subjects, and were all in arms in his favour,
his honour was pledged to do justice to the Irish
Catholic landowners. By the essential facts of the

THE REVOLUTION.

143

case, which if he disregarded he must return to exile— Gaal
by his duty to Ireland itself, which, brief as had been -—.—

its period of repose, was rising into prosperity such
as it had never known before, under the impulse of
the vigorous race which had been established there
by the late Protector, he was compelled to leave un-
touched in a large degree the disposition by which
the old owners of Ireland had been either driven
beyond the Shannon, or converted into landless
exiles.

As soon as it became clear that Richard Cromwell
would be unable to hold his place, his brother Henry,
who was then in command in Ireland, with a loyalty
supremely honourable to him, acquiesced without
condition or stipulation in the restoration of the
Stuarts. He was popular with all parties; he might
have made a party among his father’s soldiers strong
enough to have enabled him to make terms for his
own Irish estates. The revolution was too momen-
tous to allow him to remember so small a matter as
his personal interests. Smaller men were naturally
less high minded. After Henry Cromwell, the two
persons most trusted by the Protector were Sir Charles
Coote, who had assisted so efficiently in ending the
rebellion, and Roger Boyle, Lord Broghill, third son
of the great Earl of Cork. Both had acquired enor-
mous estates under the new settlement. Their in-
fluence with the army was second only to that of
Henry Cromwell, and seeing how the tide was
running, and foreseeing the difficulties which would
arise, they were among the first, in the army’s in-
terests as well as their own, to speak of the Resto-
ration, and to bind the King to them by inviting his
return.

1660

144

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The Court of Charles on the Continent was thronged

— 1 with exiled Irish patriots. No sooner was the ap-

1660

proaching change known, than of course he was beset
on all sides by clamours for reparation. He put the
petitioners off with promises till he was established
in England. In the autumn of 1660 a Commission
sate at Westminster, to consider their claims; and
counsel were heard on their side.

The first attempt was for a really equitable com-
promise. Sir James Barry, the Irish Lord Chief
Justice, sketched briefly the history of the massacre,
some scenes of which he had himself witnessed. He
proposed that the Irish claimants should be heard
in detail before separate juries, and that those who
could prove that they had borne no share, direct or
indirect, in murder, should have their claims allowed.
Some test of this kind was at last ultimately adopted;
not however till on both sides there had been much
unreal declamation. Sir Nicholas Plunket, who re-
presented the Irish, spoke with national fervour of
their loyalty and their sufferings in the royal cause.
Lord Broghill showed in answer, that the King’s
real friends had been the Protestant army, which
had been so forward in promoting the Restoration.
To the Irish professions of loyalty he replied, by
producing three documents, which, considering how
confused a business the war had been, proved prac-
tically extremely little: an order from the Kilkenny
Council, at one stage of the conflict, to prosecute
Ormond with fire and sword; an offer of Ireland,
from the same Council, to any Catholic prince who
would take the country under his protection; and
lastly an acknowledgment, signed by the Irish leaders
in the last campaign, of the authority of the Rump

THE REVOLUTION.

Parliament. To have served under Cromwell was at
least as great an offence as to have acknowledged the
Parliament; and the charge, as coming from Lord
Broghill, partook of an insolence which probably
arose froma knowledge that the cause was already
privately determined.

The Irish deputies were dismissed, and the King
declared his resolution. He admitted the difficulty of
the case. The Act of the English Parliament under
which money had been raised by debenture bonds on
Irish forfeited estates, and on which half the confisca-
tions rested, had been confirmed by Charles the First,
and he could not disavow his father’s act. It was true
that, when English rebels were subsequently medita-
ting regicide, he had himself made peace with his Irish
subjects, and had accepted their help to prevent if pos-
sible that infamous crime from being consummated.
He did not deny that, in so doing, he had entered into
obligations which he ought not to forget. Yet to fulfil
these obligations under existing circumstances would
be against the interests of Ireland herself. The titles
of the adventurers and soldiers might not bear perhaps
minute examination, but he found himself, he said,
rather inclined to mercy than to law. He had made
up his mind to leave them undisturbed, or, if disturbed
from their present holdings, to allow them an equiva-
lent in land elsewhere. The debentures still unpaid
should be acknowledged also. But while justice was
thus done on one side, the other should not be left un-
considered. When every bond was settled there would
still remain enormous estates unallotted with which to
reward the really deserving. Protestant Royalists like
Ormond and Lord Inchiquin were to be reinstated at
once, and intruders settled on their territories were to

VOL. I. iL

146

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK receive lands in some other place. Innocent Catholics
I. ; oe.
—— too, whose only fault was their religion, were not to

1660

suffer, and should be replaced in their homes; and a
list followed of persons said to have merited parti-
cular favour—the great Anglo-Irish Catholic nobles,
Clanrickarde, Westmeath, Dillon, Gormanstown, Fin-
gal, Mountgarret, Netterville, and many others, who
in their hard position, compromised as they had been
inmany ways, and responsible for terrible bloodshed,
had yet desired throughout to confine the insurrec-
tion within the lines of opposition to Parliament and
the Puritans as distinct from the English Crown.

There remained others—those who had been cri-
minal, but had shown repentance, and had done good
service later, either in Ireland or abroad. Of these,
such as had accepted lands in Connaught were expected
to abide by their bargains. They might consider their
case a hard one, but no more could be done for them.
Those who had preferred exile might look for favour
in time, but must wait and be patient. English
families who had sold their interests at home, had
transplanted themselves to Ireland, and built and
fenced and enclosed there, could not at once be dis-
possessed and ruined. Great changes could only be
accomplished by degrees. The innocent must be pro-
vided for first.

Two classes of persons were to receive no favour—
those who had been concerned actively in the mas-
sacres, or, if they were dead, their heirs and repre-
sentatives ; and, to balance these, the regicides, whom,
although it was through them, and only them, that
England had any authority left in Ireland to exer-
cise, the conditions of the case made it possible, and
even necessary, to exclude.

THE REVOLUTION.

Thus the King hoped all parties would be satisfied.

147

CHAP.

The wicked would be deterred from wickedness by Pane

such signal evidence of justice, and the good be en-
couraged in loyalty by the favour and mercy shown
to them.’

More than this Charles could not have done:;. less
he could not honourably have tried to do. However
miserable in its consequences might be: the overthrow
of Cromwell’s policy, however fatal the redistribution
over the country of so many elements of mischief—
some measure of the kind was a price necessarily to. be
paid for the blessing of a restored monarchy.

No less inevitably followed the re-establishment of
the Irish Church, the dissolution of the short-lived
union, and the restoration of the political consti-
tution.

Coote, created for his services Earl of Mountrath,
and Lord Broghill, created Earl of Orrery, presided
as Lords Justices at the re-inauguration of the Royal
authority. The Parliament met in Dublin on May 8,
1661. In 1641 the Catholics were in a majority. In
1661 socompletely had they been crushed, out of 260
members they had but one. But the Protestantism
of the assembly made its task only the more difficult.
They had to declare themselves happy in the restora-
tion of a sovereign against whom most of them had
fought. They had to condemn, as an atrocious usurpa-
tion, the power of which they had been the instru-
ments, yet maintain the fortunes which they had won
for themselves in the service of that power, to pre-
serve the reality of the conquest, and to fling a veil
over it of unmeaning phrases and hollow affectations.

1 ¢The King’s Declaration, November 30,1660.’ 14 & 15 Charles II,

Trish Statutes,
on

1661

148

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

They acquitted themselves with incomparable skill.

pee Tie first session was a short one. The Act of Settle-

1661

ment ‘was ‘not yet ready; but, in congratulatmg the
King on his*return, the members made haste to show
‘that they were none of the seditious rebellious

‘rabble whom it had pleased the Almighty to suppress

by the might of ‘his power, ‘but loyal subjects, pre-
‘served alive amidst the storms of persecution, who
abhorred the rebellion and traitorous. murder and
parricide of his majesty’s father of blessed memory.’
In the eagerness of their loyalty they discovered ‘that
‘his majesty’s title to the Irish throne ‘did not de-
‘scend from Henry the Second, but from times far
‘more ancient, as by authentic evidence appeared.’
‘They could not conceal ‘the unspeakable joy’ with
‘which they welcomed the revival of ‘the true worship
of God’ among ‘them, and civil government re-esta-
blished on the fundamental laws of the land; and,
while it was necessary to enact that the proceedings
in the eourts of law which had passed under the name
-of ‘the Protector should be held valid, they insisted,
notwithstanding, that the Protectorate itself was
‘a wicked, traitorous, and abominable usurpation.”*

Ormond, raised for his services to a dukedom, re-
‘stored to his estates, and with expectations of vast
additions to them, as a:reward for his exertions, came
‘back the next year as viceroy. Parliament again
met in April, 1662, and the great question was now
‘ready for solution.

The preamble of the Act of Settlement? was a
miracle of ingenuity. The Lord Lieutenant was the
same person whose defeat by Cromwell had rendered

1 Statutes of the Realm, Ireland: '15:Charles IT. caps. 1 and 2.
2 14 & 15:Charles IL.-cap. 2.

THE REVOLUTION.

possible the confiscation which was now to be legal-
ized. Cromwell was to be disowned with execration;
yet his work was to be: defended, and the fruit of it
secured ; while Coote and Broghill and the rest were
to be made to appear as if they had acted as subjects
of a sovereign against whom they were openly in
arms.

After repeating the story of 1641, the murder of
many thousand English. subjects, the universal rebel-.
lion which ensued, and the establishment of an Irish

government at Kilkenny independent of England, the

act went on to say, ‘that Almighty God had given
his majesty, by and through his English Protestant
subjects, absolute victory and conquest over the Irish
Popish rebels and enemies, so as they, their lives,.
liberties, and estates, were at his majesty’s disposition
by the laws of the kingdom.’ ‘Compelled by neces-
sity,’ and ‘to prevent the:further desolation of the
country,’ ‘certain of his subjects,’ ‘durmg his ma-

jesty’s absence beyond the sea,’ had enquired into the:

origin of the rebellion, had dispossessed the authors.
of it of their lands, and had sold or otherwise dis-
posed of them to persons who, by money or imme-
diate services, had contributed to the conquest; and
these persons were the same who, having secured the

power in their hands, had invited his majesty to come:

home, and had yielded Ireland: to his obedience. His
majesty, after due consideration, had: made known
his pleasure; and the Parliament, having weighed the
character of the insurrection, and the obvious inten-
tion of the promoters of it to eradicate the British
inhabitants and the Protestant religion, having con-
sidered the blood and treasure which had been ex-
pended, and the unspeakable sufferings which had

150

BOOK

—_—_——

1662

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

been undergone to reduce the kingdom to the obe-
dience of the crown of England, declared themselves
heartily gratified with the King’s resolution. ‘ The
rapines and massacres committed by the Irish and
Popish rebels were not only well known to the pre-
sent Parliament, but were notorious to the world.’
‘The artifices which had been used for many years
to murder witnesses, suppress evidence, and vitiate
and embezzle such records and testimonies as, made
agamst particular persons,’ had failed nevertheless to
suppress the truth; and the rebels, having thrown off
their allegiance to the English crown, ‘ had become
subdued and conquered enemies, and had justly for-
feited their titles and estates.’ The Parliament,
therefore, concluded that all confiscations legitimately
growing out of the insurrection ought to be held
good. The lands of those who could prove that they
had borne no part in it should be restored, and the
adventurers or soldiers in possession of them should
be compensated in some other district.

A Court of Claims was established to examine

‘each case in detail, and the innocent were allowed

to hope that they should have speedy satisfaction.*
The working of an act so vaguely worded depended
wholly on the temper of the juries before whom the
cases came. Innocence was a wide term. Guilt might
mean anything, from mere knowledge of the intended
rising—under which construction every Catholic land-
owner in Ireland would fall probably within the ex-
cluded list—to active participation in massacre, and
this could be traced to a comparatively insignificant
number. The act was construed so favourably to the
Catholic petitioners, that more of the soldiers and

1 Trish Act of Settlement: 14 & 15 Charles II. cap. 2.

THE REVOLUTION.

adventurers were removed than there was land else-

where to compensate. A million acres cultivated, or |

capable of cultivation, remained undisposed of; and
to these were to be added the allotments of the
regicides, Ireton, Fleetwood, Ludlow, and others,
who had bought estates, or received grants of them
to their families. But out of these lands half of
Tipperary was given to the Duke of York. Ormond’s
vast domains had to be restored, with additions, as
well as those of the loyal Protestants and of the
Anglo-Irish peers and gentlemen who had been spe-
cially named by the King, and whose claims Parlia-
ment had allowed. Many settlers were thus ejected
for whom no compensation could be found; a second
act was found necessary to save the Protestant interest,
and the tendency of the Court of Claims to decide in
favour of the old owners became still more evident
from the compromise to which the Protestant colonists
found it necessary to submit. By the 17th and 18th
of Charles II. cap. 3 (1665), the soldiers, adventu-
rers, and debenture holders consented to accept two-
thirds of their legitimate claims, and those already in
possession, to part with a third of the land they held
to secure an unchallenged tenure of all that remained.

By this sacrifice sufficient was obtained to meet all
demands that could fairly stand scrutiny; and, in
return, to put an end to the uncertainty which must
have otherwise hung over half the new holdings, the
period within which Catholic claimants of estates
must have proved their innocence was limited to the
current year. Witnesses died off; particular things
were forgotten; and innocence would be considered
established unless proof of guilt was forthcoming.
If the challenge might be postponed indefinitely, no

152

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK tenure at all under the Act of Settlement could be
—~— considered secure. There was a frank admission that

1665

the object of the second act was to defend the Pro-
testant interest. So great had been the tendency of
juries to favour the native Catholics: that a clause was
inserted directly ordering the Act to be construed
beneficially to the Protestants. The King, in return,
‘that more old proprietors might be restored,’ agreed
to abandon debentures which had lapsed to the
crown where part of the purchase-money had been
left unpaid.!

Thus, amidst confusion and heart-burning, the
ownership of the land of Ireland became once more
determined.

According to the Down survey, made at Cromwell’s
order by Sir William Petty, the entire surface of the
four provinces contained ten million five hundred
thousand Irish acres.? Of these a million and a half
were bog, mountain, and lough. Another million and
a half was coarse land, commonly called unprofitable.

Of good land, arable and grass, there remained seven

million five hundred thousand acres. The three
million acres of wild country had been left wholly to
the native Irish. Of the good land there had fallen
under forfeiture from the rebellion, five million two
hundred thousand acres, nearly all of which, before
October, 1641, had been owned by Catholics. Two
millions belonged to the Protestants planted by Eliza-
beth and James, who had been the objects of the mas-
sacres, and had recovered their lands under the Com-
monwealth. Three hundred thousand acres were the

property of the Established Church, belonging either

1 Second Act of Settlement : 17 & * 121 Irish = 196 English.

‘18 Charles IL. cap. 2.

THE REVOLUTION.

to the bishops’ sees, or to the deans and chapters.

153

CHAP,

They had been left untouched, being designed for the —~—~

support of Cromwell’s ministry, and reverted to the
Church on the Restoration. Of the five million two
hundred thousand acres which had been forfeited,
there were given back to Catholics, under the two

Acts of Settlement, two million three hundred and

forty thousand acres. Two hundred thousand more
were restored to Ormond, Inchiquin, Roscommon, and
other Royalist Protestants; a hundred and twenty
thousand were given to the Duke of York—substan-
tially, therefore, to the Catholic cause. The rest
remained to the adventurers and soldiers, or the
speculators who had purchased their shares of them;
and to this remainder were to be added eighty thou-
sand acres in Connaught, sold by the transplanted
Irish to Protestant capitalists.

As a total consequence of their rebellion, therefore,
the Irish Catholics, who, before 1641, had owned
two-thirds of the good land of Ireland and all the
waste, were now reduced to something less than one-
third; Sir William Petty appending to his summary
the significant remarks, that, of the Irish who pre-
tended innocency, seven out of eight had their claims
allowed; that those who, either under this plea or
under the special favour of the crown,.were restored,
received their estates again enlarged’ by a fifth, as a
compensation for their losses; that by forged feofments
of what was more than their own they obtained an
additional third ; and, finally, ‘ that of those adjudged
innocents, not one in twenty was really so.’

 Petty’s Political Anatomy of Ireland.

1665

154

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

Sues SHorN of a third of the lands which they had re-
—— garded as their own, and with an inevitable sense

1665

of insecurity from the return among them of their
irreconcilable enemies, the Cromwellian settlers were
even more seriously disturbed by the re-imposition
of the authority of the Established Church. The
Independents had not been popular in Ireland; the
Presbyterians had not forgotten or forgiven the exe-
cution of Charles the First ; and, in their hatred of a
form of religion which, except politically, was indis-
tinguishable from their own, they acquiesced in the
restoration of the Episcopalianism which, in the days
of Strafford, had trampled on them and tyrannized
over them.

The proportion of Protestants to Catholics had in-
creased very considerably since the settlement. Of
the latter there were now 800,000; of the former
300,000. A hundred thousand were Scots, and
almost to aman Presbyterians. Of the English, half
only were Episcopalians ; the rest were Presbyte-
rians, Independents, or Quakers. The Establish-
ment, however, was the religion of gentlemen. The
events of the last years had brought discredit on
Nonconformity. Bramhall came back, and was made
Primate. ‘Two archbishops and ten bishops were
consecrated at St. Patrick’s on January 27, 1661.
They lost not a moment in teaching Dissenters of all
kinds that their day was over—in teaching the Pres-
byterians especially the value to them of that loyalty

THE REVOLUTION.

to the crown which had made them so bitter against
the ministers sent by Cromwell.

The Cromwellian settlers were almost all Noncon-
formists, the Scots in Ulster wholly so. To insist
that no one should officiate who had not been
ordained by a bishop was to deprive two-thirds of the
Protestant inhabitants of the only religious ministra-
tions which they would accept, and to force on them
the alternative of exile or submission to a ritual
which they abhorred as much as Popery; while, to
enhance the absurdity, there were probably not a hun-
dred episcopally-ordained clergy in the whole island.
Yet this was what the bishops deliberately thought
it wise to do. They carried through Parliament a
second Act of Uniformity. To the already stringent
conditions of ordination they added another, which
was like the offspring of lunacy. Not only was every
clergyman to profess before his congregation his full
acceptance of the Prayer Book; he had to subscribe
a declaration that a subject, under no pretence, might
bear arms against his King ; that he abhorred the trai-
torous position which distinguished between the King’s
person and the King’s lawful authority ; and that the
oath to the League and Covenant, which had been
generally taken by the Protectorate ministers, was
illegal andimpious. No person, for whose political and

spiritual orthodoxy these securities had not been taken, —

was permitted to hold a benefice, to teach, preach,
or administer the sacrament in any church, chapel, or
publie place.t The form of prohibition extended to
the Catholics, the practice applied only to the Non-
conformists, who became at once the objects of an
unrelenting and unscrupulous persecution. There

117 & 18 Charles II. cap. 6.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

were seventy Presbyterian ministers in Ulster. Eight
only accepted the bishops’ terms and were ordained:
the rest were deprived, and, when persisting in recu-
sancy, were imprisoned.’ Jeremy Taylor, the imper-
sonation and special jewel of Anglicanism, who came
over with Bramhall, to be made Bishop: of Down, and
afterwards of Dromore, at one visitation declared
thirty-six churches in his diocese vacant,’ and sent

people of his own to.supply the empty pulpits. The

miserable division, in the face of the common enemy,
thus condemned the Church from the first to irreme-
diable failure as a missionary institution. It made no
converts from the Catholics.. It checked instantly and
decisively the immigration. of Puritans and Presby-
terians from England and Scotland, who would gladly
have welcomed a refuge in Ireland. ‘The more serious
of the Cromwellians sold their holdings, and left a
country which could be no longer a home for them ;
and then commenced that fatal emigration of Non-
conformist Protestants from Ireland to New England,
which, enduring for more than a century, drained
Ireland of its soundest Protestant blood, and assisted
in raising beyond the Atlantic the power and the
spirit which by-and-by paid England home for the
madness which had driven them thither. Ulster par-
tially recovered its freedom. The Scots were too
numerous and too resolute to be put down, and they
wrung from the bishops at last the connivance which
was allowed to the Catholics. The southern provinces
were less fortunate. The few families of Independents
which remained were condemned to spiritual isola-
tion.. So long as the first owners lived they retained
~ 1 Reid, History of the Pesbyter- the expelled ministers is given.
yians in Ireland, vol. ii. p. 267, * Ibid. p. 263,

Killen’s edition, where the list of

THE REVOLUTION.

their own beliefs; but deprived as they were of school
or chapel, they could not perpetuate them. Liturgy
and mass were to them alike detestable. To Church
they would not go; separate family worship they were
unable to maintain; and thus their children were swept
into the Irish stream, became Catholics, like those
among whom they lived and married, and trod in the
old steps of the generation who had gone before them.!

Had the Church possessed an expansive power of
its own, there would have been at least some com-
pensation. But the Anglican system was a creation
of compromise. It was the religion of educated gen-
tlemen: it was not and could not be the religion of
the poor, to whom emotion stands in the place of
knowledge. “The Established Church of Ireland pro-
duced many excellent and some great men ; but in
the eyes of the Celtic peasantry it was the cold symbol
of Saxon supremacy. It could neither compete suc-
cessfully with the priests for the adherence of the
people, nor could it resist the influences to which,
through its connection with the State, it was itself
peculiarly exposed ; while theCatholic complexion of

1The immense majority of the or of their descendants. (Of the

soldier settlers left the -country.
Lord Clarendon, however—(Henry,
eldest son of the Chancellor, Lord-
Lieutenantin Ireland in1686)—pro-
bably underrates the number that
remained. ‘ Yourmajesty,’ he wrote
to James II., ‘is said to believe
that the gross of the English of
this kingdom are fanatics of Crom-
well’s brood, the offspring of those
who served in the rebellion against
your sacred father, which I presume
to say is a very great mistake.
There are very few of the original
soldiers and adventurers now left,

latter not twenty families, and no

great number of the former. The
generality of those two great inter-
ests sold ‘their lots, many of them
to honest men, who, at the King’s

restoration, brought with them out

of England to lay out here what
little remained of their fortunes,

and many of them to a new sort of

people, who are always to be found
where fortunes are to be made, and
who never had anything to do
in the rebellion.—‘ The Earl of
Clarendon to the King, August 14,
1686,’ State Letters, vol. i.

158

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book the Prayer-book was exceptionally unfortunate in a
eee, country in which the expansion of Protestantism was

1665

the condition of a settled government. ‘ The state of
the Church,’ wrote the Earl of Clarendon to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, after Bramhall and Jeremy
Taylor and Leslie of Raphoe, and their brother pre-
lates, had worked their will on the Dissenters, ‘is
very miserable; most of the fabrics are in ruins;
very few of the clergy reside on their cures, but
employ pitiful curates, which necessitates. the people
to look after a Romish priest or Nonconformist
preacher, and there are plenty of both. I find it
an ordinary thing for a minister to have five or six
cures of souls, and to get them supplied by those
who will do it cheapest. Some hold five or six
ecclesiastical preferments worth 9001. a year, get
them all served for 150/. a year, and preach them-
selves perhaps once a year. When | discourse with
my Lords Bishops on these things I confess I have
not satisfactory answers, but, with your Grace’s help,
I do not despair of doing some good, for many things
are redressed without any other difficulty than men’s
doing their duties. Several of the clergy who haye
been in England have sent to me to renew their leave
of absence; and they must return; for absence with-
out leave forfeits the preferment, and none shall be
licensed without good grounds. The Archbishop of
Tuam,’ after three years’ absence, is resolved to come
over, and I hear is on his way. Down and Connor?
has been absent six years. He wrote to renew his
license. I refused.’’ i

1 John Vesey. 3 ‘The Earl of Clarendon to the

* Dr. Hacket,afterwardsdeprived Archbishop of Canterbury, May 25,
for simony. 1686,’ State Letters, vol, i.

THE REVOLUTION.

SECTION III.

Tue salt of English Puritanism was driven out of
Treland at a time when Puritanism represented the
most genuine element in the English mind. The
place of it was taken by speculators seeking their for-
tunes, solid, hard-hearted men, indifferent to creeds,
and well contented with an establishment which left
them alone. ‘Toleration of the Catholics was a natu-
ral part of the same policy. The penal laws were sus-
pended at the special instance of the King; and once
more it was the reign of conciliation. Though half
the penalty had been remitted, the Irish had been
heavily punished. They would now, it was to be
hoped, show themselves duly grateful for the indul-
gence extended to them.

The rebellion was not, however, to be forgotten.
The 23rd of October was set apart, by Act of Parlia-

ment, as a solemn anniversary, to be observed with |

a religious service and a sermon, ‘in perpetual me-
mory of a conspiracy so inhuman and cruel as the
like was never heard of in any age or kingdom.' The
new Protestant gentry were shrewd men of business,
who meant to incur no more risks than they could
help. They had come to Ireland to push their way
by English energy and enterprise. Whatever their
political opinions, they were well aware that, as the
world then was, skill and industry were mainly Pro-
testant virtues ; and if Ireland was to become, as they

1 14 & 15 Charles II. cap. 8,

159

CHAP.
Iil.
———~

~1663

160

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

intended, a second England, Irish Popery, with its

__*:_. idleness and its faction fights and slatternly habits,

1663

could not be allowed to recover the ascendant. With
their eyes open to the manufacturing resources of
the country they passed an act to encourage French,
Flemish, and Dutch Protestant workmen to come
and settle among them. They failed to see, that
the cause which was driving out the Independents
would serve equally to keep out the foreign Calyin-
ists; but the natural sense of Saxon men of business
would probably have soon enlightened them had free
trade been continued, and had they felt the absence
of skilled labour. Before the days of coal and steam
the unlimited water power of Ireland gave her natural
advantages in the race of manufactures, which, if she
had received fair play, would have attracted thither
thousands of skilled immigrants. The Presbyterians
held their ground in Ulster with the help of the now
rising linen trade. Had other trades been permitted
to grow, and an industrial middle class established
itself in the southern provinces, they would speedily
have wrung adequate toleration from the dominant
Church. This one true and real justice to Ireland,
unhappily, was precisely what the reconstituted
government of England refused to allow her. By
the parties now and for another century in the as-
cendant there, Ireland was regarded as a colony to
be administered not for her own benefit, but for the
convenience of the mother country.

So rapidly under the Cromwellian despotism had
the wealth of Ireland increased, that having been
brought to the lowest depth of ruin, she was now
able, after defraying all her own expenses, to settle
on the King a permanent revenue of 30,0000. a year.

THE REVOLUTION.

Home jealousy took alarm at a growth so rapid.

161

CHAP.
LEG

Ireland, if allowed free trade, would, it was feared, ———~

undersell England in the world’s markets. Profits
would fall. The value of real estate would fall. The
best artisans would emigrate to a country where
land was cheap and living inexpensive. English
commerce was about to be ruined for the sake of
the unruly island, which was for ever a thorn in
her side. Ireland was admitted to the benefit of
the first Navigation Act of 1660. English ships
possessed no privileges which were not extended to
Irish. The export of Irish as well as English wool
to foreign countries was prohibited, because it was
the best in Europe; the fleeces of France and Spain
could not be woven into the finest kinds of cloths
without an intermixture of the wool of these islands;
and while they retained the material the English and
Irish weavers retained the monopoly of the manu-
facture. Ireland was not injured so long as each
country alike might export her own cloths. But the
equality of privilege lasted only till the conclusion of
the settlement and till the revenue had been assigned
to the crown. In the Navigation Act of 1663 Ire-
land was left out. She had established an independ-
ent trade with New England; it was destroyed. All
produce of the colonies sent to Ireland, all Irish
produce sent to the colonies, had first to be landed in
England and thence reshipped in English bottoms."
She had established a large and lucrative cattle trade
with Bristol, Milford, and Liverpool. It was sup-
posed to lower the value of English farm produce,
and was utterly prohibited. Neither cow or bullock,

1 15 Charles II. cap. 7.
VOL. I. M

1668

162

BOOK

ee mere”

1663

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sheep or pig, fat or lean, might be transported from
Ireland to England.’ Salt beef and bacon, even
butter and cheese, lay under the same interdict.’

With the restriction of her chief exports, her ship-
ping interest suffered a simultaneous eclipse. Such
direct trade as she retained was with France, Spain,
and Portugal, as if England wished to force her, in
spite of herself, to feel the Catholic countries to be
her best friends.

It was the beginning of a policy which was to be
persevered in till it had for ever blighted the hope of
Ireland becoming a prosperous Protestant country.
Further, however, it was not immediately carried.
The woollen manufactures and the linen manufactures
were for the present permitted to stand side by side,
and to compete with the productions of Ireland’s
powerful rival. The saffron shirt of the Irish, of
native make, had been celebrated from immemorial
time. Lord Strafford had encouraged further a form
of industry which would give least umbrage in Eng-
land. He had imported choice kinds of flax-seed,
and given bounties on the cultivation. The woollen
manufacture, which he had discouraged, had been set
on foot again by Cromwell. The prohibition of the
export of the raw material was an encouragement to
the native weavers, and Irish woollens were acquir-
ing a name in Europe. The two trades were equally
thriving; and, had they been allowed to stand, there
would have been four Ulsters instead of one. As it
was, the reign of Charles the Second, notwithstand-
ing some absurd restrictions, and the more absurd

1 18 Charles IL. cap. 2. English ? 32 Charles II. cap. 2. English
Statutes. Statutes,

THE REVOLUTION.

religious persecutions of the Dissenters, was looked
back upon in the next century as Ireland’s golden
age. The Catholics had not recovered from their
punishment. They were indulged, and they appeared
to be grateful. Trade was busy and growing ; and
the tenure of property was too insecure to permit
absenteeism. The spent force of the impulse which
had been imparted by the vigorous administration of
Cromwell was not yet exhausted ; and the tendency,
though at a slackening rate, was. still forward and
upward.

m 2

168

CHAP.
LT:
———

1663

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IY.

Tue Church meanwhile was making no converts.

—— The Catholics were recovering strength. [very

1666

parish had its priest again, and friaries and convents
sprung up as if the laws against them had been
blotted from the statute book. ‘The elasticity of the
permanent customs duties dispensed for the present
with the necessity of another Parliament ;* but the
suspension of the constitution could not last for ever.
At the next election the Catholics were prepared to
resume their privilege of voting. A Catholic majority
might easily be returned in the House of Commons,
and a collision of the creeds would be inevitable. The
Acts of Settlement had done too much or too little:
too much, if Protestant ascendancy was to be main-
tained and Ireland was to be treated as a conquered
country ; too little, if the Catholic Irish were to be
really conciliated. Both parties felt, that with the
accession of a Catholic king the struggle must be
revived.

The ‘ Tories’ continued to give trouble. The sons
of the dispossessed owners levied war upon the in-
truders, supported by the sympathies of the people ;
and, with a halo of spurious patriotism about them,
hung about the Protestant settlements, burnt the
farmhouses, and shot and stabbed their inmates.
The farmers armed in self-defence, and organized
themselves into regiments of militia, that there might
be no second surprise.

4 After the session of 1665-6, no Parliament met in Ireland for
twenty-six years,

THE REVOLUTION.

Dangerous influences were at work, even in

ia ee

Charles’s lifetime, at the English court. The secret —~-~

advisers in Irish matters were the two Talbots,’ Peter,
Catholic Archbishop of Dublin, and Colonel Richard
—lying Dick, as he was called in the London coffee-
houses—known afterwards as the famous Duke of
Tyrconnell. Archbishop Peter was treated at the
Viceroy’s court with distinguished consideration. He
appeared in council in his. episcopal robes. In 1670
he borrowed plate and hangings from the Castle for
a splendid religious celebration; Lord Berkely, who
was Lord-Lieutenant, sending them to him with a
message that, in a few months, ‘he hoped to see high
mass at Christ Church.’? Colonel Talbot prevailed
on Charles, in the following year, to reopen the Acts
of Settlement, and order an inquiry into the working
of them. The conspirators believed themselves even
then in a full career towards success, when they were
stopped by the English House of Commons, who in-
sisted sternly that the acts should not be tampered
with; that the Talbots should be sent about their busi-
ness;* and the law be observed which disqualified
Catholics who declined the Supremacy Oath from
being members of corporations and in the commission
of the peace. The Papal party had shown their teeth
too soon, and slunk back out of sight; but with
James’s accession the hour of triumph had come.

Let the enthusiasts who believe that Ireland
can be governed upon ‘Irish ideas,’ and that Irish
Catholics can be contented with concessions which
leave them less than omnipotent, study the history

1 Sons of Sir William Talbot, of 2 Harris, vol. i. p. 270.
Cartown, Kildare, and related 3 Thid. p. 274, 276.
nearly to the Talbots of Malahide.

1670

166

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

~pook of the last attempt to do them ‘justice’ on these
__* _ principles.

1686

The first sign of what was coming was an order
for the Protestants to be disarmed. Ormond, whom
Charles left at his death as Viceroy, and from whom
no help could be looked for in the measures which
James contemplated, was allowed to resign. Lord
Granard, and the Primate Michael Boyle, an old man
almost in his dotage, were made Lords Justices. By
them instructions were issued to take away the mus-
kets of the militia, on pretence of preventing disturb-
ances ; ‘muskets of the militia’ were construed to
cover the guns and pistols of the Protestant gentry ;
and Sir Thomas Newcomen, Granard’s brother-in-law,
when questions were asked in council said fiercely,
‘that the English wanted no arms;’ the work was
not half done, and ‘he hoped they would never have
arms put into their hands again.’! The Tories took
the hint, and went vigorously about their part of the
business. The Government could not proclaim them
for want of formal informations, which the gentlemen
were afraid to send in; and a zealous officer at Cork,
Captain Aunger, who killed .a notorious robber in
attempting to take him, was threatened with indict-
ment.” Those who were not wilfully blind, saw
plainly how events were tending. There were still
persons, however, who could believe that if Protest-
ant ascendancy were put down, and the two creeds
be placed on an equality, the lion and the lamb
would lie down in peace together ; and, while plausi-
bility and cant of toleration would pass current, they

1¢The Earl of Clarendon to 2 ¢Clarendon to

Rochester, January 19, 1686,’ Jan. 19, 1686.’ Ibid.
Clarendon State Letters, vol. i.

Sunderland,

THE REVOLUTION,

formed a convenient shield to the real purpose. The
Primate Chancellor resigned the great seal. Sir
Charles Porter was sent from England to succeed him.
The Earl of Clarendon was appointed Lord-Lieuten-
ant ; and James, when Clarendon waited on him and
took leave, gave a distinct assurance that the Acts of
Settlement should be maintained. The Catholics as
Catholics were to have equality of privilege with the
Protestants ; but the Irish were still to understand
that they were to suffer the consequences of having
rebelled. The principle of the Government was to
be religious toleration. Popery was to be no longer
treated as a disqualification for office ; and from this
it seemed to follow, that the anti-popery laws had been
unfair, the rebellions against them justified, and the
consequent confiscation acrime. Principles, however,
were not to be tested by the conclusions growing out
of them, and Clarendon came over with an honest in-
tention of carrying out his master’s wishes, so far as
he understood those wishes. He was an Englishman,
convinced as his father had been, as every intelligent
English statesman had been, that if Ireland was to
be a wholesome member of the empire, the English
interest must be maintained. If uncertain at his
arrival, a brief experience sufficed to show him what
the native race were, and what the country would
become if handed back into their keeping.’

1 ¢ When the King sent me here
he told me, that he would support
the English interest, and that he
sent me that the world might see
that he would do so. They were
to have the freedom of their religion,
yet he would have them see too
that he looked upon them as a con-
quered people, and that he would

support the settlement inviolably,
—‘ Clarendon to Rochester, Oc-
tober 2, 1686.’ Clarendon Letters,
vol, i.

2 ‘Tt is sad to see the people—I
mean the natives — such proper,
lusty fellows, poor, almost naked,
but will work never but when they
are ready to starve, and when they

163

BOOK
ibs
—--—’

1686

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The next practical step was the reconstitution of
the Courts of Law. The second Act of Settlement
appeared to preclude the revival of claims on the
Protestants’ estates; but ingenious barristers could
find roads through statutes, if sure of a favourable
hearing; and it was therefore necessary to admit
Catholics to the bench. Clarendon made no objec-
tion, but recommended that, if there were to be
Catholic judges, they should be Catholic Englishmen.
He saw signs of uneasiness, he said, and apprehen-
sions of change ; the Irish who had been restored by
the Court of Claims were as much afraid of re-open-
ing so sore a subject as the Protestants.’ He advised
—and his opinion was endorsed by Chief Justice
Keating, an Irishman by birth—that if the King
meant to admit Catholics to high offices of state, he
should first appoint a commission to confirm the
existing tenures, and place the security of property
beyond a doubt.?

The King, who had Colonel Talbot at his ear again,
listened neither to the Viceroy nor to the Chief Jus-
tice. The judges in Ireland held their office dur-
ante bene placito. All the Protestants except three
were removed, and their places filled by Catholics,
one of them, Mr. Justice Daly, being described by
Clarendon as ‘perfect Irish, of the old race, very

have got them a few days’ wages
will walk about idly till that be
gone. If they cannot then get work
they steal. Their women do nothing
—not so much as spin or knit;
but have a cow, two or three, ac-
cording to the bigness of their
ground, which they milk, and on
that they live. Their housesare pig-
styes, walls castup and covered with

straw and mud, and out of one of
these huts, ten or twelve feet square,
you shall see five or six men and
women bolt out as you pass by, who
stand staring about.’—‘ Clarendon
to Rochester, May 4, 1686.” Letter's,
vol. 1.

1 «To Rochester, May 8.’

2 To Rochester, March 14 and
May 8, 1686,’ bid. vol. i,

THE REVOLUTION.

bigoted and national.’ If equality of religion was
to be the rule of the Bench—a fortiori it applied to
the secondary offices. The army was thrown open
and the commission of the peace. Catholics were to
be sheriffs of counties. There had been Catholic
sheriffs before the rebellion, and therefore there
might be Catholic sheriffs again. When Clarendon
objected that they must take the Oath of Supremacy,
he was directed not to require the Oath of Suprem-
acy. The same rule was applied to the Privy Coun-
cil. The new judges were introduced on the board,
and most of the great Catholic peers.

The hierarchy felt the ascending tide, and sounded
the war trumpet, disdaining disguise. A conven-
tion was held at Dublin. Circulars were sent round
by the Bishops, directing lists to be furnished from
every parish of men able to bear arms.’ ‘I wish I
knew how to act,’ wrote the perplexed Clarendon to
Lord Rochester. ‘If the Protestant clergy were to
hold a convention without giving me notice, I would
not suffer them to meet. I would punish them for
the attempt, and I know the King would approve.
These meetings ought not to be held without the
supreme authority.’’

The Protestants were honourably eager to prove
that they did not deserve mistrust. A Mr. Keating,
an Irishman, had been killed in a duel by a son of Sir
William Ashton. Ashton was in fault, and was put

1 *T had lately an information
given me from a good hand to this
effect, that every parish priest
throughout the kingdom hath had
instructions from their respective
bishops, to give an exact list of all
the men in every of their parishes

which may be fit to bear arms, and
of what ability they are, and their
return is given to the several
bishops.’—‘ Clarendon to the Lord
Treasurer, May 15, 1686.’ Letters,
vol, i.

2 Ihnd.

170

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book on his trial. He excepted against every Catholic
_*_ that was empanelled. He was tried by a jury ex-

1686

clusively English, and the Irish clamoured that
he would be acquitted. He was found guilty and
hanged.

The exaggeration of justice was of course inter-
preted into cowardice. ‘The next step was to place
the arms of the militia beyond the reach of recovery.
Chester Castle was made the arsenal for Ireland; and
orders were given for the stores at Limerick, Ath-
lone, and Carrickfergus to be removed to Dublin,
from thence to be shipped to England.

The generation which remembered 1641 had not yet
died out. The traditions of the massacre were told by
the fireside of every Protestant family, and the cir-
cumstances which preceded it were all once more
present, with the fatal aggravation, that the King was
now avowedly on their enemies’ side, and there was no
longer a Long Parliament to hold his hand. Eng-
land, it almost seemed, was running the same road,
and about to become Catholic itself.

Betrayed by their natural protectors, deliberately
deprived of the means of self-defence, and handed
over apparently to the mercies of exasperated and
now triumphant enemies, the Protestants began to
set their houses in order, and such of them as were
able, to fly out of the country.

‘Never in my life,’ Clarendon wrote passionately
to the King, ‘have I met with people fuller of duty
to your majesty, nor more desirous of opportunities
to manifest their loyalty.’

‘The King does not believe me,’ he said, when he
found remonstrance vain. ‘Well, I have done my
part. If the King finds his subjects here desert the

THE REVOLUTION.

eountry every week, as I am sure they do, perhaps I
shall be believed then.’*

Fast as the changes were hurried forward, the
revolution moved too slow for James’s impatience.
Colonel Talbot, promoted to the ominous name of
Earl of Tyrconnell, as if purposely to inflame the
national Irish spirit, was now sent over to quicken
Clarendon’s hesitation. The army was to be remo-
delled. The King, Tyrconnell said when he arrived,
would not keep a man in his service who had served
under the Usurper. The Protestant officers were dis-
placed, and Irish Catholics substituted. Since the
sheriffs and magistrates were to be Catholics, Claren-
don had at least nominated men of weight and station.
The appointments did not satisfy Tyrconnell. ‘Mode-
rate Catholics’ he was pleased to call ‘Trimmers.’?
‘By God! my Lord,’ he said—every second sentence
contained an oath with him—‘ the sheriffs you made
are generally rogues. There has not been an honest
sheriff in Ireland these twenty years.’ Tyrconnell
and Nugent, one of the new puisne judges, drew a
list of sheriffs for the year following, which Claren-
don was forced to accept ; and the entire civil magis-
tracy of Ireland was now at the disposition of the
Papist fanatics.

At length matters were ripe for the attack on the
Acts of Settlement. Tyrconnell introduced the sub-
ject before the council in his peculiar manner.

‘By God! my lord,’ he said, again rising from his
seat to speak, ‘ these Acts of Settlement and this new
interest are damned things !’

Such words were unusual at the Council Board,

1 ¢Clarendon to Rochester, June 2 To Rochester, June 15,’ Let-
3.’ Letters, vol. i. ters, vol. 1.

171

CHAP.

172

BOOK
i.
——

686

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

even in Ireland. The Viceroy interrupted him. ‘Their
business,’ he urged, ‘was to quiet men’s minds, that
the common interest might flourish, and trade and
revenue increase.’

Tyrconnell was not to be stopped. ‘ We know,’
he continued, ‘the arts and damned roguish contri-
vances that procured those acts. J know it would
make a confusion if they were touched; but Mr.
Justice Keating and Sir John Temple told me that
the new interested men would give a third or half
what they have to secure the rest. I will say no
more at present ; but, by God! my lord, there have
been foul damned things done here.’ !

Tyrconnell was a remarkable specimen of a religious
leader. ‘In bare matters of fact,’ wrote Clarendon to
Lord Rochester, ‘the truth will never be known from
my Lord Tyrconnell. It is impossible you can believe,
except you found it, as we do here, how wonderfully
false he is in almost everything he says.’

‘Lying Dick,’ however, such as he was, represented
the King’s pleasure, and the Viceroy began to see
that he could no longer depend on James’s words to
himself.

‘All proceedings now look,’ he said, ‘as if the
King’s mind was altered, and as if he intended a total
alteration. He consults only with the Irish whose
interest is to break the settlement. All power is in
the hands of the conquered nation, and the English,
who did conquer, are left naked, and deprived even of
the arms which by the patents of plantation they are
obliged to have in readiness for the King’s service.’ ?

A. third of these grants had been sacrificed at the

? €Clarendon to Rochester, June * ‘Clarendon to Rochester, Oc-
8.’ Letters, vol. 1. tober 12.’ Jbid,

THE REVOLUTION,

second Act of Settlement. It was now broadly hinted
that a third or half of what remained would be further

expected of them. The moderate Catholics had de- .

sired that the acts should be confirmed. Their ad-
vanced representative on the council—the Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, Sir Stephen Rice—frankly insisted
that the acts should be repealed. It was assumed that,
if time had been allowed, every claimant for reinstate-
ment would have proved his innocence, and so made
good his right. As a compensation for the long
deprivation, Sir R. Nagle, the Attorney-General,
proposed that the ancient proprietors, who by the
acts were intended to be restored to their estates
after the present possessors were reprised, should at
once be put in possession; and that the English occu-
pants, after twenty or even thirty years of occupancy,
having built, drained, fenced, and planted, and trebled
or quadrupled the value of the properties, should be
paid off at the price of the original debentures. |
While judges and law officers spoke plainly, the
King still maintained an affected veil on his own in-
tentions. He talked of summoning a Parliament ;
but there was not a child of ten years old that could
be ignorant what a Parliament would do, assembled
under such auspices as the present. The most sinister
rumours were abroad. Clarendon continued to hope;
but, sanguine as he tried to be, an autumn progress
through the south dispelled the possibility of illu-
sion. ‘The priests forbade the people to appear at his
levees. Tyrconnell, not the Viceroy, was the repre-
sentative of James Stuart in Ireland.? The next

1 ¢Clarendon to Ormond, August discoursing with some wonder how
28.’ Letters, vol. i. few of the natives had been with
2 ‘At Cork, some gentlemen of me, a Roman Catholic priest in the
both religions being together, and company, who will own it, said,

174
BOOK

—-—"

1686 -

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

post from England brought Clarendon word that he
was in disgrace at the court. His recall had been
determined, and Tyrconnell was to take his place.
Profoundly loyal as Clarendon was, he could not
blind himself to what such an appointment would
mean. The English interest was about to be sacrificed.
The administration of the country was to be thrown
into the hands of a set of men whose object was the
same as that of the conspirators of 1641, though their
road to it might le through less violent means. He
had come over on a mission of conciliation, and con-
ciliation was found to imply, extremely plainly, the
extirpation of the Protestant settlers. On the eve of
his departure, he pointed out to his brother his un-
willing conviction that, unless Ireland was to go her
own way altogether, concession to the Catholic clergy
was a delusion and a folly. ?
‘It is scarce possible for any that have not been
here,’ he said, ‘to believe the profound ignorant
bigotry the nation here are bred in by the priests,
who, to all appearance, seem to be as ignorant as
themselves. The generality of them do believe that
this kingdom is the Pope’s; that the King has no
right further than the Pope gives him authority; and
that it is lawful for them to call in any foreign power
to help them against those who oppose the jurisdic-
tion of the Church, as has evidently appeared by the
late rebellion. And I do assure you the same prin-
ciples which carried on that rebellion have been since
carefully propagated, and are now too publicly owned.
True, many Roman Catholics declare against these
“Our people are mad: our clergy know more of the King’s mind than
have forbid gentlemen to appear.” my Lord Lieutenant.” "—‘ Claren-

Says another, “We have among don to Rochester, October 2,’
us who pretend to govern and to Letter’, vol. ii.

THE REVOLUTION.

principles, and do detest them, even priests. But

175

CHAP.

these two things are observable; first, that those saris

who detest those principles, and will not allow the
Pope to have so great an authority at this time when
Roman Catholics are put into all employments, are
scarce taken notice of, and upbraided with the names
of whigs and trimmers, and the children of the most
active in the rebellion, and those who set up the
Pope’s authority most, are in the employments ; and
secondly, notwithstanding the moderation of those
Roman Catholics I mention, not one of them will
suffer any of the others to be prosecuted for any
offence they commit.’

1 ‘Clarendon to Rochester, December 26, 1686.’ Letters, vol. ii.

1686

176

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

Book Tue Irish believed that Ireland was theirs; that the
Botti: English were invading tyrants who had stolen their

1687

land, broken up their laws and habits, and proscribed
their creed. The English believed that Ireland was a
country attached, inseparably, by situation and cir-
cumstances, to the English crown ; that they were
compelled to govern a people who were unable or
unwilling to govern themselves, and that the spolia-
tion with which they were reproached had been forced
upon them by the treachery and insubordination of
the native owners. Between these two views of the
same facts no compromise was possible. That the
Irish, being what they were, should bear the chain
impatiently was inevitable from the constitution of
their nature. It was no less certain that England
neither could nor would recede from the position
which she had taken up, and that, before the Irish
were allowed to be independent, they must win their
independence with the sword. ‘Those who could look
beyond the moment, saw plainly that the struggle
which was recommencing must end at last in a con-
flict between the two nations. Religion might serve
as a veil, for the present, over more vital questions ;
and the religious question itself might conceal its real
nature behind the spurious pleas of toleration. But,
even under the extravagant supposition that James
could undo the Reformation and make England
Catholic again, no English Parliament would or could
consent that the settlers of English race should be dis-

THE REVOLUTION.

possessed, and that Irish rebellion, after its neck had
been so hardly broken, should be re-established in its
old strength. Tyrconnell meant to take back the lands.
England, whether Catholic or Protestant, was sooner or
later certain to interfere, and insist that it should not
be. For the moment, however, the Irish were the win-
ning side, and the game went merrily along. Clarendon
resigned the sword, paying a melancholy but hononr-
able compliment to the loyal hearts of the Protestants,
who were now to be sacrificed. Tyrconnell, when he
was installed, talked grandiloquently, as James had
done in England, of the immortal principles of religious
liberty, which were to be the rule of his government ;
principles which, in practice, were to mean that those
who had been punished for a detestable rebellion, which
they were pleased to describe as a religious war, were
to be indemnified for their sufferings at the expense
of those who had punished them. Chancellor Porter,
as unavailable for the purpose in view, was dismissed
with Clarendon. His office was given to Sir Alex-
ander Fitton, whose qualifications were, the having
been convicted and imprisoned for forgery, and whose
merit in the King’s eyes was his being a convert to
Popery. Protestant officers were weeded out of the
army; and the power of the sword being now Catholic,
Chief Baron Rice set himself, as he described it, to
drive a coach and horses through the Acts of Settle-
ment: such statutes, he said, ‘ being contrary to natu-
ral equity, could not oblige.’!

The dispossessed families put in their claims. Out-
lawries were reversed as fast as the courts could give
judgements; and decrees of restoration were made out

1 Life of Wilkam III. Harris, vol. ii. p. 8.
VOL. I. N

178

BOOK
if

ene

1687

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

so rapidly that it was said, ‘if Rice had been left to him-
elf he would, in a few years, have given away most of
the estates of Protestants in Ireland without troubling
Parliament to attaint them.’ Fitton said publicly
that, among forty thousand Protestants, there was not
one who was not a traitor, a rebel, and a villain. The
merchants and manufacturers being Protestants, and
in consequence governors of the corporate towns, the
corporation charters were revoked and cancelled, and
new charters issued, by which the Viceroy had him-
self the nomination of the aldermen. There was to
be no bloodshed ; the work could be done by forms of
law, and there was no need of it. To make assurance
more sure, a second search for arms was made in the
Protestant houses. Their horses, swords, and pistols
were demanded, with a threat that, if they were found
with firearms in their possession for the future, ‘ their
lives and goods should be at the mercy and discretion
of the soldiers.’? The army, being Catholic, lived at
free quarters on the Protestant farms. Tories, lately
outlaws and bandits, were commissioned officers in
the King’s service; and over those who had set prices
on their heads, they were left to work their will as
they pleased. Tenants of Protestant landowners were
bidden not to pay their rents, for the land would soon
be their own. Tyrconnell proposed to receive the
money meanwhile, to be used in the service of the
King.

So went matters all through the year 1687, and for
ten months of 1688, when the news came that the
Prince of Orange had landed, and that the King was
a fugitive. What now was to be the fate of Ireland?

1 Harris, vol. ii. p. 8.
2 History of the Protestants nm Ireland, Archbishop King.

THE REVOLUTION.

179

To those who believed in the forms and shadows of CHAP.

II.

things the English revolution made no difference, —~—~

save that it might precipitate the severance of the
two countries, which the Irish so intensely desired.
The Dutch usurper might be driven out again, and
the second revolution come to nothing like the first ;
but should it be permanent, the King of England
need not be King of Ireland. Ireland might re-
main loyal to James, though England disowned him.
They could fight against their old enemy, sheltered
under the same veil as the insurgents of 1641,
keeping still within the limits of the constitution,
and overthrowing the detested Protestantism, while
professing themselves the devoted subjects of their
lawful sovereign. The members of the Established
Church could not oppose them. The bishops and
clergy, in the exaggeration of Royalism, had bound
themselves to an opinion that, ‘under no pretence,
might men take arms against their king.’ Tyrcon-
nell, tyrant as he might be, was still the representative
of the lawful prince. To resist Tyrconnell was to
imitate the crimes of Cromwell, whom it had been
their special function to anathematize. Secured
against half the English settlers from this singular
reason, the fanatic Catholics believed themselves safe
in defying the rest. The Ironsides, thanks to Bram-
hall and Jeremy Taylor, were beyond the Atlantic.
Except in Ulster, among the persecuted Presbyterians,
the English could count on no friends in Ireland ;
and, without a party among themselves, would be too
weak to resist the reviving energy of the native race.

There were others, however, longer-headed, like
Chief Justice Keating, on whom the experience of
the last rebellion had not been thrown away. LKeat-
N 2

1688

180

BOOK
Is
———

1688

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

ing warned Tyrconnell in council that in the end,
in grasping at the whole, the Catholics would lose
all that had been left to them. ‘Tyrconnell himself
hesitated till he saw how events would turn in Eng-
land, and how James would be received in France.
‘He wrote plausible letters, affecting a desire to-come
‘to terms. William, with England in confusion, was
peculiarly reluctant to court an Irish quarrel, and for

‘some months there seemed to be a chance of a peace-
ful solution. The fanatics carried the day at last.

‘Some Irish regiments had been sent to England to
‘support James. They had thrown :down their arms,
_and their officers were under arrest. General Hamil-
ton, who was one of them, volunteered ‘his services
to William to negotiate with Tyrconnell. His offer
‘was accepted. He returned to Dublin to tell the
Viceroy that William’s cause was desperate, and that
in a few weeks, or months, James would be again

on the throne. The letters from France were equally

encouraging. Cannon were coming, and powder and
‘muskets and money. perhaps a disciplined French
army.

The uncertainty was at end. William’s overtures
‘were construed into a.consciousness of weakness, and
all Catholic Ireland was called under arms. The
‘property of the Protestant farmers and gentlemen
was generally seized. ‘Cows and sheep were driven
-off; ‘all was gone in three months, to the value of a
million of money.”* What could not be consumed or
carried off was destroyed, that ‘the damned Whigs
might not have the benefit of it.’ The corn was cleared
from the farm-yards. A guard of soldiers surrounded
the bakehouses, that no Protestant might purchase a

1 History of the Protestants in Ireland. Archbishop King.

THE REVOLUTION.

loaf. The less reticent Catholics said publicly, ‘ that
they designed to starve half the Protestants in Ireland
and hang the other half, and that it never would be
well till it was done.’”

Passionate language was not to be construed lite-
rally, but 1641 was not forgotten. When the Irish
had’ the bit between their teeth they were unre-
strainable savages; and this much they had deter-
mined, that, by fair means or foul, Ireland was to be
swept clean of heretics. It was a less. easy matter
than Catholic enthusiasm. anticipated.

The siege of Derry, almost the only. heroic piece
of story which the long chronicles of Ireland can
boast, does not need a fresh description. At the end
of 1688, an anonymous letter was addressed to Lord
Mount Alexander, telling him that there was to be a
second massacre. Whether such a design had or had
not been formed, the story seemed only too credible;
and in Ulster, where, though generally disarmed, the
Protestants. were numerous, they formed associations
for general defence. The garrison of Derry had gone
to England. among the troops which Tyrconnell had
dispatched to James. Lord Antrim was sent with
another regiment to take its place. The mhabitants,
proud of their virgin city, which, through the ten
years of the last civil war, had kept their streets clear
of the Irish enemy, decided to refuse to admit him
till they had taken security for the. character of his
soldiers. Ezekiel Hopkins, the Episcopalian bishop,
counselled submission; but the Derry Protestants
were mainly Calvinists, whose respect for kings and
bishops was not excessive. ‘The apprentices closed

1 History of the Protestants in Ireland. Dr, King was an eye-witness,
* Ibid.

182

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book the gates in Antrim’s face; and though they were
mes willing to accept half a dozen companies to take

1689

charge of the town, they stipulated, successfully, that
half at least of the men should be of the same religion
as themselves.’

Enniskillen had been no less resolute. The gentle-
men throughout Ulster armed their tenants as well
as they were able, and reestablished their disbanded
militia. James, it was now known, was coming in
person to Ireland; and Tyrconnell, to secure the
North, at once sent down a strong force to disperse
these incipient gatherings and seize the two towns.
The militia, under command of Colonel Lundy, a feeble
and perhaps treacherous officer, was easily broken up.
Lundy himself fled to Derry; and finding the forti-
fications consisting of nothing but a half-ruined wall,
insisted that defence was impossible. English ships,
with two regiments, were in the lough. Lundy assured
the English officers that, if the men were landed they
could not be fed; and that the town was totally un-
tenable. ‘They sailed away, and left Derry to its fate ;
and Lundy prepared to surrender.” James himself
was approaching in person to receive the capitulation.
After many difficulties, he had obtained at last the
promised assistance from France. He had landed at
Kingsale on the 12th of March, bringing with him
5,000 French troops under Marshal Rosen, several
hundred officers for the Irish regiments, cannon,
ammunition, and arms for 40,000 men. He passed
through Dublin on the 24th, when writs were issued
for a Parliament; and he went on to the North, to
return and open the session in May, when the Ulster
troubles should have been put down.

1 March, 1689, 3 April,

THE REVOLUTION.

Now was again witnessed what Calvinism, though
its fire was waning, could still do in making common
men into heroes. Deserted by the English regiments,
betrayed by their own commander, without stores
and half armed, the shopkeepers and apprentices of a
commercial town prepared to defend an unfortified
city against a disciplined army of 25,000 men, led by
trained officers, and amply provided with artillery.’
Expresses were sent to England for help. Lundy, to
escape being torn in pieces, fled for his life. Major
Baker and Dr. Walker, a clergyman of the Esta-
blished Church, who had raised a regiment and seen
service against the Irish, were voted into the com-
mand. Lvery assault failed. The siege was turned
into a blockade. ‘They were cut off from the sea by
a boom across the river. Fever, cholera, and famine
came to the aid of the besiegers. Rats came to be
dainties, and hides and shoe leather were the ordinary
fare. They saw their children pme away and die.
They were wasted themselves till they could scarce
handle their firelocks on their ramparts. Asa shame-
ful example of cowardice, an English fleet lay for weeks
in the lough, the lazy ships visible from the church
towers. ‘There, before their eyes, were holds brim-
ming with meal, hundreds of brave men ready and
eager to come to their help, all lying enchanted by
their commander’s cowardice. Still indomitably they
held on through three miserable months, till, on the
80th July, the Dartmouth frigate came in with two
provision ships and an English officer who feared
other things worse than danger and death. The
boom was broken ; the relieving squadron found their
way to the town. The Irish camp was broken up in
despair, and Derry was saved.

STA DTyLs

183

CHAP.
TUT:
————

1689

184

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

ENNISKILLEN had been as successful as Derry. There

_*_ too the Irish had failed. But the odds were despe-

1689

May 7.

rate, and unless an army came from England, the end
could not be far off.

Meanwhile James had met his Parliament, not
bringing with him the keys of Derry to grace the
opening, but leaving Rosen to complete a conquest of
which every day he looked for the news.

On the 7th May the Lords and Commons of Ire-
land assembled in Dublin. By the constitution, the
Trish Parliament could only meet when summoned by
the King of England, and James was King of England
no longer. By the constitution no measures could be
submitted to them which had not been considered
and approved by the English Council. Plead as
they would that James was still King of Ireland,
having neither abdicated that crown, nor done any
act which could be construed into abdication, they
were 7pso facto in revolt against England. The value
of their Parliamentary proceedings would depend on
whether their swords were at length sharp enough to
vindicate the independence which they had assumed.
The meeting was itself an act of rebellion, and every
person who took part m it was compromised. As
between the two countries, the position was simple.
If the Irish arms were successful, they were loyal
subjects. If they were defeated, they were insur-

1 May 7.

THE REVOLUTION. , 185

gents, and were again liable to forfeiture. The moral cuap.
bearings of the question were less simple than the Re ee
political. The Episcopal Church of Ireland was still 1689
praying for James as lawful King of England, and
denouncing William as a usurper. The lawful King

being present among them, might be held to carry

with him his constitutional powers. The maintainers

of the divine right were in hopeless embarrassment.

In practice, however, whatever this Parliament might

do could be only provisional. If William were to
remain sovereign of England, Poynings’ Act must be
repealed on the field of battle before the statutes of

an Irish Parliament could become law.

In prudence the Catholic leaders should have
waited till the fighting was over, without committing
themselves to acts which, unless they were victorious,
might prove dangerous to them. But they were too
impatient to bear delay. Ireland had. an opportunity
of declaring her free opinion of Engand’s dealings
with her, and was determined to use it.

The Parliament which passed the Acts of Settle-
ment was almost exclusively Protestant. Fhe Par-
liament which met to destroy them was almost as ex-
clusively Catholic. The Protestant nobles had fled
to England. Had Lord Clarendon called a Parlia-
ment, the Upper House would have contained ninety-
six lay Protestant peers, with twenty-four bishops,
and twenty-two Catholics. Fifteen outlawries were
reversed. New Catholic peers were created. Boys
under age were called to serve. Thirty-six in all
presented themselves in Dublin on 9th May. Among
them were nine Protestants only: four bishops—
Munster, Ossory, Limerick, and Cork, whose attend-
ance was insisted on to give a semblance of fairness

te

186 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK to the proceedings ; and five lay Protestant peers—the
way?) Barls pat Barrymore, Clancarty, and Longford, Vis-
1689 count Ross, and Lord Kingsale. The rest were Catho-
lics of the most prominent type, the majority of them
legally disqualified, and called on to sit for the special
business intended for the session. The House of
Commons consisted, with five or six exceptions, of no-
minees of Tyrconnell. Elections could not be free in
the heat of a revolution, and the sheriffs of counties
and the mayors of the towns being necessarily Tyr-
connell’s creatures, the returns were managed without
difficulty. Two hundred and thirty members were
sent up. Six Protestants, perhaps by accident, per-
haps for appearance, found places among them. It
was inevitable, under the circumstances, that the
most extreme men were most generally chosen. So
bitter were the Catholic electors of Dublin, that
Gerrard Dillon, the Prime sergeant, though of un-
impeached bigotry, was rejected by them because he
had bought an estate under the Acts of Settlement,

and he sate for Mullingar.

Immediate steps, it was well understood, would be
taken for the repeal of the detested Acts of Settle-
ment. Chief Justice Keating, still confident whither
all this was tending, made a last appeal to the King’s
better understanding. The time was unpropitious, for
Derry was still closely blockaded, and the Irish were in
a passion of elation at the defeat of an English squad-
ron in Bantry Bay, which was sent to intercept the
French ships that had brought James to Kingsale.
There were principles of justice, however, not to be
disregarded with impunity, on which Keating ven-
tured to insist. The soil which had been taken from
the Irish owner was bare as nature made it. Thus it

THE REVOLUTION.

had been when sold to the English, But it was no

187

CHAP.
jure

longer the same country. The wild common had been ——~—~—

fenced in, the barren morasses turned to pasture, and
ample stone mansions had taken the place of cabin
and castle. ‘The farms carried as abundant stock as
farms in England; and up and down were established
manufactories, by which the meanest peasant had
been enriched and civilized. All was panic now, but
the panic in its extent and magnitude showed how
great the interests had become which were about to be
hazarded. The English settlers had bought their
lands in good faith, with a state title, and the honour
of the government as their security. They had made
Ireland the most improved and improving spot of
earth in Europe, and, if the Acts of Settlement were
repealed, they would be irretrievably ruined. The
Chief Justice implored the King to pause before en-
couraging or allowing so dangerous and iniquitous a
measure.’ ‘T’o James himself the justice of such an
argument must have been obvious. But James was
swept away in the torrent of an Irish revolution
which he despised and detested, while he was obliged
to use and humour it. The improvement of their
estates did not diminish the anxiety of the old owners
to return to possession. If landlords in ordinary
times may appropriate without scruple the fruits of
their tenants’ industry, the lawful proprietors saw no
occasion for Quixotic virtue in resigning rights which
the change of times had restored to them, because
spoilers and aliens had raised the value of the lands
which they had stolen. ‘The settlers should receive

1 ‘Address to King James in behalf of the Protestants, by Judge
Keating. King, Appendix, p. 22.

1689

188

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

spook back their original purchase-money, and ought to feel
__*_ themselves happy in being so equitably dealt with.

1689

The bill for the repeal was introduced on 4th
June. The preamble, going back over the history of
1641, retorted the charge of treason on the Govern-
ment. It accused the Protestants of having provoked
the revolt, to take advantage of the forfeitures. It
charged the Lords Justices with ambition, avarice,
traitorous combination with Puritan sectaries to
murder the Catholics, with an effrontery which seems
natural in Ireland, but would have been impossible in
any other country in the world. The guilty and the
innocent were made to change places, and the Irish
Catholics presented themselves as the injured victims
of a perfidious conspiracy. On these grounds the
representatives of the loyal and pious men who had
lost life and lands in a holy cause, claimed to be re-
stored to the possessions of their fathers.

Anthony Dopping, Bishop of Meath, had the extra-
ordinary courage to rise in the House of Lords and
protest. He took the ground of Keating. The pre-
sent proprietors, he said, had bought their estates in
good faith. They had sold. their interests in England,
and had committed their fortunes to Irish soil ; and
out of the wild, barren Ireland of the past they had
made a thriving, growing, and prosperous country.
It was pretended that, in justice to: the old owners,
they could not be allowed to remain, and they were
promised an indemnity for their losses. He ventured
to hint that promise was not fulfilment, and that the
assessment was not likely to be equitable, when they
were themselves to be allowed no voice in it. To
destroy so many loyal and useful subjects was the
height of impolicy. The revenue would return to

THE REVOLUTION.

nothing, trade and manufactures would perish, the
plough would turn the soil no longer, and the inha-
bitants would feed not on bread but on one another.

‘My Lords,’ he concluded, ‘either there was a re-
bellion in this kingdom, or there was not. If there
was none, we have been very unjust all this time in
keeping so many innocents out of their estates. God
forbid I should open my mouth in defence of so
grave an injustice. But then, what shall, I say to
his majesty’s royal father’s declaration, who owns
that there was a rebellion, and in pursuance of that
opinion passed an act to secure such as should ad-
venture money for the suppression of it. . . I take
it for granted that there was a rebellion, general or
partial. If general, then all were guilty, and none
can claim their estates. If partial, we ought to dis-
tinguish, and not confound, the nocent with the
innocent.’ !

The Bishop was not likely to be listened to with
patience by an assembly which had met with a fore-
gone conclusion. The fatal policy of the late reign,
the retrogression from the steady principles of Crom-
well, and the concession of part of their demands to
men who challenged all as their legitimate right, and
regarded instalments of so-called justice as a weakness
which it accepts while it despises, was bearing its
legitimate fruit. The Restoration found the three
provinces exclusively Protestant, the rebellious ele-
ments shut up in Connaught, and in Connaught
disarmed of power for mischief. ‘Justice to Ireland’
had flung bridges over the Shannon, and allowed the
returning stream once more to flow over the land,
and this was the result.

1 King’s State of the Protestants in Ireland, Appendix, p. 23.

190

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The repeal was passed. Every one who held an

_ 1 _ estate under the Acts of Settlement was dispossessed.

1689

The old proprietors were reinstated in their inherit-
ance, and made the happy owners of the wealth which
had accumulated there. The ejected colonists were
to receive compensation when they could get it. The
Irish Catholics were thus restored to all which they
had lost by the rebellion of 1641. There remained
to be recovered the forfeitures from the Elizabethan
wars and the six counties of the Ulster settlement.
The process taken upon these was as complete as it
was summary. Almost all the leading Protestants
in Ireland were comprehended by name in one sweep-
ing act of attainder. Two thousand six hundred

landowners, commencing with the Archbishop of

Dublin and the Duke of Ormond, were declared
guilty of adherence to the Prince of Orange, and to
have forfeited their estates by treason. Two months’
respite only was allowed to such of them as were still
in Ireland to present themselves in Dublin and take
their trial. Each member of the House of Commons
gave in a list of his Protestant neighbours, and guilt
was assumed in the absence of proof of innocence.
The habitual absentees were struck out, because, as
residing in England or Scotland under the usurpa-
tion, and not having returned to Ireland to defend
their natural sovereign, their treason stood confessed.
Those who had fled since the disturbances, betrayed
a consciousness of guilt, and were to be accounted
guilty till they cleared themselves. The conditions
of 1652 were reversed. Then all Catholics were held
responsible for the rebellion of 1641; now all Pro-
testants were partisans of the Prince of Orange. The
question at issue was whether England had or had

THE REVOLUTION.

191

not a right to govern Ireland, and the right depended cwap.

on the relative strength of the two countries. . If the
Trish could succeed in driving the invaders out by
force, history would see only legitimate retribution
in the proceedings of James’s Parliament.

Another act swept away the personal property,
goods, chattels, stock, debts, bonds, arrears of rent of
every person who was in arms against King James, or
who, by the previous statutes, was declared to have
forfeited his real estate. Schools and colleges were
transferred to Catholic management; the churches
and the church property were given back to Catholic
bishops and priests. Poynings’ Act was repealed, and
Ireland was declared independent; while, in harmony
with the language which James had ingeniously used
to advance Romanism behind principles which were
abjured in every Catholic country in Europe, laws
interfering with liberty of conscience were declared

repealed. Liberty of conscience might be safely con- ,

ceded in a country where, if the present measures
could be maintained, no Protestant was likely to
remain.

The session, so momentous in its consequences,
closed on 20th July. Eleven days later, Derry was
relieved. |

Kil.

1689

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VII.

Book Tue Parliament had finished its work, and, so far as
—*— words could accomplish it, had achieved a revolution.

1689

Ireland was again Irish. It remained to be seen
whether the sword would ratify the statute roll. For
a time they had reasonable hopes that fortune would at
last favour them. On the 13th August, Duke Schom-
berg, with a nominal force of 20,000 men, landed in
Down and took Carrickfergus. But, under the train-
ing of Marshal Rosen and the French officers, the
Irish displayed capacity as soldiers. Supplies con-
tinued to pour in from France, and Schomberg’s army,
comprised of English, Dutch, Germans, and French

_ Huguenots, ill-furnished and worse-disciplined, lay idle

in Ulster, disabled with sickness, vice, and division.
Neither Schomberg, nor Schomberg’s master, under-
stood the Irish problem. The clergy of the Estab-
lished Church were called Protestants, but, not-
withstanding attainders and confiscations, were still
everywhere praying earnestly for James, and denoun-
cing the new usurper. The siege of Derry had shown
that all the Protestants were not of the same mettle;
but Schomberg’s officers did not care to distinguish,
and treated all alike ‘as enemies to King William’s
government.’ ‘The best of them,’ it was said, ‘had
either basely complied with King James, or cowardly
deserted their country.’ The soldiers lived at free
quarters, plundering as they pleased, and living in

THE REVOLUTION. 193

riot and debauchery.t. The Irish army itself showed cHap.
in favourable contrast to the discreditable force which —~~—
had come, it seemed, for no other purpose than to 1690
bring the revolution into contempt. Forty years

had passed since Cromwell landed on the same errand.

The cause was unchanged, but the men who were

its champions were of another breed and soul. In
Schomberg’s camp ‘religion was but canting,’ and
whoredom and drunkenness the soldiers’ natural
amusement.” The defenders of Londonderry and
Enniskillen, few though they might be, were more
formidable to Rosen and Tyrconnell than the loose
companies of swearing ruffians who were dying of the

rot, through their own vices, in the Belfast Hospital.

The situation could not continue. The English
Parliament grew impatient. A little more and France,
finding James succeed better than had been expected,
might throw its whole power into the scale, and
Ireland might be irrecoverably lost. Schomberg was
so sharply censured that William found it necessary,
as Cromwell had found, to take charge of the war in
person.

With a fresh army composed of better stuff, though
of the same motley materials, he crossed the Channel
on 14th June, 1690, and joined the camp at Carrick-
fergus. Following Cromwell’s example, he resolved
to strike at once, and with all his force. A few days
were spent in reorganizing Schomberg’s troops, and
then, with 386,000 men, he commenced his march
on Dublin. Against the advice of his best officers,

1 See the very remarkable letter | Plowden, vol. i, Appendix, p. 45.
of Dr. George, Schomberg’s secre- 4 Thid.
tary, to Colonel James Hamilton.

VOL. I. O

194

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

for fresh troops from Brest were daily expected,

_' _ and Louis was meditating a descent on England in

1690

William’s absence, which would distract him, and,
perhaps, compel his return, James determined to risk
an immediate engagement. ‘The Irish, he said, were
now confident; he had the advantage of numbers; and
to abandon Dublin and retreat as the Council of War
advised, might dispirit and divide them.

The action of 1st July, on the Boyne, must be
passed over, like the siege of Derry and Enniskillen,
with the briefest notice. The result only concerns
us here. The Irish, though with every advantage of
position, exhibited once more their unvarying in-
ability to encounter the English in the field in their
own country. The patriotic ecstasy which had flowed
so freely in torrents of rhetoric, congealed at the
sound of cannon. They did not even attempt to
make a creditable stand. James, who had shown
personal cowardice, bid his disgrace in flight, and
stole back to France. William advanced to Dublin,
but lingered purposely in following up his success, in
the hope that Tyrconnell would now throw up the
game. Tyrconnell made no sign, and he went on to
Kilkenny. His discipline was now as stringent as
Oliver’s. He saw some of his men once plundering
an old woman ; he struck one on the spot with his
cane, and promptly hanged the whole party. But with
the Irish he was studiously lenient. He promised
publicly that, if they would lay down their arms, all
that had been done should be forgotten. When no
response came, he turned westward, made a feeble
attempt upon Athlone, passed on, and sate down before
Limerick. But he betrayed no intention, and he felt
no desire, to break down by violence a people whom, in

THE REVOLUTION. 195

his inexperience, he believed it possible to win by  cuap.
indulgent terms. He refused to look upon them as ee,
rebels when they were in arms for one whom they 1699

regarded as their natural sovereign. He either did

not or could not see that the essential enmity was

against England, and the English settlement ; and he

shrunk from pushing a war to extremities, which

must then be followed by fresh forfeitures.

The reality of the situation was obscured by the
confusion of political feeling, and instead of ending
the campaign promptly and decisively, and reviving
Cromwell’s policy, which ought never to have been
touched, he imagined, as many an amiable person has
imagined before and since, that the native Irish had
been handled irrationally and cruelly, and needed only
kindness to become faithful subjects. Neither should
the Irish race be dealt with hardly, if William could
help it, nor the Irish religion. James’s Parliament
had enacted liberty of worship. It would be ashame
if the champion of Protestantism was less tolerant
than an assembly of Catholics ; and he was purposely
dilatory, as if to enable them to offer conditions which
he could grant. Sir Arthur Ashton imagined that he
could hold Drogheda for many months. Cromwell
stormed Drogheda the day after his cannon opened on
it. The same spirit would have taken Limerick had the
spirit been there. But William lingered till the rains
forced him to raise the siege ; and he returned to Eng-
land, leaving Tyrconnell another year for reflection.
Lord Sidney,’ Sir Charles Porter, the late Chancellor,
and Thomas Coningsby,’ who had stood by William at

1 Brother of Algernon Sidney, 2 Created Lord Coningsby of
great grandson of Sir Philip, created Clanbrassil,
afterwards Earl of Romney.

o 2

196

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book the Boyne and staunched his wound when he was hit,
ee, were left as Lords Justices, and were all well inclined

1690

to moderate counsels. The army went into winter
quarters, and Baron Ginkel remained in command.’
Cork was taken from the sea in September, and the
south and east of Ireland submitted; but Athlone
and all the country west of it continued in Tyr-
connell’s hands. He held Connaught, Clare, Lime-
rick, and Kerry; and with the sea open behind him,
and the Shannon in his front, he trusted to the tide
of events in Europe and to possible revolution in
Engiand, or at any rate to a continuance of assist-
ance from France. The English Parliament met on
2nd October. Large money grants were necessary
for the war with France; the Irish expenses had been
enormous ; and naturally and inevitably the House of
Commons insisted that the cost should not be borne
by the English taxpayers; the Irish lords and gen-
tlemen who made a fresh reconquest necessary must
pay for it, anda million at least of the estimates must

be charged, as in 1642, on the anticipated confisca-

tions. William’s disposition to leniency was under-
stood; but there would be no escape from an Act of
Parliament ; and a bill of attainder was introduced
against all who had been in arms. |
Confiscations were now complicated with difficulties
unknown in earlier times. Estates were mortgaged,
charged with settlements, and otherwise encumbered
in their tenures. Creditors petitioned, and raised
difficulties, and a clause was introduced which would
have reduced the compulsory forfeitures by two-
thirds, and left the King free to grant what terms he

1 Godard de Ginkel, one of  ficers: created for his Irish ser-
William’s most distinguished of- vices Earl of Athlone.

THE REVOLUTION.

pleased to those who had not yet surrendered. The
House of Commons did not choose to be put off
with evasions and excuses. But the bill was stopped
in the Lords, to leave William’s hands unbound.

The King desired most earnestly to be allowed still
to hold out hopes to the Irish of favourable considera-
tion. ‘ Touched by the fate of a gallant nation, that had
made itself the victim to French promises,’ says Sir
Charles Wogan, ‘the Prince of Orange, before the deci-
sive battle of Aghrim, offered the Irish Catholics the
free exercise of their religion, half the churches of the
kingdom, half the employments, civil and military
too, and the moiety of their ancient properties.’* Sir
Charles Wogan was Tyrconnell’s nephew; he affects
to speak from personal knowledge, and he adds, that
‘these proposals were to have the sanction of an act
of Parliament.’ If William ever made such an offer,

he was promising more than England would have

allowed him to perform ; but had Tyrconnell possessed.
ordinary sense, there can be no doubt at all that he
might have secured conditions which would have left
the Catholics materially unweakened, and free to re-
sume the struggle whena fresh chance offered. When
the siege of Limerick was raised, he went to France,
attended by Sir Richard Nagle and Chief Baron Rice,
to ascertain if he was to have further support. France,
unhappily for him and his cause, gave him just so
much help as encouraged him to persevere, not
enough to give him a serious chance of success. He
returned up the Shannon in January 1691, with three
frigates, clothes, arms, ammunition, and a little
money. Louis, like every foreign ally on whom the

1 «Sir Charles Wogan to Swift.’ Swift’s Works, vol. xviii. p. 10, &c,

197

CHAP,

Ill...

1691

198

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book Irish have been rash enough to lean, was contented
pa that they should make a brief diversion for him,

1691

whatever might be the consequence to themselves.
One more campaign was thus inevitable, with fresh
bloodshed and fresh expense. Ginkel’s army assem-
bled in May at Mullingar; Mackay brought reinforce-
ments from Scotland; Sir Richard Cox sent some
spare regiments from Cork ; and Ginkel advanced to
Athlone, at the beginning of June, with 18,000 men.
The bridge was broken; the Irish were strongly
posted on the Connaught side. There were divided
counsels in Ginkel’s camp and a talk of retreat. It
happened that the spring had been dry; the river was
unusually low, and could be crossed by wading a short
distance off. At six o’clock in the evening of 30th
June, when the Irish were in no suspicion of an attack,
Mackay waded over with 2 ,000 men. Covered by the
smoke of the muskets, he Le the end of the bridge
and repaired it; and perore dark the whole army had
crossed. The castle capitulated ; the Irish fell back
among bogs and streams upon Aghrim Hill, five miles

from Ballinasloe, and prepared for the final battle

which was to decide the fate of the country.

At last they appeared really conscious of the great-
ness of the stake which was being played for. They
were commanded by St. Ruth, a distinguished French
officer and a profound and passionate Catholic. Masses
were said and prayers offered in all the regiments.
St. Ruth addressed the officers as if they were
Crusaders engaged in mortal conflict with hell and
heresy. Remembering the disgrace of the Boyne,
they took a solemn oath not to forsake their colours,
and to their honour it must be said that most of them
kept their word. Not without reason does the anni-

THE REVOLUTION.

versary of the battle of Aghrim keep so fresh a hold
on Irish memory. If the conquerors look back upon
it with pride, that day’ was also the only one on which
the Irish people fought on their own soil, for their
own nationality, with the courage which so uniformly
distinguished them under other flags and on other
fields.

Sunday, the 12th July, dawned thick and hazy ;
a damp fog lay spread over the marshes, which did
not lift till late in the afternoon. At half-past four,
with five hours of daylight remaining, the mist blew
off and the English advanced. English properly
they were not. IJinglish regiments were intermixed
with Danes, French Huguenots, Scots, Dutch, Brand-
enburghers, and Anglo-Irish Protestants, the fitter
to try an issue which, however disguised, was an
episode in the long European struggle for liberty of
conscience.

The battle was long doubtful. The ground was
trenched in all directions, and the ditches were lined
with Irish sharpshooters, who stood their ground
bravely, and again and again Ginkel’s columns, rush-
ing forward to close with them, were driven back in
confusion. Once St. Ruth believed the day was his
own, and he was heard to swear that he would hunt
the Saxons into Dublin. Almost immediately after
he was killed by a cannon ball. The Huguenot
cavalry, led by Henri de Ruvigny, executed a charge,
behind which the English infantry rallied. At last,
late in the evening, the Irish gave way, broke up,
and scattered. Few or no prisoners were taken, and
few were reported wounded. Those who escaped

1 July 12, 1691.

199

CHAP.
ET:
————”

1691

200

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

escaped, those who were overtaken were made an

baa end of. Seven thousand men were killed before dark-

1691

ness and rain ended the pursuit. ,

The wreck of the defeated army divided ; part
went to Galway, part to Limerick, where the last act
of the drama was to be played out. Galway’s turn
came first. Whether William did or did not make
the offer before the battle, which Sir Charles Wogan
says he did, that he had instructed Ginkel to wind
up the war on conditions easy to the Irish, became
evident in the articles of surrender which were allowed
to Galway. An English fleet was in the bay, and com-
manded the approaches from the sea. The town might
have been completely invested by land, and compelled
to surrender at discretion. Obviously this was not
William’s desire. The French regiments, and such
of the garrison as preferred to continue the struggle,
were allowed to march away to Limerick, with drums
beating and flags flying. The governor, mayor,
sheriff, burghers, freemen, all the inhabitants, or
reputed inhabitants, for the word was construed
with the utmost latitude, received a free and com-
plete pardon for all offences which they had com-
mitted since the accession of James the Second. The
officers of the regiments which capitulated, whether
present or absent, were secured in the possession
of the whole of such estates, as they had enjoyed
under the Acts of Settlement. Catholic gentlemen
within the walls were permitted to retain their arms;
Catholic barristers there were allowed to continue to
practise. The priests of the town received protection
for person and property; and a promise was given
that their religious services, so long as they were
conducted in private, should not be interfered with

THE REVOLUTION.

by the penal laws. Cromwell ‘meddled with no
man’s conscience,’ but declared ‘ that the mass should
not be allowed where the English Parliament had
power.’ William, though himself nominally a Calvin-
ist, had unbounded faith in the principles of tolera-
tion, and believed that the Irish temperament was
capable of being conquered by generosity.

The surrender of Galway carried with it the
submission of Connaught. Limerick remained. It
had baffled William the year before. The season was
waning, the summer wet, and there had been no
second ‘massacre of Drogheda’ to show that re-
sistance might be dangerous. Ginkel approached at
leisure. Tyrconnell, who was in the town, either
worn out by fatigue, sick with disappointment, or
else poisoned, for this too was suggested, died before
he came under the walls, advising the Irish to make
peace with so liberal a conqueror, and not to sacrifice
themselves any longer to French ingratitude. The
fleet came round from Galway and sailed up the
Shannon. The same terms were offered which Gal-
way had accepted; but there was a hope for more
extended concessions; and Sarsfield,’ who had suc-
ceeded St. Ruth in command, undertook the defence.

Either Ginkel was purposely slow, or else was
culpably careless. He arrived before Limerick at the
end of August. For three weeks he left Sarsfield’s
communications open with the county of Clare, and
it was not till 22nd September that the town was

1 Patrick Sarsfield, created Earl
of Lucan by James the Second.
The Sarsfields were an old Anglo-
Norman family of the Pale. Patrick,
father of Sarsfield who commanded
at Limerick, was one of the Catholic

proprietors who were restored to
their estates under the Act of Set-
tlement. His eldest son, William,
married a natural daughter of
Charles the Second,

202

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

completely invested. A parley was then demanded,

aay and Sarsfield named his conditions.

1691

He demanded almost the very concessions which
were mentioned by Sir C. Wogan—a general indem-
nity; a confirmation to the Irish owners of all the
estates throughout Ireland, which they had held before
the revolution; religious liberty, with a priest in every
parish, recognised by the law; the admissibility of
Irish Catholics to all employments, military and civil ;
a full and entire equality with Protestants in every
right and privilege, with a promise that the stipula-
tions accepted by Ginkel should be confirmed by an
Act of Parliament.

It was obviously impossible that terms such as
these could be conceded. William himself might
have consented, and an Irish Parliament, elected like
that which had met two years before at Dublin,
might have been found to ratify them. But the con-
duct of the Irish in that Parliament had proved that
between them and the Protestant settlers there could
be nothing, if they were in a position of equality, but
an internecine war. Nor could any English Parlia-
ment have listened to an arrangement, which would
have left the settlers at the mercy of their enemies ;
the revolt absolutely unpunished; and the English
taxpayers burdened with the cost of a reconquest,
which at any moment might have to be repeated. Gin-
kel replied, that although he was a stranger to the laws
of England, he was certain that what Sarsfield asked for
could not be granted. He had Sarsfield at his mercy,
but he declined to push his advantage. In return
he drew himself, as a sketch of what might be allowed,
the celebrated Articles of Limerick, round which so
many heartburnings were to rage.

THE REVOLUTION.

There was a mystery about these Articles which
has been left unexplained. They were accepted by
the Irish leaders as sufficient, yet, in the form in
which the Irish leaders signed them, they were less
favourable than in the draft first offered by Ginkel.'
The alteration was explained afterwards as an over-
sight. This only is certain, that William had directed
Ginkel generally to grant the utmost that the Eng-
lish Parliament would allow; that, by some means or
other, the concessions were at the last moment mate-
rially reduced; that Sarsfield signed them in this
reduced form; and that William endeavoured after-
wards, without success, to restore them to their
original state.

The material stipulations, on which the doubts
afterwards arose, were these :—

1. That the Roman Catholics of Ireland should
enjoy such privileges, in the exercise of their religion,
as were consistent with the laws of Ireland, or as
they did,enjoy in the reign of Charles the Second ; the
King promising, as soon as his affairs would permit, to
summon a Parliament in Ireland, and to endeavour to
procure the Roman Catholics such further security
in that particular, as might preserve them from dis-
turbance on account of their religion.”

1 The allusion will be explained
in the next page.

? This article, intended obviously
to confer religious liberty, might
mean much or little, as it was
interpreted. The 2nd of Elizabeth,
which was still in force, prohibited
the exercise of the Catholic religion,
and so far the article gave the
Catholics nothing. On the other
hand, the law of Elizabeth had
rarely been acted on. Under

Charles the Second the practice
had varied. At one time the Ca-
tholic Archbishop had been re-
ceived in his robes at court.
There was a chapel and a priest in
every parish, where, for the greater
part of the reign, mass had been
said without disturbance, and
Catholics had been sheriffs and
magistrates. There had been an
interval, however, when the Eng-
lish Parliament took alarm; reli-

204

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

2. The inhabitants of Limerick, and of every other

ile ° e ° .
——— garrison town in possession of the Irish, the officers

1691

and soldiers in arms, under any commission from
King James, in the counties of Limerick, Cork, Kerry,
Clare, Sligo, and Mayo, and—so the words stood in
the original draft—all such as are under their protec-
tion in the said counties, should retain such estates,
interests, and privileges, as belonged to them in the
time of Charles the Second, or at any time during which
the laws of Charles the Second were in force. They
should retain their personal property untouched also,
and be at liberty to pursue their several trades and pro-
fessions as freely as before, subject only, they and
all other Catholics in the kingdom who made their sub-
mission, to take the simple Oath of Allegiance, as
modified by the English Parliament.’

The sixth article passed a sponge over the plunder
and violence which the Protestant farmers and gentry
suffered under at the beginning of the war.?

So long as the second of these three articles con-
tained the contested words, printed in italics, it con-
ceded nearly all for which Sarsfield had asked. Very
many of the Catholic gentry being in the army, were
protected as commissioned officers. The estates of
most of those who were absent, and yet were com-

and bear true allegiance to their

gious houses had been closed and
majesties King William and Queen

priests had been imprisoned. The

article might be understood to
refer to either of these periods,
and convey full toleration, or none
at all; while the word ‘endea-«
your,’ which might be only a form
of courtesy, might also leave an
opening to Parliament to refuse its
sanction.

1 <T, A, B., do sincerely promise
and swear that I will be faithful

Mary.’

* See the articles in Plowden,
vol. i. Appendix, p. 49. There were
forty-two articles in all—thirteen
civil and twenty-nine military. The
military articles referred to the
detailed winding up of the war;
the remainder of the civil articles
contained particular provisions of
no historical importance,

THE REVOLUTION.

promised in the insurrection, were in the counties
thus carefully particularized; and thus it might be
said, that nearly every Catholic of consequence, with
a disposition to be dangerous, would be covered by
the broad vagueness of the word ‘ PROTECTION.’

Inexperienced in Ireland, and in the spirit of the
broad truth that

He who overcomes
By force, hath overcome but half his foe,

William was expecting to win by kindness those
whom he had defeated in the field, and had studied
rather to spare their pride, and not to make their
overthrow toocomplete. The fact, however, was not
to be concealed, that in the Articles as signed by the
Irish generals the protection clause was not present.
The King, in his confirmation of the Articles in the
ensuing February, said, that ‘the words had been
casually omitted by the writer;’ that ‘the omission
was not discovered till the Articles were signed, but
was taken notice of before the town was surren-
dered ;’ and that ‘the Lords Justices, or General
Ginkel, or one of them, had promised that the clause
should be made good, since it was within the inten-
tion of the capitulation, and had been inserted in the
rough draft.’ He therefore for himself ‘ did ratify
and confirm the said omitted words.’ ’

The deliberate assertion of William ought not to
be lightly questioned, yet it is difficult to credit that
the accidental omission of a paragraph of such enor-
mous consequence should have passed undetected.
The more probable explanation is, that the Lords

1 ‘Confirmation of the Articles of Limerick, February 24, 1692.’
Plowden, vol. i. Appendix.

205

CHAP.
Lis
ed

1691

206

BOOK
iu
—_,-—_—_’

1691

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Justices who had arrived at the camp when the
treaty was in progress, narrowed down the King’s
liberality, and extorted harder terms than he had
prescribed or desired.

Once more, in conclusion, the conditional character
attached to the first of the Articles was extended to
the whole. The Lords Justices and the General
undertook ‘to use their utmost endeavours that the
treaty should be ratified and confirmed in Parlia-
ment.’ They bound themselves to ‘use their en-
deavours ;’ more they could not do; and if words
had a meaning, there was still reserved to the legis-
lature a power of revision,

THE REVOLUTION.

SECTION VIII.

Hap the Articles of Limerick and Galway been car-
ried out in the spirit in which they were framed, it is
sometimes pretended that the reconciliation between
the English and Irish races, which unhappily remains
incomplete, would then have been effected. The
allegiance of the conquered would have been given
freely to a sovereign who, when they were at his
mercy, had forborne to punish them. The past would
have been forgotten, and the Catholics, grateful for a
toleration which they were conscious that they had
not deserved, would have settled down contentedly
under a government which left them their religion
undisturbed by persecution, and uninsulted by penal
legislation.

If I am unable to share this opinion, it is because
William’s policy, however natural, and for himself,
pressed as he was by his difficulties with France,
convenient, was but a repetition of an experiment
which had been tried many times and had invariably
failed. To allow the Irish to manage their own
affairs, so far as was consistent with a bare allegiance
to the British crown; to interfere and punish when
indulgence had produced its unvarying consequences,
and then tread over again the same round, in the
hope that Ireland had learnt her lesson and would at
last recognize forbearance, had been the principle on
which Irish affairs had been administered from Henry
the Seventh’s time downwards, and can be traced
distinctly through successive stages of failure, from

207

208

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK the moment when the Tudor sovereigns first became
—.— conscious of their responsibilities for the condition of —

1691

their dependency. If Ireland was not again in flames
for the Pretender, and was now, for the first time in
its history, to enjoy a century of political peace, it
was because the experience of the past had not been
thrown away, and the Irish Protestants were less
ignorant than William of the country which had fallen
suddenly into his hands. Fiercer ages, and nations
less humane than the English, would have ended the
Irish difficulty by methods which in the end would,
perhaps, have been less productive of human wretch-
edness. Such races as could neither defend their
liberty with the sword, nor would submit when de-
feated to. live within the bounds of order, have been
transported generally to other lands, or been steadily
decimated till the unruly spirit has been broken.
William of Orange need have been driven to no such
excess of severity, for the main root of Irish disaffec-
tion was exposed and visible, and at that conjunc-
ture might have been easily excised.

There were peculiar conditions at that particular
moment, such as had never occurred before, and such
as have never returned, by the skilful use of which
the two islands might have been completely and per-
manently united.

The conquest first ought not to have been left im-
perfect. Treaties, however vague, raise claims which
if unsatisfied leave festering sores; and had there
been a will to do it, the entire untrammelled reduc-
tion of Ireland could have been accomplished by
William far more easily than by Cromwell. The
religious condition of Europe, and the attitude espe-
cially of the ally whose assistance Tyrconnell and

THE REVOLUTION.

James had unsuccessfully called in, would have
enabled and permitted the English Government,
without real injustice, to have made Ireland a Pro-
testant country. It is conveniently forgotten by
Catholic declaimers against the iniquity of the penal
laws, that in Catholic countries the laws against Pro-
testants were more severe than any code which either
England or any other Protestant country has enforced
against Catholics. In Spain and Italy there was no
liberty of religion. In France it had just been with-
drawn by the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. The
existence in those countries of Protestant communities
was held inconsistent with the safety of the state.
Nonconformists were imprisoned, exiled, deprived of
their estates, or put to death. No schools or churches
were allowed to them to teach their creeds in; not
so much as six feet of ground in which their bodies
might rest when dead, if they died out of com-
munion with the Church. Catholic writers express
neither regret nor astonishment at these severities,
and reserve their outcries for occasions when they
are themselves the victims of their own principles.
They consider that they are right and that Pro-
testants are wrong; that in consequence, when Pro-
testants persecute Catholics, it is an act of wickedness;
when Catholics persecute Protestants, it is an exer-
cise of lawful authority. The modern Liberal finds
excuses for the Catholic which he refuses to the
Calvinist. He perceives, or thinks he perceives, that
in all creeds there is both truth and error, that the
essentials are to be found in each, that mistakes of
opinion are venial; and he considers that the Pro-
testant in claiming a right to think for himself ought
VOL. I. P

210

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK in consistency to have allowed the same right to
.*— others. He, too, forgets that these Latitudinarian

1691

reasonings are of recent growth; that earnest Pro-
testants in past centuries, men of the highest intel-
lectual ability, believed the doctrines of the Catholics
to be poisonous lies. To a Sir Isaac Newton the
Pope was the scarlet woman of the Apocalypse ; and
the feeling which made the Protestant an object of
horror to the orthodox Catholic, made the Catholic
equally detestable to the sincere Protestant. He
would have preferred to confine his opposition to
reason and conscience ; but persecution begat per-
secution in self-defence ; and deprived those who com-
menced such methods of their right to complain, when
their own measure was retorted on them. To inflict
penalties on opinion becomes, in some cases, legitimate
in the sense that war is legitimate. It is a recourse
in good faith to force to determine questions which
argument is not allowed to solve.

But, beyond this general excuse, there were features
in Irish Romanism which might at that time have justi-
fied any government in making a final end of it. At
the bottom of every rebellion in that country since the
Reformation, were to be found the Catholic bishops
and clergy. In the eyes of the Catholic Church the
lawful sovereign of Ireland was the Pope. Insurrec-
tion was an act of piety; those who fell in it were
martyrs; and crime in a holy cause lost its character,
and became sanctified. The lines of the two creeds
were identical with the lines of loyalty and disloyalty.
Irishmen who became Protestants were good subjects,
English settlers who became Catholics were drawn
into the ranks of the disaffected; and any Catholic
sovereign who, before the 18th century, was at

THE REVOLUTION.

war with England, could calculate with certainty on
a party in Ireland to make a diversion on his side.
Catholic writers pretend that England was the ag-
gressor in proscribing the mass. In no Catholic coun-
try in the world had so much toleration been shown
for Protestants, as had been shown to Catholics in
Ireland. Each successive provocation had been repaid
with larger indulgence, and always with more mise-
rable results. The Act of Uniformity was the law of
the land, but Elizabeth never attempted to enforce
it beyond the Pale; and within the Pale, by the
Catholics’ confession, it slept after the few first years.
The bloody rebellions of Shan O'Neill, of the Earl of
Desmond, and of the Earl of Tyrone, each encouraged
by the clergy, each connected with a design to sever
Ireland from England, were the rewards of forbear-
ance; yet after each insurrection, and always, save
when the country was actually in flames, the suc-
cessive governors of Ireland were prohibited from
meddling with religion. The titular bishops exer-
cised their jurisdiction without interference. The
religious orders, friars, monks, and nuns, remained
in their houses wherever the Irish chiefs were pleased
to maintain them. The parish clergy said mass,
first in private houses and castles, and then in chapels
and churches of their own. As the country grew
more quiet under James the First and Charles, they
throve with the progress of prosperity, and had never
been more numerous or less disturbed.

The consequence was the massacre of 1641. When
it was yet undecided, whether the rising was to be a
bloody one, the most ferocious counsels were traced
to a Catholic abbey. The civil war, with all its
miseries, was protracted by the interposition of the

Pa

212

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book Pope; and the fiercest resolutions against peace, and
_ *_ the most determined irreconcilability with England,

1691

was with the party of the Nuncio.

During the ten years of Cromwell’s government, the
priests and their works were at an end. Ireland was
quiet, and, had Cromwell left a son like himself, must
in another generation have been Protestant. The
Restoration brought back the old system. Half, or
nearly half, the Catholic gentry were replaced in their
estates. The Catholic hierarchy was re-established.
Catholic prelates received a quasi recognition from the
state, and the Oath of Supremacy was dispensed with
as a condition of admission to the service of the state.
Protestant Dissenters were prosecuted and impri-
soned. Catholics were connived at and smiled upon.
At last, when James the Second was meditating the
overthrow of English liberty, he turned for help to
the Irish Catholics. The whole power of the state,
civil and military, was placed in their hands, and
they instantly snatched the opportunity for their
own purposes. They attainted every Protestant of
consequence, and reclaimed the land to themselves;
and while they proclaimed liberty of conscience, they
took practical measures which would have destroyed
the [English settlements, and in a few years have
rooted Protestantism out of the country.

They appealed to arms to maintain their usurpa-
tions, and they failed. The Catholic clergy had proved
that, so far as lay in them, Ireland should never be
at rest till they had their own way. What was there
in the circumstances of Ireland that, when it was once
more subdued, the English Government should have
hesitated to apply the same rule there, which Louis
the Fourteenth was finding necessary for France ?

THE REVOLUTION.

The utmost stretch of toleration cannot reach to the
endurance of a belief which makes rebellion a duty,
and teaches temporal obedience to some other sove-
reign as an article of faith. No government need
keep terms with such a creed when there is power to
abolish it. To call the repression of opinions which
had issued so many times in blood and revolt, by the
name of religious persecution, is mere abuse of words;
while at that time the best minds in England really
believed that, besides its treasonable aspects, the
Roman Catholic religion was intellectually degrading
and spiritually poisonous.

The results to the country, from the attempt at
repression which was actually made, lamed as it was
by impediments thrown deliberately m the way by
politicians, and with the flaw upon it of the breach
of promise made conditionally in the Articles of
Limerick, prove that with wisdom and firmness the end

could then have been completely attained, and Ireland .

been made a Protestant country as entirely as Eng-
land and Scotland. Had the Catholic bishops been
compelled in earnest to betake themselves elsewhere,
had the importation of priests from abroad been
seriously and sternly prohibited, the sacerdotal system
must have died a natural death, and the creed have
perished along with it.

But repression could not go alone. If in so vitala
matter the Government interfered with the natural
tendencies of the people, it was bound most strictly
to give them every other opportunity of real improve-
ment. Industry, in the first place, ought to have been
encouraged in all directions by all legitimate means.
Infinite wealth was in the Irish soil if only it was cul-
tivated; rare virtues were in the Irish character if only

214

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

it had fair play; and industry was the school in which

se oth might have been developed. England had no

1691

natural advantages which Ireland did not share with
her. The seeds of trade and manufacture which had
been sown by James the First and Cromwell, though
blighted by the Navigation Act, were not dead, and if
let alone would revive. The persecutions in France
were driving out fresh swarms of Protestant artisans
to whom Ireland, were trade and manufactures free,
would be a welcome home. Scotch and English
capital was waiting to flow over there, and workmen,
who aspired to better their condition by emigrating,
and would prefer a nearer home than America. No
country in the world had a more brilliant commercial
future opening before her, if the opportunity had been
wisely used.

Again; experience had shown, that the form of
Protestantism known as the Anglican Establishment,
though entitled to remain on equal terms with other
reformed communities, ought not to have retained a
power of persecuting those who had carried out more
thoroughly the principles of the Reformation. The
creation of the English mind, arising out of the dis-
position towards compromise which is so marked an
English characteristic, the Established Church had so
far failed in England itself, that the legal toleration of
Dissent had become a necessity. An assumption of |
exclusive authority was more mischievous in Ireland,
where the conditions of the compromise did not exist,

where the Episcopalians formed but a third of the

Protestant body, and where there was an enemy to be
daily encountered, against whom they were the least
effective antagonists. The more robust forms of
Protestantism furnish no converts to Popery. Angli-

THE REVOLUTION.

215

canism, a limb incompletely severed, remains attached CHAP.
: ; III.
to the old system by veins and ligaments, which ——-~

allow passage to the wirus of sacerdotalism ; it has
always been the favourite nursery in which Rome has
sought and found recruits, and has been singularly
ineffectual in making converts in return. A mind
sufficiently in earnest about religion to prefer truth
to falsehood listens only to teachers who speak with
emphasis and certainty, who do not think and say,
but feel with warmth and passion. Before a man can
persuade others to accept him as a guide, he must
know his own mind, and be ready with a Yes or No,
on the questions with which his hearers are perplexed.
On the points which divide Protestant from Roman-
ist, the Anglican answers Yes and No. Is there a
Christian priesthood? There is and there is not.
Is there a real presence in the Eucharist ? There is
and there is not. Is baptism necessary to salvation ?
It is and itis not. Such hesitating modes of thought
may be prudent and cautious, but they will make no
converts. ‘The only Protestants who could make an
impression on the Catholic peasantry were the Pres-
byterians, and it was in them that the strength of Irish
Protestantism lay. The bishops had preached passive
obedience, had looked favourably on the Catholics, and
had been bitter and violent with the Nonconformists.
In the day of trial the Nonconformists of the North
had been found at their posts. The clergy of the
Establishment continued to pray for King James.
The least that the Presbyterians had deserved was an
ample toleration. If Ireland was to be a sanctuary
for Protestant refugees, the utmost possible freedom
should have been allowed them ; the more complete
the Protestant, the more secured his allegiance to

1691

216

THE. ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book England, the less danger of a repetition of the fatal
—*_ mistake which had driven out the Cromwellians.

1691

Repression too, it should have been remembered, could
not last forever. The Catholic peasantry were not to
be expelled. Their families could not grow up in
Atheism; and, if they were not converted, sooner or
later, their liberty must be given back to them. A
respite only could be secured at best, and if the oppor-
tunity were lost it might be lost for ever.

And there was another matter of scarcely less vital
moment. The lands of the Irish chiefs had not been
taken from them that they might be owned by noble
lords and gentlemen residing the other side of the
Channel, and acknowledging no further connexion
with their estates beyond receiving rents for them.
The theory of attainders rested on the duties attaching
to property. If no such duties existed, the penalty
was absurd and irrational. The absentee grievance
was a very old one, and less easy to deal with than in
earlier times. Under the feudal system the respon-
sibility was visible, and the claims of the state were
understood and admitted. When the state sold lands
to raise money, or allowed men to sell to one another,
it became necessarily more indulgent to neglect. But
if, on the one hand, London speculators, or crown
favourites, could not be prevented from acquiring
large estates in Ireland, on the other the entire object
of the confiscation was defeated if the population were
left unshepherded; or if, for the landlords’ convenience,
the sons and grandsons of the old owners were left in
possession as tenants retaining their local influence,
still to all intents and purposes the practical rulers;
and of the conquest, no result was left but the annual
exasperation of the returning rent-day. An owner-

THE REVOLUTION.

ship which consisted merely in robbing a poor country
of a percentage of the fruits of its industry, was no
benefit but a curse; and although it might have been
impossible to revive the laws of Henry the Eighth, a
wise settlement of Ireland would have included a tax
so heavy on all rents sent out of the kingdom, as
would have compelled proprietors to sell their lands
to others who would make their estates their home.
Lastly, as including in itself every other condition,
as, at that time, the warmest object of desire with
every intelligent Anglo-Irishman, the separate con-
stitution should have been abolished, the two coun-
tries reunited, as Cromwell had designed, and thus,
better far than by any separate detailed condition,
the Irish admitted to the full participation of every
British privilege. So long as there were two centres
of political life, and two legislatures, the idea of
a separate nationality and of a separate interest,
persistently survived; and absenteeism of the most
mischievous kind could not be prevented. To the
great peers, hereditary statesmen like the Shelburnes,
a public career in the larger country was an irre-
sistible temptation. ‘The young barrister, conscious
of real powers, could not but prefer the ampler field
of Westminster Hall for his energies and his abilities.
A man of letters or an artist would be drawn to
London as by a magnet. All the influences which
could govern healthily and nobly the public tone of
Trish life would be lost to her; and the provinces and
the capital, the legislature, the learned professions,
the arts and sciences—all which constitute thestrength
and greatness of a nation, would be left to the second
best. The nationality itself, perversely maintained,
would survive, perpetually conscious of ill-usage,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

deficient in every element of moral health and life, to
brood over its wrongs; and the mixed races, the
conquerors and the conquered, the Saxon and the
Celt, would grow together as they had grown before,
in a common interest and common resentment.

Certain principles, easily defined, had they been
steadily acted on at the close of the civil war, would
have made by this time the woes and the wrongs of
Ireland a thing of long-forgotten history.

A complete subjugation of the native faction un-
trammelled by articles of capitulation.

The resolute exclusion of a Catholic hierarchy, and

stringent laws, stringently enforced, against the in-

troduction of priests from abroad.

Entire toleration of all Protestant communities,
and an effective system of national education.

Sharp penalties against absentees; a legislative
union of England and Ireland ; the abolition of the
Irish Parliament, the separate government, and the
separate bars; and a complete naturalization of all
classes of Irish as English citizens. ©

How England on all these points, treating Ireland
as a conquered country which she had no longer
occasion to fear, and might therefore safely misuse,
deliberately left undone what she ought to have done,
—refused the union when Ireland asked for it,—de-
stroyed Irish manufactures,—ruined her trade,—in-
curred the odium of penal laws while destroying their
efficacy—-demoralized the entire people—and at last,
by the most ingenious complication of mismanage-
ment, exasperated Protestant and Catholic, Saxon
colonist and indigenous Celt, into a common revolf,
will be told in the following pages.

BOOK II.

—_o0—————

CHAPTER TI.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.
SECTION I.

sir THomas CLARGES, in a speech in the English
House of Commons on the state of Ireland,’ said,
that ‘King James’s false dice were still played with
there.’ ‘The question which the politicians asked
themselves who had charge of the new settlement
was, not what they could best do to re-establish order
and industry, but how the dice could so be thrown
that they might make their own fortunes.

Marking, as it does, a turning-point in Irish history,
the campaign of 1691 is usually considered to have
decided beyond reversal the fate of the Irish Catholics;
yet the meaning of great events, however legible in
their consequences, is often concealed from the actors
in them. Notwithstanding Aghrim and the surrender
of Limerick, the Lords Justices’ either doubted their
power to hold the Catholics down, or they had re-
ceived orders to indulge and protect them. Under
the terms of the Limerick convention, half the Irish
army left the country for France, intending to come

1 December 14, 1689.
4 Lord Sydney, Lord Coningsby, and Sir C. Porter.

CHAP.

220

BOOK
ad
—”

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

back when a new chance offered. The rest returned
unmolested to their estates, or were allowed to
enter William’s service. Coningsby and Porter were
credited with having removed the obnoxious clause
from the second Limerick Article, which, if sustained,
would have left the rebellion unpunished. Yet the
loyal colonists were dismayed to perceive that the
Catholics were handled as tenderly as ever. Catholic
gentlemen who had been in James’s army were
admitted to, or continued in, the commission of the
peace. Catholic officers were taken back into the
army, and the oaths were altered to suit their con-
sciences. They swore allegiance in the simple form
prescribed by the English Parliament ;* but the ab-
juration, which the law equally required, of the Pope’s
pretended right to interfere with subjects’ allegiance,
was dispensed with in their favour? The reversals
of outlawries, which the war had suspended, recom-
menced. The disputed clause in the treaty was treated
as binding, and Catholics covered by it received their
pardons. ‘The army, its wages being in arrear, was
again billeted upon the Protestant gentry and the
half-ruined farmers. The English House of Commons
had insisted that the expenses of the war should be
paid, in part at least, out of the sale of confiscated pro-
perties. Itseemed as if the Government deliberately
intended that there should be no properties to sell.
Had there been no Limerick or Galway Articles,
3,921 Irish resident owners would have been liable to
forfeiture, and fifty-seven absentees. The estates
amounted to over a million plantation acres; their

13 & 4 William and Mary, against Lord Coningsby and Sir
cap. 2. English Statutes, C. Porter before the English House

4 ‘Articles of Impeachment of Commons, 1693.’
¥

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

market value to two millions and a half sterling.’

221

CHAP.

The acts of James’s Parliament had thrown the en

whole country into confusion. The old owners had
made haste to take possession, and half the properties
in the country had changed hands. Commissioners
were appointed to hear clans, and reinstate the ex-
pelled Protestants. ‘They were accused of showing
favour to the Catholic interlopers, and of raising
difficulties in the way of the rightful proprietor. Of
the lands newly lapsed, a quarter was at once restored
to the Catholics under the Articles of Limerick and
Galway. Sixty-five great Irish proprietors, whom
the Articles could not be made to cover, were re-
instated by special favour from the crown. The vast
domains of the late King, the grants to Tyrconnell,
and the estates of others who were not to be par-
doned, were distributed, under letters patent, to
courtiers and favourites with the most lavish and
indiscriminate generosity.

The secrets of these transactions were imperfectly
ravelled out on subsequent enquiry. ‘ When we
touched on this subject,’ reported the Parliamentary
Commissioners in 1699, ‘we found difficulties too
oreat to be overcome, most of these matters being
transacted in private.’ They discovered, however,
that Lord Raby received 2,000/. to procure the
pardon and restitution of Lord Bellew.? Lord Albe-
marle*® ‘consented to receive’ 7,500/. from Lord

1 Exact figures : — Plantation * Walter Bellew, who com-
acres, 1,060,792; rental, 211,6232.; mandedatroop of horse in Tyrcon-
total value, 2,685,1302., taking a nell’s regiment. His father, created
life at six years’ purchase, and an by James the first Lord Bellew,
inheritance at thirteen.— Report of | was mortally wounded at Aghrim.
the Commission appointed by Par- 8 Van Keppel, Lord of Voorst,
liament to enquire into Irish For- created Karl of Albemarle by Wil-
feitures. liam,

222 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK Bophin for a similar service,’ and these were but two
eee instances out of many of a similar kind. Considera-
tions of pretended merit were alleged in excuse of
grants to favoured individuals. Under a general plea
of ‘service done’ Lord Sydney received fifty thou-
sand acres, and Lord Albemarle a hundred thousand.
A hundred and thirty thousand were given to Ben-
tinck, whose deserts were held to be so self-evident
that no explanation was so much as offered.? Con-
ingsby, as one of the Lords Justices, rewarded himself
handsomely for his official labours, and forty thousand
acres were bestowed on Henri de Ruvigny, created
by William Earl of Galway. These noblemen had
contributed something towards the reduction of the
country on which they were quartered so liberally;
but credit could be allowed for more doubtful services
in favour of those who had private access to the dispen-
sers of the royal bounties. James Corry’ ‘ obtained
a heavy mortgage and an estate,’ ‘the considerations
mentioned in his letters patent being that his house
was burnt, and that he furnished the garrison at
Enniskillen with provisions and materials to the value
of 3000/. at his own expense.’ When the commis-

1 Lord Bophin was not restored,
anditis therefore uncertain whether
Van Keppel actually received this
scandalous bribe. ‘In pursuance of
this agreement,’ says the report,
‘a letter was sent to the Lords
Justices to go before the Commis-
sion of the Court of Claims in favour
of Lord Bophin, to have him ad-
judged within the Articles of Gal-
way: Nothing being done therein,
a bill was drawn, to be transmitted
to England, restoring Lord Bophin
to his estates and blood, the con-

sideration suggested being to edu-
cate his children Protestants, and
to set his estate to Protestants.
The bill was brought into the
House of Commons in Ireland, and
the House resenting their being used
to support a clandestine bargain,
rejected,’ &e.

* Bentinck commanded a regi-
ment at the battle of the Boyne,
and behaved well there.

* Ancestor of the Earl of Bel-
more. See Ke corer of /A&s
Yel, fora eo oe

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

sioners enquired into the merits of this gentleman, it
appeared that he had given no assistance whatever to
the garrison at eer seilien; that in the town of
Weaiskiten ‘he had declar a publicly, that he hoped
to see all those hanged that took up arms for the
Prince of Orange ;’ and that his house had been burnt
by the Protestant soldiers as a punishment for his
disloyalty... ‘ The worst case was Lady Orkney’s.
This lady’s sole claim to consideration lay in her
being the daughter of Sir Edward Villiers, Knight
Marshal of Charles the Second’s household, and of
Lady Villiers, who had been governess to the Prin-
cesses Mary and Anne. To her were given the enor-
mous Irish estates of the late King. To William
these estates were represented as worth 5,000/. a year.
They consisted, in fact, of a hundred thousand acres
of the finest land in Munster. The rental was
26,000. a year. The selling value at the time of the
grant 332,000/?

To King William himself the Irish Protestants
were enthusiastically grateful. He had come in per-
son to fight their battle, and he had been wounded
in their cause. The descendant of a line of heroes,
he was upholding on the Boyne, on the Thames, and
on the Meuse, almost alone, the cause for which his
great ancestor had given his blood. Wherever he
went he freely risked his own life, and he was known
to be incapable of being influenced by mean consi-
derations. But he was a stranger in England; of
Ireland and Irish history he was utterly ignorant ;
and he had to rely for information on persons with

1 Report of the Commission.
* Thid. and see Parliamentary History, January 15, 1700.

22.4 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK whose character and motives he had not leisure to
vial acquaint himself. It was too plain that, notwith-
standing all that she had gone through, Ireland was
to be again sacrificed. Corruption and interest were
to reign supreme. ‘The wound was to be skinned
over in the old false way, and Catholic to be still
played against Protestant as if 1641 were forgotten,
and the Tyrconnell Parliament had never been.
False dice indeed! The cry ran through the
country that Ireland was betrayed. It was said that
the Articles of Limerick were a trick; that they were
invalid till the Irish legislature had sanctioned them,
and that sanction they should never have. Anthony
Dopping, Bishop of Meath, who had stood up so
boldly against James, preached in Christ Church that
‘peace with a people so perfidious as the Irish’ was
childishness. ‘They observed neither article nor
oath longer than was for their interest.’ ‘ They were
a conquered people, and as a conquered people only
could they be safely treated.’ Dopping’s name was
struck from the list of Privy Councillors ; but the
ferment was not allayed. A correspondence came to
light between two Catholic bishops in the late reign,
showing how determined was the animosity of the Irish
against the English, how utterly powerless was the
moderate Catholic to control the national fanaticism.
The creed made no difference in the opinion of these
prelates. An Englishman, whether Catholic or Pro-
testant, was regarded as Ireland’s enemy; a Saxon,
orthodox or heretic, would rather see Ireland occupied
by his own countrymen, of whatever religion, than by
the native race. ‘The land, therefore, must be taken .
back, the alien expelled, and Ireland be Irish once more.
Loyal to a Catholic King of England she might be, if

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

she had her own laws, and if her lands were her own
people’s. Loyal to England she could never be.’

This was the feeling with which the colonists knew
that they had to reckon; and to hope that by time
or indulgence it would be soothed or obliterated were
to those who understood the country the most idle of
dreams.

Supplies meanwhile were needed to pay the army;
and for this and for other reasons Parliament must
now meet. Lord Sydney was appointed Viceroy.
Writs were issued for an election, the Catholics being
constitutionally disabled by the English act,’ which
made the taking the Abjuration Oath and the Declar-
ation against Transubstantiation conditions of a seat.
Little mystery was usually possible with the intended
business of an Irish session. ‘The heads of the Go-
vernment bills were sketched in council, sent to Eng-
land for approval or alteration, and returned to the
council before Parliament began. The feeling of the
country was ascertained by conversation, or by direct
enquiry; and, for weeks before the opening, the state
correspondence was generally filled with discussions
of the prospects of the meditated measures.

This time, so little conscious was Sydney or his
advisers of the humours which they were to encounter,
that not a misgiving was entertained. When the
members began to collect in Dublin, they were in-
formed that a bill would be introduced to confirm the
Articles of Limerick in the extended form in which
the King had ratified them; and that the Acts of Settle-
ment were to be re-enacted, with further concessions

1 ‘Bishop Mahony to Bishop bishop King’s State of the Protest-

Tyrrell, March 8, 1690.’ Printed ants.
among the Appendices to Arch- * 3&4 William and Mary, cap.2.

VOL. I. Q

225

CHAP.
IF

es
1692

226

BOOK
IL.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to the Catholics. But it was intimated by the Castle

_ -~"_. officials that there was to be no discussion; ‘ both

1692

measures had been amply considered by the Privy
Council; the two Houses were called up only to ratify
what was already determined; and, if any scruple was
made, there would never again be a Parliament in
Treland.’?

The brief and stormy session opened on the 5th
of October, 1692. Never had the temper of a pub-
lic assembly been more profoundly miscalculated.
Lord Sydney’s speech was short and general. ‘The
King,’ he said, ‘had risked his own person to give
Treland quiet; and Ireland, he hoped, would remember
in turn the duties which it owed to its sovereign. A
country so advantageously situated for trade, and so
favoured in its soil, could need nothing but peace and
good laws to make it as fertile and flourishing as any
of its neighbours.’ The address in reply was con-
ciliatory. Both Houses expressed their most hearty
thanks to William for delivering them from the
Papist tyranny. They passed a Recognition Act with
special expressions of gratitude. They admitted,
without difficulty, that the kingdom of Ireland was
dependent on, and inseparably united to, the Crown
of England.? An act passed in Charles the Second’s
time,? to encourage the immigration of Protestant
French and Flemings, was renewed; an additional
clause being attached, giving them the untrammelled
exercise of their religion,* and the rights of freemen
without the disabilities of Nonconformity. So far

1 ¢ Account of the Parliament of  Lrish Statutes.
1692.’ MSS. Ireland. Record ° 14 & 15 Charles IL. cap. 13.
Office. 4 4 William and Mary, cap. 2.
. 2 4 William and Mary, cap, 1. |

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ‘ERA.

the session went smoothly, but so far only. The

pent-up indignation then burst out, and the entire.

policy of the Government was denounced in a torrent
of declamation. The Lower House drew a petition
to the Crown complaining of the reversals of out-
lawries, the misappropriation of the forfeitures, the
pardons and protections which prevented Protestants
from recovering their farms, the idle and mischievous
attempts at reconciling the irreconcilable. If Eng-
land intended to govern Ireland on these principles,
she was not to count on the assistance of the Irish
Parliament. William, or William’s advisers, con-
ceived perhaps that they, and not the colonists, had
conquered the Catholics, and that they therefore were
entitled to dictate the concessions which were to
make the Catholics into good subjects. The colonists,
on whom the immediate peril fell, and who understood
well that they must either rule or perish, declined to be
consenting parties to so wildascheme. ‘To ask them,
in their present humour, to confirm the Articles of
Limerick, was to ask them to sign away their lives,
To pass the first article was to. give Romanism a
legally recognized existence. The second article,
_ with the omitted clause, ‘would open a passage to
the Papists to repossess themselves of the estates
which they had forfeited.’ Instead of showing a
readiness to confirm the Articles, they required to be
told by what means ‘the additional paragraph had
been maintained.’* ‘They quarrelled on every line
of the new Act of Settlement. The Government
introduced a bill to declare void the acts of the late
pretended Parliament. This, it might have been

1 ¢Petition of the Irish House of 1692.’ MSS. Rolls House, Ire-
Commons to the Crown, October, land. :

Q 2

228

BOOK
E13
—_

1692

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

thought, they would accept without objection; but
they threw it out, because it proposed that those acts
should be simply cancelled ; and the Commons ‘ found
it for their majesties’ service and the honour of the
Protestants of Ireland, to preserve the record of the
Irish barbarity, which would have been taken off the
file had the bill passed.’

Still more dangerously, they voted that persons
commissioned by the Crown to receive the forfeited
estates had broken their trust, and had fraudulently
diverted them to their own use. They ordered that
these persons should be prosecuted, even though they
were members of their own House; and, when the
Money Bill came on, the immediate object of their
assembling, they would not, indeed, ‘in the present
exigencies of affairs,’ refuse a supply altogether ;
they voted part of what the Government asked ;
but, as an assertion of independence, they threw out
another part, because ‘ the bill had not taken its rise
in their House;’ and they carried a vote, that it was
the undoubted right of the Irish Commons to prepare
their own Money Bills, and not receive them from
the Crown. Finally, when the Mutiny Act was pre-
sented as of pressing importance, and with a special
request that it should be unopposed, they threw out
this also, in resentment at the admission of Catholic
officers into the King’s service.

Instead of the complacent assembly which Sydney
had expected to meet, he found himself in the midst
of a nest of exasperated hornets. He prorogued the
Parliament till the spring with an angry rebuke.
Specially offended with the interference with the
Money Bill, and unconscious of the sore point on
which he was treading, he ‘ regretted,’ he said, ‘ that

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA. 229

they who were under so many obligations to be cunap.
loyal should have entrenched on the rights of the ae
Crown in rejecting a bill which had not originated 1693
with themselves.’ He pronounced their vote to be
‘contrary to the laws of their constitution,’ and
required his protest to be entered in the journals in.
vindication of the prerogative.

The hereditary revenue was unequal to the current
expenses. Without supplies the army could not be
paid, and must continue to live at free quarters.
Money must be raised in some way, and it appears,
from Sydney’s language, as if the alternative contem-
plated by the Government was to govern Ireland
directly as a province. The King, he said, must re-
solve whether the Parliament should meet a second
time. For himself he thought the lesson had done
them good, and. he was willing te try the experiment
again ; but he was not disposed to yield a step of his
own policy. ‘If they are as foolish and knavish as
they were,’ he wrote to Lord Nottingham, ‘ they must
not sit a day.’ ‘If they are so mad and absurd as
not to consent to what is proposed for their own
good, if they are afterwards undone, I suppose they
will not be pitied.’?

About the Catholics he had speedy reason to dis-
cover that the Parliament had been wiser than him-
self. There was this difficulty then and always in
schemes of conciliation, that they could not be acted
on consistently, and were lable to be continually
reversed under sudden alarms. Lord Sydney had
invited Catholics into the army. A report rose in the
winter of 1692-8, that a French invasion was to be

1 ‘Sydney to Nottingham, Jan. 5 and Jan, 25, 1693,’

230

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book looked for in the spring. At once he confessed him-

Heb

—~-— self embarrassed ‘ with a prodigious number of officers,

16938

who, without doubt, would do mischief when it was
in their power.’* He had wished to extort from the
Legislature a formal toleration of Romanism. He
found himself within a few months obliged to
recommend the suppression of all Catholic convents,
schools, and colleges, and the expulsion of the
Catholic hierarchy; he issued an order for an inde-
finite arrest of priests and regulars,’ and followed it
by a warrant® for the dismissal of the Catholic officers
and the substitution of Protestants. )

The mistake which he had made became more ap-
parent from the action of the Parliament in England.
The revolution had given a fresh impulse to Pro-
testantism, and revived the traditions of the past
generation. The m&ssacre of 1641 was inseparably
connected with Irish Popery in every Protestant
mind; and, outside the court circle, there was as
much impatience at Westminster as in Dublin at the
incompleteness with which Ireland was being handled.
The complaints which Sydney had silenced were
taken up at St. Stephen’s, and the Irish grievances
were embodied in a second petition, which could be
less easily disposed of. The King was reminded of a
promise which he had made to reserve the forfeitures
for the consideration of Parliament. The Bishop of
Meath and Sydney’s secretary, Mr. Pulteney, were
sent for and examined in committee; and the indigna-

1Tt is uncertain whether he was ment policy was equally con-
alluding to officers in the King’s demned.
army, or to Tyrconnell’s officers, * MSS. Record Office, Ireland,
who were allowed to retain their January, 1693.
estates under the Limerick Arti- § May 30. DSS, Ibid.
cles. In either case the Govern- Metin!

THE. OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

tion went so far that Sir Charles Porter and Lord
Coningsby were actually impeached. Coningsby boldly
defended himself. Most Protestants, he said, con-
sidered that the proceedings now called traitorous had
saved Ireland. ‘The Commons decided that there was
not matter to sustain a charge of treason; but both his
conduct and Porter’s were censured as illegal and
arbitrary.

The King’s Government discovered that they must
consider with more courtesy the opinion of Ireland.
Sydney was recalled, and the Parliament with which
he had quarrelled was dissolved. ‘The first attempt
at settlement had failed disastrously. A fresh begin-
ning was to be made with new men; and Sir Henry
Capel, a distinguished member of the English House
of Commons, raised to the peerage as Lord Capel,
was sent over to heal the wounds which had been so
recklessly opened.

232

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

BOOK Two years were allowed to pass before an Irish
‘Be
—~ Legislature was again assembled. The Government

1695

was embarrassed by want of money, and great ques-
tions were left open which the Protestants were eager
should be closed. Both sides were disposed to a
compromise when their heats cooled down, and the
situation could be discussed dispassionately. By
judicious handling, by taking into the service of the
Crown the favourites of the House of Commons, and
by private assurances that their wishes would be con-
sidered more respectfully, Capel at last brought about
a temper which encouraged him to issue writs for a
fresh election. Robert Rochfort, a son of an officer
of Cromwell’s, and Alan Brodrick, who, in the last
Parliament, had led the opposition, were made Attor-
ney and Solicitor-General. Porter was retained as
Chancellor, perhaps as a last chance of preserving the
wide construction of the Articles of Limerick ; but
his general policy was discredited, his views were
abandoned, and his power gone. The Court had per-
ceived at last that Ireland could be governed only by
the Protestant gentry, and with some return to the
principles of the rule of the Protector.

The Commons, it was understood, were willing to
leave in abeyance ‘the sole right’ of initiating money
bills. In return, the Government promised measures
for the repression of the Catholics, which on that
side would relieve the anxiety. A new difficulty
was now likely to rise from the leaven of Jacobitism

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

in some members of the Established Church, left be-
hind by the traditions of Bramhall and Jeremy
Taylor. The Churchmen had fared no better than
the Presbyterians at the hands of the Parliament of
James ; but, if they feared the Catholics, they hated
the Nonconformists. There was a latent wish with
some of them that the Catholics might not be weak-
ened beyond a point where the Ormond and Strafford
games might be played over again ; and that, when the
lawful sovereign came back, he might still find a loyal
Ireland to bear him up against dissent and revolu-
tion.!

The ground, however, had been well prepared.
Capel was accused of having used undue influence.
He appealed to his own Parliamentary life in answer.
‘For thirty years he had taken a freedom in voting,’
he said, and ‘the liberty he claimed for himself he
allowed to others.’ He had secured, at any rate, the
two most formidable opponents. ‘ Without Rochfort
and Broderick,’ he admitted that he would have failed.”
The session opened on the 29th August. The Com-
mons promised in their address, that they would
avoid heats and animosities, and do their best to pass

other for ‘restraining foreign

1 Capel, writing to the Duke of
education.’ ‘The first,’ Capel

Shrewsbury on the 16th May,

1695, was sanguine that he had
removed all difficulties. ‘I have,’
he said, ‘ endeavoured with all in-
dustry to prepare matters in order
to a Parliament, and do really find
almost a universal disposition in
the Protestants to behave them-
selves dutifully without insisting
on the sole right.’

On the 18th June, the horizon
was less favourable. Two bills
were coming from England, one
for disarming the Catholics, an-

said, ‘if passed will secure the
Protestant interest; the other, the
Protestant religion in this king-
dom. The Irish Papists will be
solicitous to overturn any founda-
tion that may be laid for prevent-
ing their future rebellions, and
may, perhaps, find Protestant
Friends here to help them m %t.’—
MSS. Record Office, Ireland, 1695.

* ‘Lord Capel to Secretary Ver-
non, November 23 and December
@.  Tbid.

234

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book * useful measures, which would give quiet to the
a country. Money was voted, and ‘the sole right’

1695

question was not raised. The Articles of Limerick
were left unapproached. The King himself, perhaps,
was unwilling to precipitate a decision which was
sure to be unfavourable. But the objections to annul-
ling the proceedings of James’s Parliament were not
maintained. It was decreed to have been an unlawful
assembly, and its measures to have been void. The
Commons consented, in express words, that the jour-
nals should be cancelled, and the acts passed there
should be erased from the roll, ‘that no memorial
might remain among the records, of the proceedings
of that assembly.’?

By an act of Henry the Eighth, which had been
revived by Elizabeth, every incumbent in Ireland had
been required to keep a free school in his parish for
instruction in English; and every diocese was to have
its public Latin school. Performance had lagged
terribly behind promise. Few parish schools or Latin
schools had Ireland seen of Protestant institution. But
now at last the dream was to become a reality. The
act was revived. The magistrates were directed to
see to the obedience of the clergy. The judges on
circuit were to report if magistrates were negligent ;
and, a proper education being thus provided by the
state, the Catholics were forbidden to have schools of
their own at home, or to send their children to learn
disloyalty and ee abroad, under penalties of out-
lawry and forfeiture.”

The positive part of this act was so gross a ndckere
that the prohibition remained necessarily dead. While
three-fourths of the benefices in Ireland were without

1 7 William and Mary, cap. 3. Trish Statutes,
2 Ibid. Cap. 10.

THE:OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

incumbents, and the stipends of the few who were
scattered about the country sufficed barely to keep
them alive, to order them to provide schools for
the whole population was to order a simple im-
possibility. As little, so long as there was no substi-
tute within reach, could the Catholics be compelled to
leave their children to grow up savages. The Irish
Parliament awoke later to a keener sense of their
responsibilities in this matter, and nobly redeemed
their neglect; till then statutes such as this were
worse than idle. Remaining minatory merely, like
scarecrows which the birds soon learn to laugh at,
they served but to teach the Irish once more a lesson
which they had no need to learn, that laws were
made to be disobeyed.

A disarming act was more rational and more effec-
tual. The measure which the Catholics, in their day
of power, had inflicted on the Protestants was retorted
on themselves. By the 5th of the 7th of William and
Mary all licenses to bear arms were revoked, and the
Catholics were ordered to deliver up whatever guns,
muskets, or ammunition they possessed. Lords and
gentlemen within the Articles of Limerick were per-
mitted, on taking the oath of allegiance, to retain
their swords and pistol-cases, and to keep a fowling-
piece to shoot game. ‘This was the sole exception to
a measure which implied that from them alone in
Ireland was violence to be anticipated. Magistrates
were empowered to search their houses. Horses it
was assumed that they did not need, except for
agriculture ; and, therefore, they were forbidden to
possess horses above five pounds in value. Any
Protestant might demand and take a Catholic’s horse
from him, on paying five guineas to the nearest
magistrate for the owner’s use. Finally, gunmakers

235
CHAP.
I.

— _-—"

1695

236

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and sword-cutlers, that the very knowledge of the

—-~ art of making dangerous weapons might be taken

1695

from them, were not allowed to receive Catholics as
apprentices; and they themselves were required, before
practising their trade, to take the oaths of allegiance
and abjuration, and subscribe the statutory declara-
tion against Transubstantiation.t

On the breaking up of James’s army the Tories
and Rapparees, from which it had been recruited, fell
back to their old haunts and their old work. The
forests and mountains were again peopled with
political banditti, who carried on a guerilla war
against their conquerors. ‘Out on their keeping,’ as
the legal phrase described them, they lived, like their
forefathers, on plunder, but on the plunder of the in-
vader. They beset the high roads. They came down
at night on the outlying farmer, houghed his stock,
burnt his haggard, or cut the throats of himself and
his family. To put these villanies down by a regular
police was found impossible, ‘ the Popish inhabitants
choosing rather to suffer strangers to be robbed and
despoiled of their goods than apprehend the offenders,
the greater part of whom were people of the same
country, and harboured by the inhabitants.’ If
Ireland was to be a civilized country brigandage
must in some way be ended; and the methods hitherto.
found effectual were again resorted to. The baronies
were made responsible, and the Catholic inhabitants
were required to make good any loss or injury inflicted.
within their boundaries: persons presented by grand
juries as ‘on their keeping’ were to be proclaimed;.
and, unless they surrendered to take their trials,
they were outlawed. To conceal or harbour them

1 7 William and Mary, cap. 5. Trish Statutes,
27 William III. cap. 21.

THE: OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

was made felony, and any one who would bring in a

237

CHAP.

; I.
proclaimed Tory, dead or alive, might claim a reward —~——

of twenty pounds.’

These measures formed the most important part of
the work of the first successful session of William’s
Irish Parliament: some wise in themselves; some wise
or unwise, according as they were or were not put in
force; all natural, however, and, as times went, inevi-
table, if the Irish Catholics were not to gather courage
from the fears of the Government, and venture an-
other rebellion.

One matter only of consequence the House of
Commons attempted, which threatened a renewal of
the former quarrel. They could not forgive Porter,
whom they accused of having been Lord Sydney’s
chief adviser. The impeachment in England had
failed; it was renewed in Ireland, and the Chan-
cellor was accused, by Colonel Ponsonby, of having
abused his position to thrust Catholics into the
commission of the peace, and to favour them in their
suits with Protestants. Porter, after all, had been
but the King’s instrument. Unusually irritated,
William reproached Capel for not having prevented
an attack which he interpreted as directed against
himself.2 Capel excused himself by saying, that the
first vote against the chancellor had been taken before
he had heard that the prosecution was intended. He
was, perhaps, wise in abstaining from interference.
Porter defended himself in person. ‘The House of
Commons decided, by a large majority, that his
answers were sufficient; and further difficulty about
him was removed by his death in the following year.

17 William III. cap. 21. non, November 25, 1695.’ MSS.
2 «Lord Capel to Secretary Ver- Record Office.

1695

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

SECTION III.

eles Amone the Scotch and English settlers in Ireland
——"—_ none had deserved better than the Nonconformists.

1692

None had been worse rewarded. When the High
Church party went with Ormond and the Kilkenny
Council, at the close of the rebellion of 1641, a Puritan
army recovered the country to England. The Restor-
ation, which brought back the bishops, brought back
the persecutions. The Presbyterian clergy had been
suspended or imprisoned. Half the Cromvwellian
settlers had been driven from the country; and the
children of the other half had been flung back, for
want of ministers or schoolmasters, into open Popery.

The same story was repeated in 1689. The bishops
and clergy of the Establishment prayed for James
till William entered Dublin. The Ulster Calvinists
had won immortal honour, and saved England half
the labour of reconquest, by their share in the defence
of Derry. In them there was a vigorous and living
power in antagonism to Popery. In the existence in
Ireland of free Protestant communities, beyond the
episcopal Pale, lay its chief attraction to the Huguenot,
the Palatine, and the English Puritan. The full and
free equality of privilege which they had honourably
earned, it was William’s desire to secure to them by
law. The tolerant spirit which made him reluctant
to interfere with the liberties of Catholics rendered him
doubly anxious to protect the rights of subjects who
had stood by him when others were found wanting,
and whose opinions were virtually his own.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

239

To foreign immigrants the desired liberty had been cuap.
conceded. Dissenters, on the other hand, of Irish, —~1—

Scotch, or English birth, were still under the Act of
Uniformity, and their position was peculiar. In Eng-
land the Toleration Act had given them their chapels,
but they were excluded by the sacramental test from
public employment. In Ireland there was no sacra-
mental test. The Oath of Supremacy had answered
the purpose as long as it was maintained ; but to the
substituted oaths of allegiance and abjuration their
objections did not apply. They had become eligible
for the magistracy, or for commissions in the army.
They could sit in Parliament, or be members of cor-
porations. They were in possession of all their secular
rights as citizens ; yet, notwithstanding, the exercise
of any form of worship, except that of the Established
Church, was prohibited under severe penalties.

The King, while personally in Ireland, had shown
his opinion of the state of the law, and his recognition
of the Presbyterians’ services, by assigning a grant to
their ministers, out of the Belfast customs, of 1,200/.
a year—the original of the fund known afterwards as
the Regium Donum. The Church authorities refused
to hold themselves bound by the pleasure of a prince
whom in their hearts many of them still looked
on as a usurper. On the return of quiet, Lemuel
Mathews, the Archdeacon of Down, took on himself to
imprison a Presbyterian minister at Hillsborough for
having presumed to preach a sermon. The King had
seen the necessity of placing the ministers beyond the
reach of the petty Church officials; and, in 1692, Lord
Sydney submitted to the Irish Council the heads of a
toleration bill, identical with the English, with a view
to its being laid immediately before Parliament,

1692

240

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

To unite the Protestant interest in the presence of

we e . e
—~— a common enemy, to avoid the repetition of the worst

1692

mistakes of the Restoration, and establish if not
intercommunion yet political equality between parties
who had fought and suffered for the same cause, was
so obviously desirable, that it is hard to see how such
a proposal could have been opposed by reasonable
men.

It was not only opposed, but opposed with a
bitterness of animosity which only the remembrance
that the parties to it were ecclesiastics, or under
ecclesiastical influence, enables us even faintly to
understand. The Irish Established clergy, the Irish
peers, and the great landowners were ardent High
Churchmen, dreading nothing so much as to be con-
founded with the Cromwellians, to whom most of them
owed their estates ; and, though reconciled outwardly
to the Revolution by the want of discrimination in
James’s Parliament, which had not distinguished be-
tween them and the Calvinists, yet they were loud as
ever against principles of church government which
tended, as they were pleased to say, to republicanism.

Though forming but a third of the nominal Pro-
testants, and an eleventh of the entire population, the
Church party chose to believe that Ireland was theirs;
that it was for them to dictate the terms on which
either Catholics or Dissenters should be permitted to
abide among them. The Bishops argued that, if they
agreed to a toleration act, they must be protected by a
sacramental test; Nonconformity must be laid under
a ban of some kind; and, if liberty of worship was
allowed, the army and navy, the learned professions,
and the Civil Service, must be reserved to Churchmen.

From a passage in one of Sydney’s letters, it would

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ‘ERA.

seem that he himself shared the prejudices of his
order, and that while he submitted to carry out the
King’s instructions, he loved the Dissenters as little as
the Prelates loved ‘heme He received orders to go
on with the bill whether the Bishops liked it or not,
and though it would have been thrown out by the
Lords, it would have been laid before the Commons,
and probably, in the existing humour of that House,
might then have been carried there but for the alter-
cation which broke up the Parliament. Relieved of
this danger, the Bishops pursued their triumph. They
regarded the Regium Donum as an intolerable affront.
The payment was suspended, and Sir Cyril Wych
and Mr. Duncombe, who were associated with Capel
on his first arrival as Lords Justices, advised, at the
Bishops’ instance, that the grant should be discon-
tinued. The King declined to yield to such intem-
perate bigotry, and, when the Second Parliament met,
insisted once more on the introduction of the Tolera-
tion Act. The Dissenters belonged chiefly to the
middle and lower ranks. They were farmers, shop-
keepers, and merchants, and even in the Lower House
were feebly represented. But the violent Protestant
humour of the first session, which might have shown
them favour, had cooled; and as it was understood
that the bill would be met in Parliament by a second
attempt to impose a test, they appealed to Irish
opinion in a general remonstrance. They said truly
that without toleration it was vain to expect that
Protestant settlements in Ireland could thrive. The

1¢Tondonderry on the death of ing Scotch regiments here, advise
the mayor has chosen another that him not.’ — Sydney to Nottingham,
was never at church in his life. February 20, 1693,’ IZSS. Record

It is the work of the Scotch fac- Office.
tion. If the King thinks of send-

VOL. I. R

241

ert

inter

1695

242

BOOK
Il.
——,—_,

1695

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Test Act in England had been designed to exclude
Catholics. If extended to Ireland, it would cut off
one arm from the Protestant interest. They would
prefer to remain as they were, they said, liable to
prosecution under the Act of Uniformity, rather than
be disabled from doing service to their country.

The Bishops, or the Bishop of Dromore as their
representative, replied that the Presbyterians were
at heart rebels and Covenanters. If they had deserved
well in the war, the Royal bounty was reward suffi-
cient for them. To take the sacrament. on admission
to employment, the Bishop of Dromore called ‘a
trivial and inconsiderable mark of compliance with
the state order ;’ and he added with pretty sarcasm,
‘that Episcopalians were opposed to toleration that
they might preserve power to show their tenderness
to their Dissenting brethren.’’ The Toleration Bill
was introduced into the Commons. Capel furthered
it to the best of his power, but it was lost. The
Earl of Drogheda tried to carry the heads of another
bill to the same purpose in the Upper House; but
the Bishops mustered in strength and defeated him.
Bishop King, writing bitterly to a friend in England,
in complaint of Capel, who had promoted a Noncon-
formist to some post of consequence, said: ‘If we
have such governors put upon us, twill be impossible,
whatever reason or Scripture be against schismatics,
to hinder them from multiplying. Most people value
their interest above their religion. If Dissenters be
picked out for places of honour, trust, and profit,
many will daily qualify themselves as they see their
neighbours do.’ ?

1 Reid’s History of the Presbyterian Church tn Ireland, vol. ii. p. 451.
2 Ibid. p. 456,

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

And in what condition was the Church which was
thus determined to assert its sovereignty so peremp-
torily? Hacket, the Bishop of Down and Connor,
who, in Lord Clarendon’s time, had been six years
absent from his diocese, was residing still undisturbed
at Hammersmith, and openly sold his preferments.
Clarendon had ordered his:return. He had paid’ no
attention. In 1691 the Primate of Ireland applied
to Archbishop Tillotson to appoint a coadjutor. The
Archbishop discovered’ difficulties, but recommended
that Hacket should be deprived ‘ for scandalous neg-
lect of his charge.’ ‘T’wo more years passed. The
diocese was reported as in hopeless disorder; and, in
1693, the Bishops of Meath, Derry, and Dromore
went down as commissioners to examine and’ punish.

The first offender who fell under their notice was
Archdeacon Matthews, the persecutor.

The character of this gentleman may be described
by the commissioners: ‘ Dr. Mathews, as Archdeacon
of Down, had four cures without any vicarages en-
dowed, and five cures as Prebendary of Carncastle, in
the diocese of Connor. On some of them he never
had any resident curates; on others he had only
nominal curates, to answer at visitations, but not
perform other offices; on others curates altogether
insufficient and unfit. Where he had curates he did
not allow them sufficient maintenance. Catechizing,
visiting the sick, administration of the sacraments,
were so neglected, that many left the Church and
turned Presbyterians and Papists. Tio save charge
of curates, he corrupted visitation-books, procured
the Bishop to unite parishes in perpetuum, chose no
churchwardens, usurped the Bishop’s office in some

R 2

244

BOOK
Il.
—$<$<_

1694

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

parts of ordination. As Chancellor of the diocese of
Down his misbehaviour had been ‘equally great.’ *

Matthews was deprived of his archdeaconry and
suspended from his other offices. He scraped together
what money he could lay hands on and rushed to
London to appeal; the Lords Justices thinking it
necessary to write to the Archbishop of Canterbury
to desire that no favour might be shown to him.

Hacket’s case followed. The Bishop was convicted
of non-residence and of flagrant simony. He had
delegated his authority to women. He had admitted
Papists to.church livings, giving them false certificates
of subscription. He was past improvement. The Com-
missioners deposed him, and declared the see vacant.’
Ward, Dean of Connor, was deprived for adultery and
incontinence. Mylne, a prebendary of Kilrush, was
reprimanded for habitual drunkenness, and suspended
for neglect of his duties.

Down and Connor, it may be said, was an excep-
tional diocese. Scandals had crept in through the
‘Bishop’s-absence, and when discovered were vigorously
reformed. but such exceptions should have ceased to
be possible before the Prelates of the Church took on
themselves to punish others for doing work which
their own officials could leave undone; work, it may
be said, which it was impossible in the nature of

things that they could ever discharge effectually. The

presentations to the great majority of benefices was
in the hands of the Government. Irish government
patronage, spiritual and secular, ran generally in
political grooves, and was disposed of to purchase

1 “Report of Ecclesiastical Com- 2 ¢The Lords Justices to the

missioners, 1694,’ JSS. Ireland, Archbishop of Canterbury.’ Ibid.

Record Office. 3 Thid.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

votes in Parliament. A corrupt secretary, if he
chose to use his opportunity and distribute Church
preferment to his own advantage, was never at a loss
for a clergyman who. was eager to make a simoniacal
bargain with him.’

Every parish, according to law, was to have a local
school supported by the incumbent. A. single in-
stance will show how vainly even the best bishops
struggled against abuses which turned the act, as a
scheme of national education, into an insult to the
Trish people.

Among the waste lands thrown in as makeweights
among his. other bargains by the Court of Claims in
1652, Sir Wilham Petty had secured the larger portion
of the mountains of Kerry. At that time they were
covered with forest, and Petty, who had a true genius
for turning opportunities to account, had established
furnaces at Kilmakilloge on the Kenmare river, at
Kenmare itself, and at other spots in the neighbour-
hood to which ore was brought from England to be
smelted. Small knots of Protestants had thus been
collected and dispersed over a district where their
presence, had they remained there, would afterwards
have been of incalculable service. They had cod and
ling fisheries, seal fisheries, and a rising trade. The
Kenmare colony had. been strong enough and spirited
enough to sustain a four months’ siege in the last rebel-
lion. The first care of a prudent Government would

1 Secretary Southwell, writing ness to obtain. Nay, they hardly

on the 28rd July, 1703, to Lord
Nottingham, says:

‘The clergy here seem mighty
dependent and very great courtiers,
for the livings are pretty good and
there is a constant expectation of
preferment and a very great greedi-

scruple offering what they hope
will be the most prevailing argu-
ment. I am sorry to say it. I
tell it only that your Lordship
may know something of their
humours.’—/SS, Ireiand, Record
Office.

246

BOOK

er

1702

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

have been to see that these people were not left uncared
for to sink away in the-Gatholic morass. Petty himself
cared little for religion in its spiritual aspect ; but he
was aware of the money value of Protestant tenants,
and of the terms on which they could be preserved.
On the Restoration two clergymen were sent into the
district, one to Kenmare and Kilmakilloge, another
to Templemore and Kileroghan. The two parishes
lay along the opposite shores of the Kenmare river
for twenty miles, and the smelting colonies were
thus moderately provided for. The rector of Ken-
mare died in 1673. A Mr. Palmer was appointed
to succeed him. The rector of Templemore dying
in 1676, a faculty was granted to Mr. Palmer to
hold all the benefices collectively, and thus a single
clergyman ‘had charge of two groups of :parishes
divided by an arm of the sea. The water, however,
formed a convenient highway at a time when there
were no roads. With the help of curates the scat-
tered flocks still received their.due attendance, and,
in 1689, the furnaces were in full work and the colo-
nies prospering. Mr. Palmer lived till 1701, and the
downward progress marks the ebb of the vitality
of Irish Protestantism. Tralee is forty miles from
Kenmare, the Killarney mountains lying between
them; and Kilmakilloge is nearly twenty miles beyond
Kenmare. On Palmer’s death, Dr. Richards, Dean
of Tralee, already overburdened with Church prefer-
ments, set his mind upon annexing, in addition, these
remote and outlying benefices. He made influence
with the Castle, obtained the presentation, and an
order with it to the Bishop of Limerick to institute
him. With this introduction the following letters
from the Bishop of Limerick to Joshua Dawson, the
Castle secretary, will tell their own story.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

“The Bishop of Limerick to Joshua Dawson, Esq., Secretary's

Office, Dublin.
‘ October 9, 1702.

‘Sir,—This day I received yours of the 6th instant,
wherein you mention a former letter which I never
received. Dean Richards has imposed on the Lords
Justices by telling them that the livings of Mr.
Palmer, lately deceased, are contiguous to his deanery.
I believe they are at least twelve miles! distant from
the nearest part of the Dean’s livings; and there is,
moreover, a great mountain between them several
miles over. They are of very great extent, and there
is a considerable number of Protestants in them.
Dean Richards writes to me to befriend him in his
application for these livings; but I sent him word
that I did by no means think it proper that he, who
had so considerable a cure as that of Tralee to serve,
should likewise have so many and large parishes at
such a distance from him to serve besides. He offered
to allow a curate what I should think fit, but I would
not hearken to it. Mr. Palmer’s livings will be a
handsome competency for some deserving resident
incumbent, who shall make it his whole business to
serve those cures without any other plurality. The
Dean has, besides the parish of Tralee, eight or nine
more parishes to take care of, being the corpus of his
deanery, and his turn every fifth Sunday in the
cathedral of Ardfert to preach besides.’

The Irish House of Commons passed a resolution
in 1697, that the non-residence of the clergy with
cure of souls in many parts of the kingdom was a
great occasion of the growth and increase of Popery.”

1 Twelve Irish miles equal = * Commons’ Journal, December
eighteen English, 1, 1697,

247
CHAP,
I.

1702

248

BOOK
Il,
nD Seettl

1708

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Remonstrances of bishops and resolutions in Parlia-
ment weighed little, it seems, against the carelessness
or corruption with which the Castle government trifled
away the interests of Protestantism. The scattered
sheep on the Kenmare river were of less importance
than some vote which it was desirable to secure.
The Lords Justices sent the Bishop word that Dean

‘Richards must be instituted notwithstanding, and

the Bishop could but leave on record his ineffectual
protest.

‘ The Bishop of Limerick to Joshua Dawson, Esq.
; © January 12, 1703.

‘Srr,—I received yours of the 5th instant this
morning, acquainting me with their Excellencies’ de-
sign of recommending Dean Richards for Mr. Palmer’s
livings, to which I can only answer that, since I have
used my endeavours to prevent what has been at all
times so much condemned, I mean exorbitant plural-
ity of cures, for by the addition of these livings the
Dean will have at least fourteen parishes—I am the
less concerned—only give me leave to make one
observation, that, whereas you say his keeping an
able curate will in effect answer the end as well as if
those livings had been given to a resident incumbent,
we find by experience the quite contrary; and if it
were so, pluralities and non-residence would not be
so much cried out against as they are. However, I
submit to their Excellencies’ wisdom, and am very
thankful to them for their condescension in express-
ing their readiness in obliging me on some other
occasion.’ }

1 ‘Correspondence of Secretary Dawson, 1702-3.’ MSS. Dublin Castle,

THE: OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

The Irish Establishment has been reproached for
its missionary failures. What chance had an institu-
tion so conditioned? With what spirit could the
better kind of clergy go about their work, with the
poison breath of the Castle thus blighting their en-
deavours? The Dean of Tralee had his promotion,
and the last English service had been heard in the
church of Kilmakilloge. The church itself lies a
roofless ruin littered with skulls. The smelting colony
melted away, till the few families that were left were
carried off by French privateers, and the harbour
and the bay became the recruiting depot for the Pre-
tender, and a nest of pirates and smugglers,

250

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

BOOK Tue Parliament had commenced a policy of repres-
—— sion against the Catholic religion which could be

1697

justified only by a united and determined. effort for
the regeneration of the kingdom. The steps taken
in this direction were so far singularly unpromising.
The King was giving away among favourites the lands
which should have been settled with Protestants.
The Church was oppressing the Presbyterians, the
Government was corrupting the Church. The High
Churchmen, Peers, Bishops, and Commoners are now
to be seen fostering secretly the common enemy in
their terror of Whigs and Dissenters.

In both kingdoms the history of these years is
woven of insincerity. Irish faction was played off
by the English Jacobites as a means of embarrassing
the King; and the passions which bred the Assassina-
tion Plot, and were blown into fury by its failure,
are to be traced working below the surface amidst
the intrigues of Dublin politicians. The Irish Par-
liament reassembled in the summer of 1697. Capel,
who had been a sound friend to the true Protestant
interest, unhappily died in 1696. Porter succeeded
to the government as Lord Justice, but died also in
the same winter. Party feeling ran so high that
neither the sword nor the great seal could be trusted
in Irish hands; and De Ruvigny, Earl of Galway,
with Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, were sent to the
Castle. Methuen, an English barrister, who had been
minister in Portugal, took Porter’s place as Chancellor.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

The King had made up his mind to gratify what he
supposed to be the wishes of his Protestant Irish
subjects. They had clamoured against the leniency
shown to Catholic offenders. He sent over a bill in
which he relinquished for the Crown the power of
reversing Irish outlawries, and he allowed a clause to
be inserted, in the belief that it would be especially
grateful, by which the estates of persons who had
either been killed in rebellion, or had died in foreign
service, were included in the forfeiture. As a yet
greater sacrifice he had brought himself to consent,
as a price fer the confirmation of the Articles of
Limerick, that the disputed clause should be with-
drawn. When the session of 1697 opened, the Lords
Justices were astonished to find that the position of
Crown and Parliament were precisely reversed, that
while five years before Protestant Ireland was in
mutiny on account of the favour shown by the Crown
to the Catholics, the House of Lords almost unani-
mously and a powerful party in the Commons were
now inclining to protect the -Catholics against the
Crown. Mr. Stanley, Lord Galway’s English secre-
tary, in despair at the element in which he found
himself, declared ‘that he had fallen into the most
eating, drinking, wrangling, quarrelsome country he
ever saw; there was no keeping the peace among
them.’* An Englishman accustomed to consistency
had sufficient reason for finding himself bewildered.

1¢Mr. Stanley to Dr. Smith,
November 20, 1697.’ :Smith was
Dean of St. Patrick’s, but preferred
to reside in England. Stanley’s
letters to him throw additional
light on the manner in which
Church matters were managed in
Ireland.

‘Though you:used to forget me,’
he wrote, ‘for a year together in
the same town, I have been so
careful of your commands at this
distance, that I have-got those of
your favourites made chaplains to
my Lerd ‘Lieutenant as you de-
sired, Dr. Raymond, Mr. Forbes,

251

CHAP,
I;
——

1697

July 27,
1697.

252’

BOOK
jut
—,_-"

1697

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

In the Upper House the opposition was Episco-
pal and Jacobite. ‘There is a greater inclination
at present,’ reported Lord Galway, ‘to favour the:
Papists here than in England. The Bishops are
great sticklers. The Bishops of Killaloe,’ Killala,”
and Derry? are the leading men that govern the
rest.’* In the Commons, though the anti-Catholic
feeling was vigorous, disgust and indignation at the
abuses in the distribution of forfeitures made them
look with suspicion on a proposal which would
leave more lands for the Government to trifle away.
Ireland had not been torn to pieces that fortunes
might be made for Countesses of Orkney, and they
determined to see their way more clearly before they
committed themselves.

When the Outlawries Bill was introduced in the
Lower House, exception was. taken that the interests
of Protestants had not been provided for, who had pur-
chased estates which fell under the act from their sup-
posed owners, or had advanced money in mortgage on
them, or were otherwise interested. The omission had
been made, perhaps, intentionally by Jacobite influence
in England, to. ensure the rejection of the bill. The
House passed it, but themselves sketched the heads of
a supplemental bill to meet the difficulty, which was
forwarded to London for approval. On similar grounds

and Mr. Wade. I could not suc-
ceed in getting in the whole forty
you named, because his Grace has

seribbling. Send me-your works as
they come out, or you shall be sum-
moned to attend your deanery.’

not in all above a dozen, being
unwilling to entertain more than
he has a prospect of providing for.
.., » Lean’t but think you in the
right to hold your deanery of St.
Patrick’s in London; I should be
glad to hold my secretary’s office
there too, I hear you have been

* Dr. Lindsay.

2 Wm, Lloyd.

$ King, afterwards Archbishop
of Dublin.

4 “The Lords Justices to Secre-
tary Vernon, August 31.’ MSS,
Record Office.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

‘they threw out altogether, on the second reading, an
act barring remainders in tail to Catholics. The
puzzled Lords Justices began to think that the King’s
concessions to Irish Protestant prejudice had been
unnecessary after all. ‘We find,’ they wrote, ‘the
interest in favour of Papists so much greater than
we expected, that perhaps the bill confirming the
Articles of Limerick may not meet with the diffi-
culties we at first apprehended, if the additional article
be inserted.’*’ When the Outlawries Bill came before
the Peers the opposition was avowed and unam-
biguous. Living men, who refused allegiance to the
reigning sovereign, might equitably be treated as
disloyal; but the Bishops, by whom the Lords were
wholly controlled, protested against punishing by at-
tainders the families of men who had been killed in
the service (as they believed) of their rightful sove-
reign. They insisted on saving the estates of noblemen
whose present loyalty they declared above suspicion;
and so determined were they, that the Irish Council
found it necessary to withdraw their measure and send
the heads of another less sweeping, scarcely concealing
their fears that, in the present temper of the Upper
House, the second would share the fate of the first.’ 2

{ ‘Winchester and Galway to the
Duke of Shrewsbury, August 26,
1697.’ MSS. Record Office.

2 “In the House of Peers the
opposition has been much stronger
from most of the bishops and some
of the temporal lords, whose objec-
tion has chiefly been the subjecting
‘such persons to the forfeiture of
their estates who shall at any time
hereafter be found by inquisition to
have died in rebellion. And they
have likewise insisted on particular
provisoes in behalf of some lords

that are now Protestants, who
apprehend themselves affected by
that bill. We therefore. . . have
resolved that a new one shall be
prepared, wherein there may remain
no ground for the objections that
have been made to this... . We
shall take care that the intended
bill be transmitted as soon as may
be; and we hope it will be sent
back with all convenient expedi-
tion, at which time it will be more
evident whether the opposition
that has been made was only in

254

BOOK
at,
—

1697

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The bill for the confirmation of the Articles of
Limerick was introduced next. Taught, perhaps, by
the Assassination Plot, William himself no longer
desired to maintain the clause over which there had
been such angry contention. ‘The omission of it, the
Lords Justices said, ‘would be very pleasing to the
majority of good people ;’ but they were unable, after
their experience with the Outlawry Bill, to foretell
how it would be received in Parliament. There
were many members of the Lower House who denied
that the Catholics were entitled to articles of any
kind. There were others who: desired to postpone
the confirmation altogether till the additional clause
could be carried. An opposition combined out of
these two parties might, perhaps, be too strong to
encounter. Moderation and good sense carried the
day. It would have been far better had Limerick
been made to capitulate unconditionally; but the con-
ditions which were really promised it would have been
unwise and dishonourable to disallow. The Commons
passed the Articles deprived of the features which
had been surreptitiously introduced into them ; but
the omission, which secured the passing of the bill in
one house, was all but fatal to it in the other.

The High-Flying Bishops were again in the front
of the battle. Jacobites at heart, they looked on the
Catholics as their natural friends. After a violent

behalf of the Protestants, for we mitted to England. All, or most

cannot yet be positive.

‘The several oppositions which
the bill has found here have been
no small encouragement to the
Papists of this kingdom. They do
not scruple to boast and promise
themselves the miscarriage of the
second bill when it shall be trans-

of them, design to make application
for particular provisoes, which it is
our earnest request that their Excel-
lencies will be pleased to refuse,’—
€ Winchester and Galway to the
Duke of Shrewsbury, August 26,
1697,’ MSS. Record Office,

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

debate the peers sent a message to Lord Galway,
desiring to be informed on what grounds the clause
had been left out after being ratified by the King
himself. Lord Galway declined to answer. He said
that the request was without precedent, and could
not be complied with. ‘The Lords Justices of Eng-
land had detained the bill before them,’ he said, ‘until
they had laid before the King all the diffieulties which
concerned the same; and, after having received his
majesty’s pleasure, had commanded them to present
it to the Parliament with a desire that it might be
passed in the present form.’ *

The third reading was carried, but only by a ma-
jority of a single vote. Seven bishops and seven lay
lords recorded a protest, which was entered on the
journals of the House. These fourteen noblemen in-
sisted that the Articles were not fully confirmed.
‘The act, as it passed, left the Catholics in worse
condition than they were in before;’ ‘ the additional
clause was most material, and several persons who
had been adjudged within the Articles would now be
excluded from the benefit of them.’ ”

‘The Bishops,’ wrote the Lords Justices, ‘ have
been extremely mischievous.’ ®

The Outlawries Bill, newly drawn, arrived soon

1 “Winchester and Galway to
the Duke of Shrewsbury, Septem-
ber 22, 1697.

2 See Lords’ Journal, Ireland,
September 1697. The vague word-
ing of the Second Article of Lime-
rick rendered necessary several
other definitions, of which the
Catholics complained. The pream-
ble admits that ‘so much’ only
of the Articles were confirmed ‘as
might consist with the safety and

welfare of his majesty’s subjects
in Ireland.’—9 William III. cap. 2.
Hence much denunciation of broken
faith, &c. The fight, however, it
is evident from the Lords Justices’
letter, was entirely over the dis-
puted clause. The remaining altera-
tions aimed merely at precision of
statement.

8 “The Lords Justices to the
Duke of Shrewsbury, September
23.’ MSS, Record Office. Ireland,

256

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

after from England. It contained special provisoes

—)_ for such peers and gentlemen as the Upper House

1697

desired particularly to favour. The Earls of Tyrone
and Kerry, Lord Kingston,’ Lords Lowth, Carlingford,
Athenry, and Bellew, Lord Wilson, Patrick Sarsfield,
and many others, were exempted by name from its
operation. The High Churchmen were obliged to be
contented with securing their personal friends; and
these exceptions being allowed, the bill was permitted
to pass. Tyrconnell, Sir Richard Nagle, and the rest of
the leading Jacobites were described in the preamble
as having levied war against the King; brought the
French, his majesty’s enemies, into the realm; mur-
dered and destroyed several thousands of his majesty’s
good Protestant subjects, for no other reason but for
their being of the Protestant religion; and as having
encouraged an unnatural rebellion throughout Ivre-
land. All outlawries and attainders on account of the
late war, not already reversed, or affecting persons
comprehended within the Articles of Limerick, or
persons exempted by name in the statute, were de-
clared to stand good for ever, any pardon from the
King or his heirs notwithstanding. Papists who had
died in rebellion before the peace fared no better ;
they were adjudged traitors, qso facto, and their
estates passed from their families.”

Besides the Outlawries Bill two other measures of
consequence were carried in the Protestant interest,
each of which attempts had been made, with partial
success, to defeat in England. By the first Article
of Limerick it had been promised that the Catholics

1 These three were among the * 9 William III. cap 25. Irish
seven who protested against the Statutes, .
Confirmation Bill.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

should enjoy such privileges in the exercise of their
religion as were consistent with the law, or as they
had enjoyed in the time of Charles the Second. By
the Act of Uniformity the exercise of their religion
was forbidden ; but, under Charles the Second, it had
been practically connived at. To make the Limerick
concessions into a reality it was determined, that the
secular priests might remain uninterfered with, saying
mass, hearing confession, and performing the other
rites of their Church ; while the archbishops and
bishops, all officials exercising jurisdiction, and the
regular clergy, the members of religious houses in
societies, should depart and trouble Ireland no more.
A bill for this purpose was drawn by the Irish
Council and sent to England for approval. The
English ministers, hoping to secure a larger measure
of toleration, endeavoured to defeat it by inserting a
clause which they trusted would secure its rejection,
and had so worded the provision for the suppression
of convents and monasteries, as to cover every guild
and corporation in the country.’ The Irish Parlia-
ment were too determined on their object to be thus
put off. They redrew their bill, sent it again to
England, from which this time it was returned un-
altered; and a law was passed that, inasmuch as the
late rebellion had been notoriously promoted by the
Catholic clergy, and the public safety was endangered
by the presence of so many of them, the members of
the Catholic hierarchy, and the entire staff of Jesuits

o

1 It is to be remembered that made to the English council; and,

the Irish Parliament kad no power
to alter bills that came over from
England. They could only accept
or reject. On the discovery of a
mistake fresh reference had to be

VOL. I.

if a bill came on at the end of a
session, the delay in the transmis-
sion backwards and forwards was
often equivalent to its entire defeat,

258

BOOK
II.
~~, —"

1697

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and friars, must take themselves away before the fol-
lowing May; if they returned, or were found in Ire-
land after that time, they should be held guilty of high
treason.! The virus of Romanism lay in the religious
orders, and in the presence of prelates able to con-
tinue the succession. Deprived of these elements it
might be left to linger and die at last a natural death.

A second act in the same direction, the first of a
long series on the same subject, attempted to provide
against intermarriages between Catholics and Pro-
testants.?, Protestant heiresses had given themselves
and their estates to Papists. Protestant gentlemen
who married Popish wives, if not converted them-
selves, had allowed their children to be educated in
their mother’s faith. The Parliament considered that
Almighty God was thus dishonoured, and the Pro-
testant interest prejudiced. Thenceforward a Pro-
testant woman having real property, and married to
a Papist, was pronounced dead in law, and her estate
was made to devolve on the Protestant next of kin.
A Protestant man marrying without a certificate from
a bishop or magistrate (and such a certificate was only
to be given in case of his marriage with a person of his
own faith) was held to have become in law himself a
Papist, to lie under all the disabilities of his creed,
to be unable to sit in Parliament, or hold any office,
military or civil.’

1 9 William III. cap. 1.

2 Difficulties were raised ineffec-
tually against this bill also in Eng-
land. The draft of it was first
sent over from Ireland in July.
On the 12th the Lords Justices
write to the Duke of Shrewsbury :

‘Mr. Vernon having acquainted
us that in the bill for preventing
the intermarriages of Protestants

with Papists now lying before the
Council in England some things
are found exceptionable ... we
do upon enquiry find that bill
as it is drawn to be judged very
reasonable, and to be much desired
by the Protestants of this kingdom.’
—MSS. Dublin Castle.
° 9 William III. cap. 3,

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

Both these measures were unwillingly conceded by
William, who, had he been able, would have carried
out in Ireland the principles of religious equality
which had been adopted into the constitution of the
United Provinces. Unfortunately for a good under-
standing between the two countries, where England
was tolerant Ireland was severe. Where England
was most jealous and susceptible, Ireland, impreg-
nated with Jacobitism, was suspiciously lenient. The
discovery of the Catholic plot for the murder of the
King in 1695 had awakened in all classes of Protes-
tant Englishmen a profound indignation. The Parlia-
ment, following the precedent of 1584, had passed a
bill which, in the event of any such conspiracy suc-
ceeding, would defeat the object of it; and an asso-
ciation, originating in the House of Commons, had
been signed almost universally throughout England
and Scotland, those who enrolled their names binding
themselves to stand by one another in defence of the
King and English liberty ‘against the late King
James and his adherents.’

It was thought good to give Ireland the same
opportunity of displaying its loyalty.

A bill came over, identical, probably, with the act
passed in England? ‘ for the security of his majesty’s
person,’ with a copy of the Association Bond, which
the Irish Parliament was invited to ratify. Coin-
cidently with the introduction of the bill, there was
laid on the table of the House of Commons a letter,
in the handwriting of an officer in James’s army,
found among Bishop Tyrrell’s papers, described as
containing ‘a project for the extirpation of all the

1 7&8 William III. cap. 27. English Statutes.
| g 2

260

BOOK
II.
———,

1697

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Protestants in Ireland.’ The Commons, making no
difficulty so far, passed a series of resolutions, to which
they invited the Lords to agree. ‘ The Papists,’ they
said, ‘ever since the Reformation, had endeavoured
to subvert the Protestant religion by conspiracies,
massacres, and rebellions. They retained the same
purpose, and designed, if possible, to separate Ireland
from the Imperial crown. Other laws, more strin-
gent, were therefore absolutely required to assure
the reformed religion and the connexion of the two
realms. The Catholics must be excluded from
voting at elections for members of Parliament; the
oaths, which were the condition of holding office
under the crown, must be exacted more regularly;
and a law must be made, that it should be high treason
to deny King William to be lawful sovereign.’ ? |

The resolutions passed by acclamation. The bill
sent from England and the Association Bond were
passed also by a large majority, although dissen-
tient voices were found to urge that it was unfair, in
a country like Ireland, to exact generally an abjura-
tion of the Papal power.’

In the House of Lords the general allegations of
the evil intentions of the Catholics were not denied.
It was admitted that, if they could, they would
overthrow Protestantism, and that stricter laws were

1 « Resolutions of the House of of any foreign power in ecclesiasti-

Commons, November 19, 1697.’
French. MSS. Ireland. Record
Office. Cf. Commons’ Journals, No-
vember 29.

2 Commons’ Journals, Nov. 29,
1697.

-3 «There were many who spoke
against the clause that requires all
persons, under penalty of .a pre-

munire, to renounce the superiority

cal or spiritual matters within the
realm when required by the jus-
tices at their Quarter Sessions, and
for that reason opposed the bill;
but it passed by a majority of
twenty-four, and has been carried
to the House of Lords.’ — ‘The
Lords Justices to the Duke of
Shrewsbury, November 24, 1697,’
MSS, Dublin Castle.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

needed. Individually they subscribed the Association
Bond. But a stand was made on the clause, which
had been opposed unsuccessfully in the Commons.
A motion was made in committee to strike it out;
and finally, on a division, a bill, the rejection of
which, under the peculiar circumstances, could not
but be construed into an avowal of disloyalty, was
altogether lost.’

To this unlucky vote is to be attributed the consent
of England to the measures which immediately fol-
lowed for the destruction of the Irish woollen manu-
factures. Ireland, it seemed, was determinately dis-
loyal. Even the Protestant Peers were determined to
throw a shield over the inveterate Jacobitism of the
High Church men. The only resource, therefore, was
to keep her weak and miserable. The deepest re-
sentment was conceived, and was loudly expressed.
A letter was addressed to a member of the English
House of Commons, making no distinction of creed
or race, involving the Irish altogether in a common
censure, and expressing a hope that ‘the House would
make them remember that they were conquered.’ ”

Another chance was allowed to the Irish Par-
liament to redeem their mistake. Unhappily they
added to their offences. The Irish Council were
directed to prepare a similar bill for the session of
the next year. To soften the objections, some mem-
bers proposed to exempt such Catholics from the oath
as were included under the Articles of Limerick; and,
when the heads were sent for revision to England,
a clause was added to that effect. The Lords

1 ‘Lords Justices to the Duke of Gentleman in the Country to a
Shrewsbury, November 29.’ MSS. Member of the House of Commons

Dublin Castle. relating to the Trade of Ireland.’
2 ‘Answer to a Letter from a London, 1698,

261

CHAP.

———_

1697

262

BOOK
i
_—-—-—-—”

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Justices admitted that if the reasons alleged were
of weight, they applied not to the Article men only,
but to every Catholic in Ireland: if any Catholic
could conscientiously take the Abjuration Oath all
might be required to take it; if not, ‘it seemed reason-
able,’ the Lords Justices pleaded, ‘that it should not
be demanded of any.’ They left the decision to
England, intimating however at the same time their
own belief, that the oath’ might be taken by every
one who was resolved to be a faithful subject.’

The English Government was in no humour to con-
sider the tenderness of Irish consciences. The Council
struck off the proposed exceptions. They returned
the bill in the form in which the Peers had rejected
it—to be thrown out again, and this time by the
House of Commons. Petitioners were heard in objec-
tion at the bar. ‘After some hours’ debate it was
carried by a majority of ten, that the clause enjoining
the oath and expressing the penalties should not be
admitted.’ The eager resolutions went for nothing,
where words and deeds so ill corresponded; and, in
the eyes of all loyal Protestant Englishmen, the un-
fortunate country had made a public declaration of
Jacobitism.?

1 J, A. B., do swear that Ido superiority, preeminence, or author-

from my heart abhor, detest, and
abjure as impious and _ heretical
that damnable doctrine and posi-
tion that princes excommunicated
or deprived by the Pope, or any
authority of the See of Rome, may
be deposed or murdered by their
subjects, or by any other whatso-
ever; and I do declare that no
foreign prince, person, prelate,
state, or potentate, hath or ought
to have any jurisdiction, power,

ity, ecclesiastical or spiritual, within
this realm.’

By the English act any person
might be required by a magistrate
to take this oath, and, on refusing,
was reduced to the condition of a
Popish recusant.

* “The Lords Justices to the
Duke of Shrewsbury, August 1698.’
MSS. Dublin.

> Ibid. October 15,1698. bid.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

SECTION V.

263

Tuer reconquest of Ireland had cost the English CHAP.
taxpayer nine millions sterling. The lands, out of ——~—-

which he had hoped, in part at least, to be repaid, had
been made away with by a corrupt commission under
specious pretences of rewards for invisible services,
or, if rescued from their hands by the intervention of
the Irish Parliament, rescued only to be restored to
disloyal noblemen, who would use these recovered
opportunities to cause fresh trouble. The last vote,'
the deliberate refusal of both Lords and Commons
to allow a test of allegiance there, which would
have sifted the treacherous from the faithful, de-
stroyed the last hope of dependence on the wretched,
uncertain, discontented, wavering island; and the
murmurs of the English clothiers, who had watched
her extending woollen manufactures with cowardly
jealousy, found willing and eager listeners. This
Ireland, with her harbours and rivers, her unnum-
bered sheep flocks, fattened on her limestone pastures,
producing the finest fleeces in the world, this nest of
Popery and sedition, this bottomless morass of ex-
pense and confusion, was to lift up its head and
prosper, tempt away their capital and their workmen,
rob England of the secret of her wealth, her mono-
poly in the world’s markets of the broad cloth, frieze,
and flannel trade. Had these purblind commercial
politicians known what belonged to their peace they

1 The vote of the Peers in 1697 in 1698, it is possible, though not

decided the commercial fate of certain, that the disabilities might
Ireland. Had the bill been past have been taken off,

1698

264

BOOK

————

1698

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

would have welcomed the development of Irish in-
dustry as a better guarantee against future trouble
than a hundred acts of Parliament. No spirit could
have more effectually killed the genius of Popery and
Jacobitism, or could more surely have provided that
Ireland should never again be a burden on the English
exchequer, than the growth of trade and manufacture
there. The practical intelligence, the fixed and orderly
habits, the class of persons who would have been
attracted over to make their homes where land was
cheap, and waited only for labour and capital to
be as rich and fair as their own English counties,
these things would have formed the links of an
invisible chain, which could never have been broken,
to bind the two islands into one. ‘Traders’ eyes
unhappily can never look beyond the next year’s
balance sheet. They saw their artisans emigra-
ting. They saw, or thought they saw, the pro-
duce of the Irish looms competing with theirs in
the home market, in the colonies, and on the Conti-
nent. They imagined their business stolen from them,
their towns depopulated, the value of their lands
decreased, their country itself plunged at last into
ruin, all for the sake of that miserable spot which
had been a thorn in England’s side for centuries.

No language could sufficiently express the emotions
of the exasperated English capitalist. The Parlia-
ment was called upon to ‘make the Irish remember
that they were conquered.’ They should not be
allowed to build or keep at sea a single ship. They
should not manufacture a thing except their linen, and
their commerce should be so tied and bound, that they
should interfere with England nowhere. To block
them from the water altogether, even their fishery

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

265

‘must be with men and boats from England.’ Their CHAP.
legislature, of which they made so ill a use, must be —~_

ended, and they must be governed by the Parliament
of England. So argued English ‘ common sense.’’
In vain an Irish apologist replied, that to imagine
‘Ireland’s competition could injure England was
adream. The frish ‘seldom sailed further than a
potato garden,’ and traded but in cows. They ‘ knew
as little of trade and navigation as the Ameri-
can Indian.” They had not five seamen of their
nation, and not one ship of their own at Dublin. Such
little trade as they had was carried on by English
merchants and on English account.” Good sense and
truth could find no hearing amidst the general
clamour. It was not enough that the Navigation Act
had destroyed the Irish shipping interest. The ex-
port of Irish fleeces to any country but England had
been already prohibited; but the restrictions on the
sale of the raw material was a temptation to the Irish
to work it up at home, and as long as they might
export their blankets and their friezes, England’s
trade was in danger from their competition. The
English manufacturers considered it politic and fair
to say to them, ‘ You shall not weave your wool at
home at all; you shall not sell your woollen cloth either
here or abroad; we will put you under such dis-
advantages that it shall not be worth your while to
supply your own necessities; you shall buy our cloths
and frieze to clothe your own backs; you shall sell your
fleeces only to us; and, as it is our interest to have it
on easy terms, you shall take the prices which we are

1‘ Answer to a Letter from a_ relating to the Trade of Ireland.
Gentleman in the Country to a London, 1698.’
Member of the House of Commons, 2 Thid.

1698

266

BOOK pleased to offer.’

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

In this spirit the English cloth

—-— manufacturers addressed themselves to their own Par-

1698

liament ; and Parliament, blinded by ill-humour and
prejudice, endorsed their petition, and carried it to the
King in language in which the baseness of the motive
was disguised faintly under pretence of national interest.

The Peers represented ‘that the growing manu-
facture of cloth in Ireland, by cheapness of the ne-
cessaries of life, and goodness of materials, invited
Englishmen with their families and servants to settle
there. The King’s loyal subjects in England appre-
hended the further growth of it would prejudice the
manufactures in England. The trade of England
would decline, the value of land decrease, and the
number of the people diminish. They besought his
majesty to intimate to his Irish subjects that the
crowth of the woollen manufactures there had been and
would be always looked upon with jealousy in Eng-
land, and, if not timely remedied, might occasion very
strict laws totally to prohibit and suppress the same.’

The Commons said that the ‘ wealth and power of
England depended on her preserving a monopoly of
the woollen manufactures. They looked with jealousy
on the increase of it elsewhere, and must use their
utmost endeavours to prevent it from extending.

1 Hely Hutchinson, in a memo-
rial to the Government in 1779,
thus briefly sums up the position :
‘We can sell our woollen goods
only to Great Britain. We can
buy woollen goods there only. If
such a law related to two private
men instead of two kingdoms, and
enjoined that in buying and selling
the same goods an individual should

‘deal with one man only in exclusion

of others, it would in effect ordain
that both as buyer and seller that

man should fix his own price and
profit, and would refer to his dis-
cretion the loss and profit of the
other dealer; while, again, other
English laws impose a duty on the
importation of the manufacture into
England equal to a_ prohibition,
which amounts to this, “ You shall
not sell to us, and you shall buy
only from us.” ’—‘ Memorial of Mr.
Hely Hutchinson to the Earl of
Buckinghamshire, July 1, 1779,’
MSS. Record Office, Ireland.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

The Irish were dependent on, and protected by Eng-
land in the enjoyment of all that they had, and the
English Parliament would be obliged to interfere
unless the King found means to make Ireland under-
stand its position.’

Both Houses insisted that the Irish woollen trade
should cease. The Irish linen manufacture, since
there were for the present no rival English interests
with which it competed, they were willing to leave
untouched and even to encourage. Though no
pledge was given, there was an implied compact that
the sacrifice of one branch of industry should be com-
pensated by the protection of the other.

The King replied briefly that the wish of Parlia-
ment should be carried out, and Ireland was invited
to apply the knife to her own throat. Two letters
from William to the Lords Justices survive in Dublin
Castle, embodying the words of the two addresses,
and recommending to the attention of the Legisla-
ture there the worst and most fatal of all the mistaken
legislative experiments, to which a dependent country
was ever subjected by the folly of its superiors.*

The Irish Houses, in dread of abolition if they
refused, relying on the promise of encouragement to
their linen trade,” and otherwise unable to help them-
selves, acquiesced. They laid an export duty of four
shillings in the pound on all broadcloths carried out
of Ireland, and half as much on kerseys, flannels, and
friezes, amounting in itself to a complete prohibition ;
while, to make assurance more sure, the English Par-
liament passed an act prohibiting the export out of

1 MSS. 1698. Dublin Castle. to by Ireland in return for no less

* Macpherson, in the History of than nine millions sterling expended
Commerce, says ‘that the suppres- by England in the reduction of lre-
sion of the woollen trade was agreed land at the Revolution.

268

BOOK
Il.
—_—

1698

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Ireland of either wool or woollen manufactures to
any country but England, to any port in England
except six on St. George’s Channel, and only from the
six towns of Dublin, Waterford, Youghal, Kingsale,
Cork, and Waterford.!

The belief that, with a coast line like that of Ire-
land, and with a population which they were punish-
ing for disloyalty, such restrictions could really be
enforced, was one of those illusions which only the
intellect of an English merchant could have enter-
tained. The result of this restriction was to convert
the Irish, beyond their other troublesome peculiar-
ities, into a nation of smugglers.

How far England adhered to the linen compact
will be told in its place. For the present, Mr. Hely
Hutchinson’s summary of the story will suffice.

‘Jt is true you promised, in return for the re-
straints, to encourage our linen manufacture. But
how have you done it? By giving large bounties for
the making of coarse linen in the Highlands of Scot-
land—bounties on the exportation of English linen—
opening the linen manufacture to all persons without
serving apprenticeships, and imposing a tax of 30 per
cent. on all foreign linens, which has been construed
to extend to Irish printed, stained, dyed, striped, or
chequered.’

‘Will you,’ Hutchinson asked, with prophetic indig-
nation, ‘will you have an increased population
employed at home, where they will contribute to the
wealth and strength of the state; or shall they emi-

grate to America, where it is possible they may assist

in dismembering the British empire?’ ?

1 10 William III. cap. 10. Zng- ? ‘Hely Hutchinson to the Earl
lish Acts. 10 William IL cap. 5. of Buckinghamshire, July 1, 1779.’
Irish Acts. MSS. Record Office, Ireland.

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

SECTION VI.

269

Tue indignation in England at the rejection of the cHapP.
Security Act had been aggravated by the simulta- cats

neous appearance of a book dear to Irish patriotism,
by William Molyneux, the member for Dublin, denying
the obligation of Ireland to submit to statutes passed
by the English Parliament, or to re-enact them un-
less agreeable to herself. The bitterness with which
her commercial prosperity was immediately assailed
arose from a belief that Ireland was assuming deli-
berately an attitude of defiance. The book was
fiercely condemned. The House of Commons insisted,
in a memorial to the King, that the laws which re-
strained the Irish Parliament must not be evaded!
—that Ireland was, and should continue, a dependent
country. It is likely they considered weakness and
poverty the best securities that could be taken for
her submission. Having thus however, with one
hand, struck so hard a blow at her welfare, with the
other they dragged her, or tried to drag her, out of
the slough of intrigue into which she had been tum-
bled. The want of purpose at the Castle, and the
hopeless entanglement of religious and political pas-
sions, had left the field wide open to avarice and
baseness. The lands available to repay the expenses
of the war had melted unaccountably into nothing.
Notorious Jacobite peers had recovered their property
under the exceptions to the Outlawries Bill. The

| Parliamentary History, vol. v. p. 1181.

1698

270

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK Court of Claims, undeterred by the exposures of 1693,
pe had gone on with their work as quietly as if nothing

1698

had happened. Estates were granted away. Indivi-
duals who began with nothing were enormously rich,
but the exchequer was empty as ever. Evidently
there was no help in Ireland itself; and the House of
Commons in England at last, in angry despair, ap-
pointed a committee to ravel out the mystery.

The Court of Claims, seeing their end approaching,
made the most of the time remaining to them, ad-
mitting shoals of Catholics under the Articles of
Limerick who had no business there.’ Slowly, and
with extreme difficulty, the seven commissioners
traced out the scandalous history. So strongly was
the corruption at work that their own body was
tainted. When they had drawn up their report, four
only of them signed it.? Sir Richard Levinge, one
of the dissentients, himself a large sharer in the
public plunder, and dreading that he might be made
to disgorge it, sent in a conflicting statement; and, to
damage his companions, charged them with disloyalty.’
The accusation was looked into in England, and dis-
missed. Levinge was sent to the Tower for defama-
tion. The House of Commons voted that the four
commissioners had conducted themselves with in-
tegrity, courage, and understanding ;’ and the dispo-
sition of the forfeitures they considered so disgraceful,

1 ¢QOne thing seems to us very

chard, James Hamilton, and Henry
extraordinary, that more persons

Lanpford:

were adjudged within the Articles
since the commencement of our
enquiry than had been since the
making of the Articles.’—Report
of the Commissioners appointed by
Parliament. London, 1700.

.? Francis Annesley, John Tren-

* Trenchard had described the
grant to Lady Orkney as ‘scanda-
lous.’ Lady Orkney was the late
Queen’s favourite, and Levinge
hoped he could set the King
against the report by denouncing
Trenchard.

THE: OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

that there was no remedy but to cancel every grant

which had been made.!

A vote passed on the 18th January, 1700, ‘ that the
advising, procuring, and framing these grants had
occasioned great debts and heavy taxes, and highly
reflected on the King’s honour, and that the officers
and instruments concerned in the same had highly
failed in the performance of their duty.’ ?

Leave was given to bring in a bill to resume the

1 Some of the most glaring
instances of misappropriation were
mentioned in detail. Among other
curious features in the story it
appeared, that as many of the per-
sons who had applied for and
obtained grants of property had
purposely understated its value, so
in turn they had been themselves
cheated by their agents, who, by
similar frauds, had tempted them to
dispose of lands worth tens of
thousands of pounds for as many
hundreds.

Of Catholic proprietors who had
been in the rebellion, and were
covered by no articles, either of
Limerick or Galway, many were
never informed against; many were
tried, but acquitted. The ‘free-
holders who formed the juries, by
contracting new friendships with
the Irish, or by intermarriage with
them, but chiefly through a general
dislike of the disposition of the
forfeitures, were scarcely willing
to find any person guilty, even
upon full evidence.’

In Connaught ‘ the findings were
almost what the forfeiting persons
pleased.’ Forty persons not covered
by articles were tried at Galway.
There were few Protestant free-
holders, and the juries were formed
of gentlemen who, most of them,
had been officers in James’s army,

and had been protected by the
Galway Articles, All the forty
were in consequence acquitted. Mr.
Kirwan, who was one of them, had
served in a regiment which had
been commanded by the foreman
of the jury. Even in Connaught
there was a difficulty in giving a
verdict in the face of evidence so
conclusive, so one of the jurors
absented himself.

The forfeitures, though in appear-
ance considerable, had been so
handled by the Court as to exhibit
an actual deficiency, the cost of
management being made to exceed
the returns either of sale or rent—
‘a thing,’ the commissioners re-
marked, ‘ that might appear extra-
ordinary till it was observed that
obscure men, who had little or no
property before the rebellion, had
become possessed of considerable
and even very great estates.’ The
management had been made so
intricate that the accounts were
purposely unintelligible. The law
officers of the Crown, the members
of the Court, even the Lords Jus-
tices themselves, had feathered
their nests out of the spoils. Lord
Coningsby, though he escaped
impeachment, had richly deserved
it.

2 Parliamentary History, vol. v.
p. 1214.

272

BOOK
By
enna,

1700

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

grants for the use of the public, and an address on
the subject was presented by the entire House to the
King.

Conscious of the integrity of his own motives, and
irritated at the seeming reflection on his personal con-
duct, William replied briefly, that not private incli-
nation, but the obligations of justice, had led him to
reward those who had served in the reduction of
Ireland out of the forfeited estates there. The taxes
and debts of which the Commons complained had
been occasioned by the wars on the Continent, and
England would best consult her honour by taking
the burden on herself.

William was thinking of Sydney and De Ruvigny.
The Commons, not forgetting them, but differently
estimating their merits, were thinking also of the
Countess of Orkney and the English taxpayers.
‘Whoever had advised that answer,’ they rejoined, in
a temper like the Long Parliament’s, ‘had used his
utmost endeavour to create a misunderstanding and
jealousy between the King and his people.’

To William’s deep mortification, a Resumption
Bill was brought in and carried. Every grant of a
forfeiture which had been made in the King’s name
was declared null. In most instances the lands had
been resold, the high persons who had been the
recipients of the King’s bounty not dreaming of
seeking a home for themselves in Ireland; but, as the
original gift was invalid, the rights depending on it
were invalid also. Allowance was made for im-
provements, and the claims of those who had laid out
money on the lands which they believed to be their
own were allowed: but the purchase-money the pur-
chasers were left to recover from those to whom they

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

had paid it ; and a significant clause was added to the

273

CHAP.

act, ‘that the procuring or passing exorbitant grants ee

by any member of the Privy Council, or by any
other that had been a Privy Councillor, to his own
use or benefit, was a high crime and misdemeanour.’?

To secure the consent of the Upper House, the Re-
sumption Bill was attached to the Money Bill; and
the Money Bill was so framed that it must be passed
unmutilated, or else rejected. The Lords threatened
amendments. The Commons locked their doors, and
preceeded to comment more at length on the con-
nexion of the King’s bounties with the list of Privy
Councillors. Amidst humiliation, rage, and pain,
the bill passed, and received the Royal assent. The
Irish forfeitures were recovered out of the harpies’
talons, and made over to thirteen trustees, to sell to
the highest bidder.

Another measure was carried also before the Eng-
lish Parliament separated, which, though immediately
affecting England only, became to Ireland an example
of the deepest moment, and formed an eventual
turning-point in its history, The Catholic clergy,
recovering from the first terrors into which they had
been thrown by the revolution, still dreaming of
changes, unable to part with a vision of a reconciled
England, which they had imagined to be on the eve
of realization, were again at their eternal work of plots
and conspiracies, moving about in contempt of penal
laws, and deep in Jacobitism and treason. Heated
with their late success, and this time with William's
sanction, the Protestant majorities in the two Houses
passed the act which formed the model of the Irish
act ‘to prevent the future growth of Popery.’

1-11 William IIT, cap. 2.

VOL. I. T

1700

274

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

By the 4th of the 11th of William the Third any

ee, bishop or priest of the Roman Church convicted of

1700

saying mass, teaching or keeping a school, or exer-
cising any other religious function, was made liable
to perpetual imprisonment. A hundred pounds reward
was offered for the apprehension of such persons;
and, because experience had proved the insufficiency
of laws against opinions or acts of worship, without
touching more nearly the motives found powerful
with the laity, it was enacted further that no person,
educated in or professing the Popish religion, who
had not, within six months after attaining the age of
eighteen, taken the two oaths of allegiance and ab-
juration, and made the declaration disavowing Tran-
substantiation, should be capable of inheriting real
estate in England. Nor should any Papist be
allowed to purchase lands; nor might he send his
children to be educated in foreign seminaries. And
if any Papist father, having Protestant children, should
attempt to punish or coerce them, by a refusal of
adequate maintenance, the Court of Chancery should
have power to interfere and compel the parent to
make such children a sufficient allowance.

The act succeeded in England, and has, therefore,
been little heard of. Catholicism ceased practically
to exist among us, and has only revived within the
memory of middle-aged men. Its companion act
failed in Ireland, and has, therefore, been held up as
an example of the folly and ineffectuality of religious
persecution. Experience, to which the appeal is
made so confidently, gives opposite answers in the
two countries; and, if the question be argued on
broad grounds of justice, the reply must still vary
with the conditions of time and place and with the

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

245

active principles of the creed proscribed. The ima-  enap.
oo. I.
gination of ordinary men is unequal to the reproduc- ——~—

tion of circumstances other than those by which they
are themselves surrounded; and, when the political or
moral mischiefs of particular opinions seem to have
disappeared, they condemn measures as bigoted and
tyrannical which, had their lot been cast in other
times, they would have themselves been the loudest
in applauding.

The condition of Ireland was not the condition of
England. A measure suited for one may, on this
eround, have been unsuited to the other; but, if it
be argued, that persecution is necessarily unsuccessful,
the history of England and Scotland is an adequate
answer.

The Catholics, at all events, had no right to com-
plain. They, who had never professed toleration,
could not demand the protection of it. To them the
same measure only was meted out which they had
allowed to others in England while the power was
theirs, and which they continued to allow them in
other countries, where the power was still theirs.
They suffered under no disabilities in Great Britain
which Protestants did not suffer under in France, and
Spain, and Italy. So long as differences of religion
affected the public policy of Catholic and Protestant
governments, the English and Irish Catholic was the
natural ally of the enemies of the English throne,
and as such, in the opinion of the times, a legitimate
object of restraint.

TQ

1700

276

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘SECTION ‘VII.

‘BOOK ‘“PopuLaR legislatures may pass laws in paroxysms of
TI. e ~@ e e
—— emotion, but, unless: the emotion is continuous, and

1700

unless with the laws they provide an ‘executive to
give effect to their resolutions, the interposition may
remain after all but a mute and helpless protest.
Their sessions end, their indignation dies away, satis-
fied with what it seems to have achieved. ‘Corruption
resumes its sway, and, after a brief pause, the stream
falls back into its old channels. The forfeited estates
were recovered from the grantees, and, by the Act of
Resumption, were ‘to’ be sold to Protestants, and to
Protestants only. The thirteen trustees were selected
for their supposed unimpeachable probity; no one
was admitted into their number-who held office under
the crown, who -was in-any way accountable to the
King, who was in Parliament, and, ‘therefore, liable
to influence. ‘They entered into possession of estates
worth in fee sumple nearly two millions; which were
to be disposed of at last to the best advantage for the
benefit.of the nation. Yet either the situation was
too difficult for them, or the temptation was too
strong. They sate for two years. The rents were
consumed by their expenses. The lands were redis-
tributed. Yet, when. they were gone, the purchase-
money was eaten up by the demand as it arose; and
the Protestant claim was defeated or evaded. The
trustees displayed, in all their decrees, ‘the same

imanifest partiality for Papists,’ which had been so

:passionately condemned. ‘The spirit which had thrown

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

out the Security Act continued dominant, ‘it being a onap.

27

lord

(

. . , . i
maxim among all who favoured King James’s interest, ——-—

to serve the professors of that religion whose estates
were confiscated for their adherence to him.’?

There was no further interference. An. attempt
to control the affairs of Ireland on principles: of
probity and uprightness, was abandoned. as hopeless;
but the estrangement between the two islands was
agoravated and the mutual resentment and suspicion;
and, more than ever, it became the policy of England
to keep her equivocal neighbour poor and helpless.
Among the immediate results was an increasing de-
velopment of absenteeism. Im all empires the wealth
and intellect of the provinces flow inevitably towards
the ruling country, where-social life is more agreeable;
pleasures more refined, and the openings to ambition
more inviting. The absenteeism of Ireland was
peculiarly objectionable, fox the justification of the
forfeitures was the necessity of settling English and
Scotch rulers on the soil. That land had become a
chattel, to be bought and sold at pleasure, however,
rendered the enforcement of residence impossible.
The altered circumstances of society threw estates
into the market, or made them the prey of political
intrigue ; and the successful speculator, when his prize
was secured, carried the profits. to enjoy them where
he pleased. Enormous estates had fallen to English
companies and capitalists in a country where they
never meant to set their foot. Irish noblemen and
gentlemen, as, from increasing intercourse, they
became conscious of the contrast between the two
countries, grew impatient of the wretchedness of their
Trish homes, and established themselves in London

1 Harris,

1700

278

BOOK
ity
—-—’

1700

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

or Bath. Ireland was robbed of the men whom she
could least afford to lose; and the estates were
managed on the terms which would yield the largest
profit to the owner with the smallest outlay of
attention.

The country was still so insecure that small Pro-
testant tenants could not venture to take farms
beyond the margin of the great towns. Protestants
who established themselves in the country were men
of substance, who could afford to build stone houses
that would not burn, and to keep retinues of servants
who would act as garrisons against attacks from
Rapparees. ‘The land was divided, therefore, into
large holdings, often of several thousand acres. They
were let at long leases, leases for lives, or leases
renewable on fines for ever, persons of capital being
unwilling to risk the adventure on any but favourable
terms; and the first tenant perhaps, after some un-
successful attempts at farming and grazing on a great
scale, sublet his holdings to Irish peasants, and glided
into the position of an independent idle gentleman.

The power of taking these long leases was limited
by law to Protestants; but the word Protestant came
to be construed loosely, and a second class of great
tenantry rose beside the first, members of the dispos-
sessed Irish families, who in their own districts could
still rule as chiefs with scarcely a sacrifice of dignity,
who lived at the old place, retained the old name,
swore an unpleasant oath or two at quarter sessions,
or when their leases were being signed, and having
complied with the lax requirements which, in the
remote parts of the country, were all that could be
demanded, troubled themselves no further with

THE. OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

Church or parson, and were bad Catholics without
becoming Protestants.

Into the hands of one or other of these two classes
of tenants the chief part of the soil of the three
southern provinces was now passing.

Those who were really Protestant retained, for a gene-
ration or two, their distinguishing character ; but, like
the Normans before them, they assimilated themselves
to their adopted element, as the fish takes the colour

of the gravel on which he lies; and the race of Irish.

gentry, which acquired so marked a notoriety in the
last century, began gradually to shape itself; a race
noted, among many characteristics, especially for this,
that they hated labour as heartily as the Irish of
earlier centuries. Hveryone who could subsist in
idleness set himself up for a gentleman. Everyone
who held a farm, which he could divide and sublet,
became a landlord and lived on his rents. The land
was let, and underlet, and underlet again, till six
rents had sometimes to be provided by the actual
cultivator before he was allowed to feed himself and
his family;+ while the proprietor and quasi pro-
prietor grew into the Irish blackguard, the racing,
drinking, duelling, swearing squireen, the tyrant of
the poor, the shame and scandal of the order to which
he affected to belong.

Of him, however, in his perfection, time was neces-
sary for the full development. At the close of the
seventeenth century, there remained in many of the
Irish Protestants a leaven of Puritan severity ; in the

1 ‘Tt is well known that over to the very utmost.’—‘ Captain
most parts of the country the lands Erskine to Mr. Lee (a letter on the

are sublet six deep, so that those Hearts of Steel), April 10, 1775?
who actually labour it are squeezed MSS, Record Office.

280

BOOK
ike
——,—’

1700

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

High Churchmen a degree of Jacobitish piety. Thus
strangely composed, amidst commercial disabilities,
political discontent, religious division, and a blank and
menacing future, the society of the period, now in-
juriously carped at as that of Protestant ascendancy,
began to settle into form. A picture of what it was
like will be found in the correspondence of Joshua
Dawson, the Castle secretary, which is preserved
in Dublin, even to his invitations to dinner. French
and Palatine Huguenots continued to flow in, having
been secured for a time against the penalties of home-
erown dissent. Dublin grew rapidly, streets and
squares springing up outside the old walls, and Trinity
College spreading over its pleasant meadows.’ The
differences with King William were forgotten. He was
thought of only as the deliverer from Popery; and the
bronze statue was erected in College Green to his im-
mortal memory. Rapparee hunts went on in the Cork
and Kerry mountains. Noted Tories were shot like
goats among the crags; chance prisoners being ready
as ever to save their lives by informing against their
comrades; and juries, as usual, refusing to find ver-
dicts when there was the faintest excuse for evasion.”

1 ¢Council Notes, January 1699,’
MSS. Dublin.

2 Captain Cooper, writing from
Macroom, after a picturesque ac-
count of a night foray in the hills,
Says:

‘I have takena Tory, who offers,.

if I will save his life, to inform
against some private Tories, who
are at home and in good reputation.
We now find the good effect of
hanging harbourers, for it was this
Tory’s foster-father that informed
me of his being at his cabin: the
dread of being hanged frightened

the fellow to this discovery.

‘You had an account of the
harbourers when Captain Lloyd’s
soldiers were killed being tried,
and that they were plainly proved,
especially one Hierley, to have been
harbourers, But the landlord of
this Hierley, speaking of his cha-
racter, said he knew him to be a
very honest man, because he paid
his rent punctually, though pro-
bably made from the Tories’
robberies; and the landlord’s uncle
being foreman of the jury, they
brought him in not guilty, to the

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

Noted murderers were hung in chains on the high
roads, and women were burnt for poisoning. Fairs
were established about the county of Dublin, the
Archbishop holding his court of pie powder there, and
taking toll and custom.! The Catholic clergy, un-
disturbed by the bill for the expulsion of their
bishops and regulars, and ostentatiously contemp-
tuous of it, built new chapels in garrison towns,
if possible in the face of the barracks.? English
officers, in spite of test acts and abjuration oaths,
attended mass and confession in Galway, and walked
in processions among friars and nuns.’ So directly,
so openly the law was defied that, at last, a pro-
clamation was issued, warning the Catholics against
presuming too far. To give emphasis to its threats,
the Government ordered the actual arrest of a handful
of friars; but they were treated so mildly as to invite
disobedience. ‘l'hey were either directed to trans-
port themselves, to leave the country, and go where
they pleased, or they were placed on board the first
ship that was sailing to a Catholic country, and were
landed, at the country’s expense, at Oporto, Lisbon,
or Ostend.*

amazement of the court.’—‘ Captain
Cooper to Secretary Dawson, Feb-
ruary 23, 1702.’ MSS, Dublin
Castle.

1 ¢ Warrant from the Lords Jus-
tices, March 18, 1700.’ AZSS. Ibid.
Pie powder is pied poudreux, dusty
foot, a name for pedlars or other
itinerant vendors of wares. The
court was held at fairs and markets,
where such persons.carried on their
trade, and dealt summary and im-
mediate justice..

2 The officer in command. at
Dingle describes a large chapel’ as

being built there so near the bar-
racks that he believed the object
was to have the means of collect-
ing men unperceived, and suddenly
overpowering the soldiers. MSS,
Dublin Castle, 1702.

* ‘Information. of Captain Wil-
liam Davidson, Royal Fusiliers.’
MSS. 1704.

4 Even such gentle measures as
these were rarely resorted to. I
find but six cases entered among
the Council notes for the five years
following the passing of the Act.

282

BOOK
iy:

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Life in Dublin was sliding into its modern grooves,

—_—"— with balls and parties, races and gambling-tables,

1700 |

eating, drinking, and duel-fighting among the Phenix
thorn trees. Chancellor Methuen runs into debt
and slips away from Ireland, owing 38,000/., and crea-
ting scandal and confusion.’ Young Mr. Harrison,
of Armagh, marries a daughter of Secretary Vernon.
The young couple spend their June honeymoon on a
riding tour through Wales to Holyhead. The bride,
on reaching Dublin, eats herself sick with straw-
berries ; and, in her letters to her father, leaves an
unconscious record of the state of education in the
upper English households.’

Joshua Dawson was buying land, draining, build-
ing, planting, improving, and providing for his rela-

tions out of his official patronage.®

1¢Mr. Harrison to Secretary
Vernon, January 28,1701.’ MSS.
Record Office.

2 ¢ Honored Father,

‘T have reseved two of your
letters. Ishould have geven you
thanks last Post had I not being
ingageed a broad. All the newes
wee have hear isa duel betwixt my
Lord Shelborn and Couronel Cun-
ingame wich has a occasioned a
nagreement of a law suite be twixt
them. Wee get yn to our house
nex week. I willindever to acqueat
myself hear as well as I cane, I
am glad my brother nedey [then a
midshipman, afterwards the distin-
guished admiral] is like to be in no
danger. I ame glad you have time
to go to hadley and to heare you
are well. My father (Mr. Harrison
senior) is stell in the countre. My
mother geves her servis to you and

Mr. harreson his humble duty.—I

remane your most Duty full Dotter
‘Mary Harrison,

‘Dublin, July 20, 1700.’
—MSS. Record Office.

3 Secretary Dawson was the one
successful member of a large family,
and being the most methodical of
men of business, has registered and
preserved his correspondence with
every member of it. Externally
he was as decorous as a Quaker;
but he seems, like other people, to
have had adventures behind the
scenes. He appointed his brother
Richard, a light-hearted vagabond,
to a situation in the customs at
Cork. Richard writes to thank
him :—

‘ Dear Joseph—for you shall be
no longer Joshua but Joseph—for
you, like him, have been the instru-
ment of making such provision for
your brothers that the plague of
Egypt—I mean want of bread—

THE OPENING OF THE PENAL ERA.

The great folks, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
went and came between Dublin and the London
season; bishops applying for convoys to Holyhead,
and ‘a sound vessel for my coach and twelve horses ;”

peers and judges asking

permission to take with

them their 4,000 or 8,000 ounces of wrought plate

duty free ‘for my own use.’ ?
a

The insurrection had

ceased to heave, but the death of the Duke of
Gloucester and a little later of the King, revived the

has not been able to reach them.
You also, like him, live in.a prince’s
court, and manage the affairs of
state. I’m now very inclinable to
believe the transmigration of souls
according to that of Pythagoras,
for certainly Joseph’s soul has crept
into your body; and the very same
Joseph which presided in Pharaoh’s
court is even now in the secretary’s
office in the Castle of Dublin. I’d
fain know if you remember that
passage between you and Potiphar’s
wife, when you left your garment
in her hand, “Iwas certainly an
unpardonable .crime so to treat the
lady having so fair an opportunity.
Had I been in your place I should
certainly have argued the case a
little with Marget, and have been
elbow-deep in the fleshpots of
Egypt. In the first place, my
hearty thanks to you for all I have.
In the next, may you live as long
as Joseph did, and after death be
where he is, which shall always be
the prayer of yours,
‘RICHARD Dawson,’

The customs appointment did
not save the ualucky Richard.
‘The fleshpots of Egypt’ and the
whiskey tumblers of Cork brought
him early to his end, and he died
two years after in great misery.

The secretary does not seem to

have wished to keep his relations
too near him. His brother-in-law,
Charles Carr, who had taken orders,
was sent to an incumbency in Done-
gal. He, too, writes his gratitude: —

‘Dear brother,—Last night I got
safe to the famous city of Raphoe.
I hope all friends in the little city
of Dublin are well. When I have
time to look about me you shall
have a more particular account of
this place, which Haly Paly was so
much against the building of. To-
morrow I design for my parish,
which is twenty-five miles nearer
to the world’s end. If you have
any service to the man in the moon,
or any of his neighbours, I'll hand
’em up a letter for you. The bishop
and all friends here give their ser-
vice to you. I desire you'll send
the enclosed to Ballyrothery, and if
any letters come to you for me that
you'd frank them hither. No more
at present, but duty to my mother,
and love and service to my sister
and wee ones, and wherever else it
is due.—Yours most affectionately,

‘ CHARLES CARR,

‘Raphoe, July 14, 1704.’
—Dawson MSS. Dublin Castle.

1 «The Bishop of Derry to Daw-
son, July 7, 1704.’ Lbid.

2 ‘Application to the Viceroy,
June 7, 1708.’ Lbid.

284

BOOK
Il.
——-—_—”

1700

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

hopes of the Jacobites. With the accession of Anne,
the High Churchmen took courage, and again struck at
the Dissenters. Bishop King wrote to London to beg
that the Regium Donum might cease. The Presby-
terian marriages, hitherto connived at, were declared
illegal, and prosecutions were threatened for inconti-
nency. ‘The Presbyterians complained to the Earl of
Rochester. The Lords Justices, Archbishop Marsh,
and Lord Drogheda replied to Rochester’s inquiries,
that the treatment of the Dissenters was peculiarly
mild. They were of opinion, that if the Bishops
should desist altogether from the prosecutions, the
Dissenters would be encouraged to make further en-
croachments on the Church, and their own clergy
would be too much discouraged.’

1 “The Lords Justices to the Earl of Rochester, 1702.’ Clarendon
Correspondence,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

CHAPTER II.
FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION I.

THoucH the name of Cromwell was mentioned only
with execration; though all parties mm Ireland, Catho-
lic and Protestant, Dissenters and Churchmen, con-
tended with each other which should most passion-
ately denounce the memory of the usurper and
parricide, yet in the face of the resentment of Eng-
land at the efforts of the Irish legislature to assert
its independence, the savage retaliation for the refusal
of the Security Act, and the miserable prospects
which now lay before the dependent kingdom,
thoughtful Irishmen began to look back regretfully
on one feature of the Protector’s policy, and earnestly
to desire that it might be revived. The shadow of a
separate national existence might gratify their pride,
but was dearly bought at the price of national ruin.
A second conflict between the two Parliaments might
lead to the suppression of their liberties and to mili-
tary government. Under the short-lived Legislative
Union, Ireland had enjoyed free-trade and every
advantage of English citizenship. Her disabilities
had commenced with the restoration of her consti-
tution; and the more she made her constitution a
reality, the more grievous became the burden under
which she was crushed. ‘The artisans who had

286

BOOK
LL,

ee

1700

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

been employed in her woollen trade were now leaving
her in thousands. Her wool, the most valuable of
her products, she was forced to sell to England only,
on England’s own terms, and was at once robbed of
occupation for her people, and of the price which she
might have commanded for her raw material, had she
been permitted to dispose of it elsewhere. Under
such treatment the two countries became daily more
estranged. Ireland considered England unjust and
tyrannical, England considered Ireland ungrateful
and unmanageable. Neither understood the other;
neither would make allowance for the other; and,
therefore, each went deeper into the courses which

most exasperated the other. The interests of Pro-

testantism, the interests of order and liberty, were
identical on both sides of St. George’s Channel. To
England it was all-important that the Anglo-Irish
should identify themselves rather with her than with
the native race; but she thought herself secure of them,
as if for their own sakes they must adhere to the
mother country, being unable to maintain themselves
without her help. With the same recklessness with
which she mismanaged later her other colonies, she
was forcing them in self-defence to make common
cause with the Celts, among whom their fortunes
were flung. The true remedy, could England have
seen it, was the abolition of the Irish Parliament, and
a political incorporation with Great Britain. The
Legislative Union with Scotland was already deter-
mined on, the details only requiring to be adjusted.
At the accession of Queen Anne, could the English
manufacturers have looked beyond their ledgers, a

union with Ireland could have been brought about

with even greater facility. The Catholics were in

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

no condition to resist. The Protestants rather re-

garded their exclusion from the English Parliament -

as a wrong, than valued or wished to preserve the
counterfeit at Dublin. At that time they would have
welcomed gratefully a proposal for union, and Irish
grievances and the Irish character, bred of separation,
would have dissolved into things of history.

A contemporary tract describes, with curious
minuteness, the feelings on the subject entertained in
Ireland by reasonable and educated men.’

The estates of the English settlers ‘might be held,’
the writer said, ‘to belong to England, from the sums
of money which England had spent to rescue them
from the Irish; and yet, although so closely interested
in the welfare of a country which had cost her so
dear, England looked on Ireland only as a rival
which, if allowed to prosper, might become dangerous.
She did not trouble herself to distinguish between
the indigenous Celts and the colonists, but regarded
them all in the gross as one people, and one people,
indeed, they were in the way to become, unless Eng-
land took more pains to understand the Irish problem.’
‘While,’ so this writer continued, ‘ we looked on our-
selves as a distinct kingdom with a legislative power
within ourselves, we were more ready to forget Eng-
land and to bandy and side with the Irish. This bred
aversion in the English mind, and increased ours to
them. Weseemed strange and remote to them, a people
setting up for ourselves. They looked on us as at a
distance. They wished Ireland sunk in the sea, when
they might with the same pains have wished it turned

1 Considerations concerning Ire- evidently immediately before the
land, and particularly in respect of Irish Session of 1703-4.
a Union. Undated, but written

288

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to gold. They regarded Ireland as peopled with

sae menor desperate fortunes, the scum of their nation

1700

that had come over with the armies, or with bank-
rupts and cheats, which had fled thither to defraud
their creditors.

‘The English colonists, on the other hand, conceived
that the mother country had deserted them, left them
to shift for themselves, and only intended to repress
and keep them low. Having no representatives in
the Parliament at Westminster, the wildest ealumnies
against them passed unanswered there. There was
no one to explain the difference between the English
and Irish inhabitants; and the one impression was,
that they were a disloyal and turbulent people, who
could only be rendered harmless so long as they were
disabled by poverty.’ *

Another Irish statesman, writing at the same time
and with the same purpose, repeats the charge in
almost identical terms, and foretels the same results.”

‘England,’ said Mr. Maxwell, ‘had twoways of keep-
ing Ireland ; by an army in the hands of English-
men, or by checking the growth of the kingdom in
trade or wealth, that it might not be dangerous. To
govern Ireland by an army was dangerous to English
liberty. To keep the country poor was to alienate
the inhabitants of all persuasions, and leave it open
to occupation by foreign enemies. Thus treated, the
Protestant colonists were disposed to close with the
Irish and set upaseparate interest. An Englishman
settling among them quickly degenerated. There
was scarcely a man who had been seven years in the

1 Considerations concerning Ire- with England, by Henry Maxwell.
land, and particularly im respect of Dublin, 1704. This writer was
a Union. probably the Right Hon. Henry

2 Essay on a Union of Ireland Maxwell, of Finnibrogue,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

country, and meant to remain there, who did not
become averse to England, and grow something of an
Irishman. From the earliest times these influences
had been at work, and Ireland had, in consequence,
been a constant thorn in England’s side. Three
times in a hundred years she had required to be re-
conquered, and was always ready to take side with
England’s enemies. That the Celtic and the Saxon
temperaments were not in themselves incompatible
was proved by the example of Wales; and, if the
methods which had proved successful in Wales were
applied to Ireland, the same result would follow.
An Englishman moving to Wales did not forfeit his
birthright, or cease to be represented in the English
Parliament, and no one grudged him whatever wealth
he was able to acquire." When he settled in Ireland
he fell under other laws and another legislature. He
lost the benefit of trade, and, if less hardly taxed,
he was regarded with jealous eyes as a rival and
a possible enemy. So long as the separate govern-
ment was continued there would be disagreement
and estrangement, to be followed in the future by
more serious catastrophes. The true and complete
remedy would be a union. The colonists, when re-
presented in the Imperial Parliament, would no longer

1 How little intelligent IrishPro- were not; the Irish had, therefore,

testants wished to preserve the local
government, how entirely the difli-
culty wason the English side, appears
distinctly from the form of Maxwell’s
argument. The refusal of the union
was one of the Anglo-Irish griev-
ances. ‘In reason and equity,’ he
said, ‘Ireland had a better plea
than Wales. In reason, because
the people of Ireland were the off-
spring of England, which the Welsh

VOL. I.

a better title to a child’s portion.
In equity, because all the massacres,
wars, and desolations that the Pro-
testants of Ireland had undergone
had proceeded from the single
reason, that they were the bul-
wark and defence of the English
Government in Ireland, which could
never be overturned till they were
destroyed,’—LEssay on a Union,

290

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK gravitate towards the Irish, but would rather draw
_*_ the Irish with them into closer sympathy with

1703

England. The moment was favourable. The army
and militia were wholly in English hands. Nine-
tenths of the land were now held by Protestants of
English and Scotch extraction, and under a union
would instantly be filled with British immigrants.
The loyal population would increase, bringing with
them English habits and English interests: while
Treland, admitted to be an integral part of the
Empire, with a fair share of its trade, would cheer-
fully bear her part of the taxation. Her condition,
having her own members to speak for her, would be
understood. Her wealth, if she became rich, would
be English wealth; her grievances would be English
erievances; and the trade of dishonest schemers, who,
in the severed condition of Ireland, found means of
promoting their own ends, would be closed for ever.’ *

If the present opportunity were allowed to escape,
Maxwell foretold, with instinctive sagacity, one inevi-
table consequence.

‘England’ he said, ‘imagined that she could best
govern Ireland by keeping her poor and miserable,
and had, therefore, disabled her woollen trade. The
manufacture was destroyed. The wool, of which
she had enormous quantities, she was compelled to
sell only to England, and on England’s own terms.
England had the monopoly of the European cloth and

1 Essay on a Union, by Henry
Maxwell. Similarly the author of

‘Considerations concerning Ireland

says, ‘ We all saw, for instance, by
what steps this last war grew, but
could not prevent it, hecause we
were not allowed a Parliament;

and the English Parliament could
neither fully understand nor pre-
vent it. Had there been members
for Ireland there, and Ireland part
of Parliament’s province, remedies
could have been found in time,’

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

291

blanket market, because English and Irish wool were CHAP.
the best in the then known world. The relative ——~

price of it in England and Ireland had been fixed as
twenty-five to seventeen, and the difference between
the English and Irish prices was made up by an
export duty in the Irish harbours. Provided Eng-
land could really secure the Irish fleeces to: herself on
these terms, she would draw a handsome profit. But
the ingenious persons who had made this arrange-
ment had forgotten that French and Spanish wool,
if mixed with a portion of Irish, would then produce
as good cloth as the best that came from the Lan-
cashire looms. One sack of [Irish wool would work
up three French sacks ; and thus there would be
an enormous premium upon smuggling. Dutch,
French, and Irish contraband dealers would outbid
the English merchants in the Irish market. The
coast line was too long and too difficult to permit
effectual watching. ‘The coast guard officers would
be bribed to look through their fingers. . The legiti-
mate commerce would be suspended. The wool
would go to France after all. The French would
compete with England for a trade of which Ireland
would have been robbed in vain. The manufacturers,
who were almost all Protestant, would leave a country
where there was no longer employment for them.
The Scotch, English, and Dutch artisans would return
home, or would go to the American plantations.
When a nation was oppressed, men of capital and
skill were the first to take wing, as Philip the Second
found when he ruined Flanders; and Protestant
enterprise being thus driven from the field, Ireland
must in a few years relapse to the old proprietors,
whose natures were better suited to the lazy life of

uv 2

1703

292 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

pook grazing and sowing, who submitted unwillingly to

_ U._ the thraldom of England, and who would throw them-

selves away, as they had always done, upon any
Popish Prince who would offer to protect them.’ *

No prophet ever spoke more accurately, or spoke

to deafer ears. ar-sighted political intelligence was

set aside as usual by the so-called common sense of

practical men. The proposal for a union was looked

at askance as a sinister attempt on English pockets,

and the fairest opportunity that had arisen since the

conquest for bringing together countries which before

and after have so sorely tried each other, was de-

liberately sacrificed to supercilious pride and purblind

covetousness.

1 Essay on a Union of Ireland with England, by Henry Maxwell.
Dublin, 1704,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION II.

In THE summer of 1703 Queen Anne’s first Irish
Parliament was about to assemble for the most event-
ful session in that country’s history. Henry Max-
well, expressing the general sense of intelligent Anglo-
Irishmen, had foretold, that, with discouraged in-
dustry, and a continued separate political existence,
Ireland must inevitably fall back into the hands of
the Celts. The minds of the Irish Protestants
were set upon a Union. English politicians had
determined that there should be no Union. They
believed that they could invent means by which
Maxwell’s prophecy could be defeated, without
sacrificing the interests of the Manchester manu-
facturers. They could not, for their own sakes, allow
the country to relapse into a condition, out of which
it had been extricated at a cost so severe. As little
did they desire it to become strong enough to de-
mand privileges and rights, which they were too
jealous to concede .. . The position in which they
wished to see Ireland, was that of a dependent pro-
vince, occupied in growing unlimited wool for the
English looms, with the relations of its inhabitants
to one another and to England so adjusted, that they
could never more be politically dangerous. If they
could not eradicate Popery, the Government believed
that they could establish a system which would con-
demn the professors of it to helplessness. But if their
intentions may be conjectured from their subsequent
conduct, they did not desire the Protestant supremacy

293

294

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK to be too complete or too immediate. Whatever
II. : : uy
~—.— may have been their previous uncertainties, they had

1703

now convinced themselves that the ownership of
land must henceforward be Protestant exclusively ;
yet a Catholic population might still be useful as a
check on Protestant encroachment. And Catholie
and Protestant could both be held in subjection, if
each section of the people were made to feel them-

selves dependent upon England for protection against

the other. They hoped probably, that as time went

on, the natural superiority of the more rational form

of religion would assert itself, and that Popery would
disappear ; but, like most English statesmen, they
looked to the immediate problems which lay before
themselves, leaving future generations to solve their

‘own difficulties. It weuld be enough for them if

they could invent means to escape compliance with
the demand for a Union, which would have brought
with it commercial equality.

By the English bill for the repression of Popery,
no Catholic was any longer able to buy or inherit
real estate in England. The disability had been
already so far extended to Ireland, that ‘Catholics
were unable to acquire lands which had been forfeited
there. The intention was now to extend the act to
Ireland in all its completeness. ' The Bill for the
Expulsion of the Catholic Dignitaries had been, so
far, little more than a form ; and a form it might, if
desirable, remain. A bill which limited the right of
inheriting or buying real property to Protestants,
would enforce itself of its own nature ; and, after a
generation or two, must destroy the last hold of
Catholic owners on the soil of their fathers.

The preparations for this remarkable commentary

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

on the Articles of Limerick were inaugurated with
due solemnity. The Duke of Ormond, fresh from
his glories at Vigo, and decorated with the thanks of
the House of Commons, was sent over as Viceroy.
His greatness cast a lustre on his country. His
appointment was a compliment which might stand in
heu of more essential concessions, and by his rank
and personal influence he was expected to overbear
opposition.’ The heads of the bills which were to
form the subject of the business of the session, were
carefully considered by the Irish Council through the
summer.” Six measures which Sir Edward South-
well, the Irish Secretary, described as most useful,
and which ‘he knew to be most acceptable,’ ? were
sent over in June for the formal sanction of the
English Council. The first was an extension of the
bill already passed to prevent priests from coming
into Ireland from abroad. ‘ The act of the last ses-
sion, Ormond wrote, ‘extended only to dignitaries
and regulars ; but it being found by experience, that

secular priests, educated

1 His influence was scarcely suf-
ficient, great as it was. Sir Hd-
ward Southwell, the Irish Secre-
tary, writes on the 25th September
—‘’Tis a miserable fatigue we are
under ; we are forced to use a great
deal of claret, and a great many
arguments, and all little enough.
There is a most strange mixture
of Scotch and fanatical principles
which sours the mass. They are
jealous of everything, and, were it
not that my Lord Duke has a great
personal interest, and many are
ashamed to deny him whom they
have talked themselves into,
nothing at all would be done,’—
‘Southwell to the Harl of Notting-

beyond sea among her

ham, 25th September 1703.’ MSS.
Record Office, Ireland.

2 To soothe Irish sensitiveness,
Ormond allowed the Council to
discuss the form in which the
Money Bill should be presented.
He wrote to Nottingham to excuse
himself. ‘The reason why I did
it,’ he said, ‘was to let them he-
lieve it was their own act, and that
nothing of this had been agreed on
in England, the people here being
jealous that everything is already
agreed on there,’—‘ Ormond to Not-
tingham, June, 1703.’ ded.

$<Southwell to Nottingham,
June 12.’ bid.

295

CHAP.
Il.
——’

1703

296

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK majesty’s enemies, did imbibe their sentiments, and
it e . e . . .
——-— at their return did become incendiaries to rebellion,

1703

it was conceived necessary to prohibit their return,
and the new act was, in fact, but to reinforce a good
law already in being against foreign education.’

The second of the ithe of the acceptableness of
which the Secretary entertained no doubt, was the
notorious one, ‘to prevent the further i Ds: of
Popery.’ There is, and there was at ie time, an
impression that this too celebrated act was the work
of the Irish Parliament; that the English Govern-
ment consented against their better judgment, and
would have preferred it to reject it altogether. Not-
tingham, perhaps, was not unwilling that such an
impression should go abroad; but the correspondence
of the Lord Lieutenant and fe Secretary tell a dif-
ferent story.

The principle of the bill had been recommended
from England. The heads, as first drawn by the
Irish Council, were modelled immediately on the
pattern of the English Popery Bill and the English act
providing for the disposition of the forfeited estates ;
but the model was departed from in one material
point. The object was confessedly to prevent Popery
from recovering its lost ground, by a law, ‘ to punish
those who seduced others, or were seduced themselves
from the Protestant religion,’ a law ‘to prohibit
Papists from disinheriting or injuring their Protes-
tant children;’ and a law ‘to prevent estates, already
in the possession of Protestants, from descending to

1¢The Lord Lieutenant and

Council of Ireland to the Harl of
Nottingham, June 26th. MSS.
Record Office. This act was appa-
rently carried unaltered. It placed

secular priests coming from abroad
into Ireland on the same footing
as regulars. Irish Statutes, 2 Anne,
cap. 3.

* 1 Anne, cap. 32.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

Catholics ;’ in other words, to prevent Catholics from
inheriting or purchasing such estates.

In this condition the heads were sent over. ‘The
Privy Council immediately observed, and in writing
to the Lord Lieutenant appear to have severely com-
mented on, a very considerable modification of the
English precedent. The English act disabled Catholics
from inheriting or purchasing lands anywhere or
from anyone. The prohibition in the Irish heads
extended only to lands belonging to Protestants.
The change had been made intentionally. Nine-
tenths of Ireland being Protestant, the Irish Council
had designedly left the Catholics free to inherit and
purchase from one another.

To those who consider such acts indefensible in
any form, the difference will seem small. It is of
importance, however, as showing the respective atti-
tudes of the two governments towards the question.
The Irish Council, with a pattern set before them to
work from, departed slightly from it in the Catholic
interest. The English Council complained. The Irish
Council answered, ‘that if the Queen and Council
in England desired to make the act co-extensive
with the English act, they had no objection.’?

In another direction the Irish Bill was harsher than
England desired. ‘Limerick and Galway being in
great part inhabited by Papists, and having been in
all rebellions of fatal consequence to the English,’ a
provision was introduced that, with the exception of
twenty merchants at each place, to be licensed by the
Government, no Papist should for the future ‘ dwell
or inhabit’ in either of those towns.”

1 ¢ Remarks in the Irish Council 2 ¢Tord Lieutenant and Council
on the Bills returned from Eng- to Nottingham, 26th June.’ Ibid,
land.’ MSS. Record Office. .

297

CHAP.
II.
re

1703

298

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

To this clause, as directly contradicting the Articles

—— of Galway and Limerick, Ormond anticipated that ex-

1703

ception would be taken. He said that he would have
prevented the insertion of it, had he been able. The
Irish Council, however, insisted that they were the
strongest places in the island; that Limerick had
endured two sieges in each rebellion, and on each
occasion had cost a year’s war and half a million of
money. They might have added, had they not
shrunk, perhaps, from an inconvenient allusion,
that it had cost also a treaty, which, though it
ought never to have been signed, yet existed as a
fact, and had been confirmed by Parliament.

The bill went to and fro several times between the
two Councils before it settled into the form in which
it was to be laid before the Irish Legislature. There
was general soreness of feeling, soreness about trade,
soreness about the conflict of jurisdictions, soreness
about the growing Pension List.? Objections were
raised on both sides. On the purchase and inheritance
question England desired that the act should corre-
spond with the law passed in her own Parliament for
the Irish forfeited estates, placing them out of reach
of Catholics by any means and for ever more. On
other points the Irish Protestants desired more severe
restrictions than England would grant. A clause was
proposed for instance which, in the eagerness to protect

1 Other intended clauses he ob- could not well have done. The

jected tosuccessfully. ‘The clauses,’
he wrote, ‘concerning Galway
and Limerick, I believe, you may
think hard and inconvenient; but
I could not conveniently hinder it.
There were several other things
offered in that bill, which I pre-
vented putting in, but those I

others were very hard indeed.’ It
is plain, from the tone of Ormond’s
letter, that i some directions Eng-
land wished the bill to be lenient.
—‘Ormond to Nottingham, 29th
June.’ MSS. Record Office.

* “Southwell to Nottingham,
17th July.’ Ibid.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

the Protestant children of Catholic fathers, would have
prevented Catholics from selling their estates under
any circumstances, and would have reduced them
universally to the position of tenants for life.’ At
last, as if in the hopelessness of agreement, or from
a wish to evade responsibility, the Privy Council
sent a general sketch of what they desired or were
prepared to allow, and left the Irish House of Com-
mons to draw the heads for themselves after the
session had commenced.”

September at length arrived, the session opened,
and business began. Ormond, in the speech from the
throne, intimated that there was an opportunity of
passing laws which might tend greatly to the
establishment of the Protestant Religion. On the
subject of which the minds of his hearers were
most full, the social prospects of Ireland, and the

union of the three kmgdoms, he was silent.
loyally ;_ but

Houses responded

anticipated a stormy session.

1 The Irish Council deprecated
this interpretation. ‘The bill,’
they said, ‘is not intended to
hinder Papists from selling bond
fide, but to restrain them from
selling purposely to defeat their
Protestant heirs, and therefore ’tis
referred to a Court of Equity to
examine the circumstances of the
case, and determine accordingly ;
1t being impossible to prescribe
any other rule which may be
suitable to so many different cases.’
—‘ Remarks in the Irish Council
on the Notes upon the Bill re-
turned from England.’ JZSS. Re-
cord Office.

2 On the 22nd July, Southwell
writes :—‘ As to the bill against

tor.

Both
the Secretary

3 The Commons were

Popery I find many objections
occur to the attorney and solici-
"Tis certainly very hard to
draw such a bill where many
severe things are enacted, and to
be able to distinguish or except
cases that deserve compassion ; and
if that Bill is not thought fit to
pass, since what is here desired is
expressed therein, and that the
House here will certainly begin
such a bill, it would be of service
before that time to have some hint
or information how far the Council
of England would think proper to
come up to in such a Bill’—
‘Southwell to Nottingham, July
22.’ Ibid.

8 ¢‘T wish we may get through

300

BOOK
II

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

occupied for some days in hearing petitions from

—-~ Protestant sons of Catholic gentlemen threatened

1703

with being disinherited; expelling Mr. Asgill, the
member for Enniscorthy, for having written a here-
tical book,' denouncing the forfeiture commissioners
for having reflected scandalously on the Protestants
of Ireland,? and appointing committees to consider
heads of bills. On the 29th they voted an address
to the Queen, protesting against the suspicion that
they wished to make Ireland independent, and de-
claring their entire conviction that their welfare de-
pended on the maintenance of the connexion with
England. On the 4th of October Southwell wrote
‘that the Commons had sate that day to consider
the state of the nation; and, after some hours sitting
and considering the many misfortunes the country
lay under in point of trade and other circumstances,
all the speakers concluded that they did in most
earnest manner desire a Union with England.’
There had been no intemperance, or declamatory
passion. The Secretary was forced to acknowledge,
in spite of himself, ‘that the temper and good dis-

as we are. We found them mighty
hearty and frank before they were
chosen ; now they begin to look
angry, and forget what they pro-
mised,’—‘ Southwell to Notting-
ham, September 25th.’ JZSS. Re-
cord Office.

1 Curiously, Asgill was expelled
from the English House of Com-
mons four years later on the same
ground, and for the same book.

2 They resented especially the
charge of favouring the native
Irish. On the 24th September they
passed a resolution, ‘That the

Protestant freeholders of this king-

dom have been falsely and ma-
liciously misrepresented, traduced,
and abused as persons that, through
length of time, and contracting new
friendships with the Irish, or inter-
purchasing with one another, but
chiefly through a general dislike of
the disposition of the forfeitures, are
scarce willing to find any person
guilty of the late Rebellion even
upon full evidence; and that such
a representation has been one of the
great causes of the misery of this
kingdom,’ Ibid.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

position of the debate surprised most people, the
loudest grievances being touched with all the true
sense, but at the same time with all the true dis-
position, as if they desired nothing more.’!

So real were the grounds of complaint, so just the
demand which was based on those complaints, that the
House was disposed to assert its powers in the form in
which alone it could command attention. The Govern-
ment had asked for supplies for two years. <A party,
led by the Speaker, Solicitor General Brodrick, in-
sisted that, unless their remonstrances received at-
tention, the money vote should pass for one year
only; and, after a hot debate, the Castle had but
a bare majority of 122 to 119. The Pension List,
a running sore and a scandal for a century, was
brought up and sifted. The Crown regarded the here-
ditary revenue as private property, which it might
bestow at pleasure irresponsibly for good or evil. On
the Irish Establishment was laid the Regium Donum.
On the Irish Establishment were quartered also court
favourites, royal mistresses and their bastards.? Weary
of a separate constitution, which was abused for the
sustenance of infamy, and with an honourable eager-
ness to cast off their shame, they voted that pensions
paid out of the kingdom should be taxed four shillings
in the pound; and on the 22nd October they framed
their more serious discontents and desires into a direct
address to the Crown.

They were, and always had been, they said, most
loyal; but Ireland, from many causes, was mise-

1 ‘Southwell to Nottingham, Second, had a pension of 5,000/. a-
October 4.’ JLSS. Record Office. year from Ireland; and the Duke of
. 2 Catherine Sedley, Countess of St. Alban’s, Charles the Second’s
Dorchester, mistress of James the son, a pension of 800/,

302

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

rable. Their trade was ruined, their industry para-

a lysed, their manufactures violently taken from

1703

them. They were overrun with paupers; among
whom, in consequence of these unjust measures, were
now to be found industrious Protestants. In a
country where the Papists were so formidable, they
humbly conceived that Protestant immigrants ought
to have been encouraged ; whereas Protestant families
were now removing to Scotland, or emigrating to
the Plantations. The commerce of Ireland was
utterly destroyed. The restrictions and prohibitions
had rendered it impossible for any merchant to carry
on business. Government officials were intolerably
corrupt. Some had made enormous fortunes; others,
holding high and lucrative employments, were re-
siding in England. The Commons implored the
Queen to consider their wrongs, and concede the
only measure which could really remove them—a
firm and strict union between Ireland and England.

Sir Richard Cox, who had succeeded Methuen
as chancellor, supported the address of the Com-
mons in a powerful letter to Lord Nottingham :—
‘Your Lordship,’ he said, ‘will be pleased to
consider, that this country is inhabited by a people
of several nations, interests, and religions; and that
incendiaries may easily serve themselves of one
party or the other; that all labour under great
poverty, occasioned chiefly by the English acts of
woollen manufacture and resumption ;? that if the
few English here find themselves oppressed, they
will return to their mother country, as many as are

1 Address to the Queen, Octo- Commons, October 1703.
ber 22.’ MSS. Record Office. Cf. * The Resumption of Forfeitures
Journals of the Irish House of Act.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

able; and the rest, prompted by indignation, neces-
sity, or despair, will turn Scotch or Irish. There is
no remedy so proper for both kingdoms as some
sort of union which would enrich and strengthen
England, and establish the English interest here,
and make it prosper; for, in that case, all the British
would be good Englishmen. We do not capitulate.
You may be your own carvers. It seems worthy
of your serious thoughts to promote so good a
work.’ ?

The forces which govern the evolution of human
society are so complex that the wisest statesman
may misread them. The highest political sagacity,
though controlled by conscience and directed by the
purest motives, may yet select a policy which, in
the light of after history, shall seem like madness.
The ‘event’ may teach the inadequacy of the
intellect to compass the problems which at times
present themselves for solution. The ‘event’ alone
will not justify severe historical censure, where a
ruler has endeavoured seriously to do what, in the
light of such knowledge as he possessed, appeared at
the moment most equitable. But no such excuse
can be pleaded for Queen Anne’s ministers, or for the
English nation whose resolution they represented, in
rejecting these overtures of the Irish Parliament.
Opportunities occur in the affairs of nations which,
if allowed to pass, return no more. The offered
Union was thrown away when it would have been
accepted gratefully as the most precious boon which
England could bestow; was thrown away in the
meanest and basest spirit of commercial jealousy.

1 ¢Sir R. Cox to the Earl of Nottingham, February 13, 1704” MSS,
Record Office.

304

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book No rational fear of possible danger; no anxiety to
ae prevent injustice; no honourable motive of any kind

1703

whatever can be imagined as having influenced Lord
Nottingham, or the persons, whoever they were, that
were generally responsible for the decision. In fatal
blindness they persuaded themselves that the Union
would make Ireland rich, and that England’s interest
was to keep her poor. The Queen returned a cold
reply, ‘that she would give no particular answer at
present, but would take the request into considera-
tion.’! The consideration never came. The wisdom
of the precious resolution was never doubted or re-
viewed ; and from this one act, as from a scorpion’s
ego, sprung a fresh and yet uncompleted cycle of
disaffection, rebellion, and misery.

The union would not be conceded ; that much
was certain; and the Irish Parliament was left face to
face with its own domestic skeleton, to determine by
what means the ever-germinating Popery could be
held down, and if possible destroyed. With an Ire-
land united to England, and restored to trade and in-
dustry, the Catholics would have sunk before the
superior vitality of their vigorous and thriving rivals.
If there was to be no trade and no industry, a social
condition would establish itself, in which the natu-
ral superiority would be on the Celtic and Catholic
side ; and, unless otherwise protected, such Protes-
tants as remained in the island would conform them-
selves to the only type of character which could be
happy in compelled idleness.

1 Commons’ Journals, February 11, 1704,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION IIL.

TE alternative which Ireland was to receive for the
refusal of the Union was the bill for the Repression
of Popery ; and the unfinished work of the Council
was turned over to the House of Commons, who ap-
pointed a Committee to draw the heads of an act.
But further correspondence with England was neces-
sary before they could make progress with their
work. ‘The interest in the smaller measure, so long
as they were considering and debating on the Union,
was comparatively feeble; and to prevent conflict
and confusion the House was unwilling to take active
steps till the views of the English Cabinet were
ascertained with precision. The most powerful in-
fluences were brought to bear on the English Court
in favour of the Catholics. The heads of a com-
panion act had been already sent over, under which
Catholic secular priests remaining in Ireland were
required to present themselves before a magistrate,
register their names, and take out a licence, of which
the Abjuration Oath was a condition. <A formal
remonstrance, both against this measure and the in-
tended Popery Bill, had been submitted to Lord
Nottingham, and a large money subscription had been
raised among the Catholic gentry to insure the Privy
Council’s attention. They appealed to the Articles
of Limerick and to the promise distinctly given them,
that they should be subject to no disturbance on
account of their religion. King William had under-
taken that they should retain all such privileges as
they had possessed under Charles the Second, and
VOL. I. x

305

306

BOOK
at,

{|

1703

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

yet they were threatened with being deprived of the
right of punishing disobedient children, or of buying
or inheriting property in the land of their fathers.
By the Articles of Limerick no oath was to be re-
quired of Catholics but the simple Oath of Alle-
giance. If the Abjuration Oath was to be made a
condition of registration, ‘no priest could remain in
Ireland; none could come thither from abroad under
penalty of high treason; and no Catholic could con-
tinue to live there being barred the exercise of' his
religion.’ ‘They humbly hoped her majesty would
refuse to consent to a law which was a breach of
faith. Public honour was always sacred, and no
people were more sensible of it than the English.’ ?

The clause of the Articles of Limerick affecting
the religious position of the Catholics had been con-
firmed by Parliament. It was part of the law of the
land. The appeal was not conclusive, for no treaties
can bind eternally when conditions change; but the
reply most consistent at once with honour and the
interests of Ireland, would have been to concede the
Union. No Repression of Popery Act would have
been then needed, if Protestantism had been allowed
fair play. But Ireland appeared to the English
ministry to be a country where honour, conscience,
and common sense were words which had no appli-
cation. General directions were given that the bill
was to be proceeded with, and, on the 19th November,
the heads were laid on the table of the House of
Commons by Tenison, the member for Lowth.

The summer work of the Council formed the evident
basis on which the Committee had proceeded. The

1 ‘Case of the Roman Catholics repression of Popery.’ MSS. Record
in relation to the bill against the Office.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

preamble stated, as a reason for further legislation,
‘that the great lenity and moderation hitherto ex-
tended in making and executing laws against the
Popish religion, had produced no other effect, or been
otherwise looked on by them, than as connivance or
encouragement.’ The existing laws were evaded.
Catholic fathers disinherited their Protestant children.
Papists had recovered possession of estates which
they had forfeited by rebellion, by eluding the Inter-
marriage Act. ‘The priests, by secret proselytizing
and perversions, were undermining the Protestant
interest and dividing families. It was proposed,
therefore, first, that, according to English precedent,
to seduce a Protestant from his faith should be
treated as a crime, both in the pervert and in the
person perverting him. The Foreign Education Act
must be more strictly enforced. Catholic parents
must be compelled to allow sufficient maintenance to
their Protestant children; and ‘to the intent that no
lordship, manor, or tenement, whereof any Protestant
was, or hereafter should be, at any time seised, should
come into possession of a Papist, the Committee
recommended that no Catholic should be left in a
position to recover such lands under any circum-
stances whatsoever. ‘Their power to purchase or in-
herit from one another the Committee, like the
Council, still proposed to leave undisturbed; with
this provision only, that the estates, real and personal,
of a Catholic having only Catholic children, should
descend in gavelkind, and be divided in equal portions
among them. If the eldest son chose to declare
himself a Protestant, he might resume his rights as
heir-at-law.

The disarming act had been neutralized by a power

x 2

308

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book left to the Viceroy to dispense with it. This power
_ 1. the Committee alleged to have been abused, and

1703

begged that it might be withdrawn. The Limerick
and Galway clause reappeared, but was prospective

in its operation. No-Catholic should, for the future,

acquire property in those towns, or come to reside
within them. The present inhabitants might remain
on finding sureties for their good behaviour.

These -positions, with a clause disabling Catholics

from voting at elections without taking the oaths

of allegiance and abjuration, constituted the chief
features of the ‘Repression of Popery Act, as the
heads left the Irish House of Commons and were
sent to England for final revision. ‘It is to be ob-
served, that the reservation of power to the Catholics
to buy and inherit land among themselves was still
maintained, in spite-of the exception which had been
taken by the English Cabinet. The Speaker, attended
by the whole House, presented the bill to the Vice-
roy, to be forwarded to London.

‘The opposition constantly made in England,’ they
said, ‘by the Papists of Ireland, against whatever
might tend to the security of her majesty’s Protes-
tant subjects, induced them to lay the heads before
his grace in that solemn manner. They thought it
the more particularly necessary, being informed and
convinced that great sums of money had lately been
raised by them to oppose the passing of a Bill of that
mature in England.’ ?

Communication between Dublin and London was
still irregular. In,mid-winter especially the passage
yacht was sometimes detained indefinitely at Holy-

1 Commons’. Journals, November 24.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

head by heavy westerly weather; and Ireland, after
the dispatch of the heads of this and the Priests
Registration Bill, remained for six weeks in a fever
of suspense and excitement..

Rumour said that England meant’ to favour the
Catholics. The short December days had brought
Rapparee outrages. The extreme Protestant party
made use of them to excite terror and indignation ;
and the Solicitor General: (Brodrick) was so: violent,
that Ormond gave him a public reprimand.! The
Commons intimated plainly, that if the Popery Bill
returned to them materially changed, they would
refuse the supplies after all; and both Southwell and
the Viceroy wrote to deprecate alterations in the
strongest language. ‘'‘Ihe House of Commons,’ they
said, ‘was extremely intent upon it. They entreated
Nottingham to see personally to its progress and
dispatch.’ ?

There was no occasion for their alarm. At the end
of January news came that the bill was coming back,
and coming in a shape which would be welcome
to all good: Protestants. On the 10th February it
arrived. From Ormond’s anxiety it might have been
inferred, that the disposition in England was really
unfavourable. Yet the bill had been changed, not ina
direction to make it bear less heavily on the Catholics,
but to brmg it rather more close to the English Act,
and to abridge the small indulgence which the Irish
Council had endeavoured so earnestly to preserve.

In the shape in which this celebrated statute was

* “Southwell to Nottingham, well and the Duke of Ormond,
January 18, 1704.’ MSS. Record December 1703 and January 1704,’
Office. Ibid,

* «Letters from Secretary South-

310

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

returned from England to be passed into law by the

Trish Parliament, the provisions of it were these :—

1704

The first part ar the preamble had been struck out,
perhaps as reflecting too severely on the imbecility
of the executive government. ‘Emissaries of the
Church of Rome,’ it was thought sufficient to say,
‘taking advantage of the weakness and ignorance of

some of her majesty’s subjects, and the sickness and

decay of their reason and senses, daily perverted
them from the Protestant religion, to the disquiet of
the realm, and the discomfort and disturbance of
private families. In their hatred of true religion,

persons professing Popery had refused to provide for
their Protestant children. They had evaded the

laws designed to keep them in check. They had it
in their power to make divisions by their votes at

elections, and to use other means, to the destruction

of the Protestant interest. Perversions therefore
from ‘Protestantism to Popery were brought under
the premunire statute, as the heads had recom-

mended. The penalties of the Foreign Education

Act were extended to all Catholics who sent their
children abroad without licence. Power was given
to the Court of Chancery to compel Catholic parents
to make sufficient allowances to their children of

another religious profession than their own; and

then coming to the great matter, the act declared,
that where the eldest son of a Catholic father was a
Protestant, the father became tenant for life only,
and was disabled from selling his estate if he desired
it. No Catholic might be guardian or trustee to
orphan children though born of Catholic parents.
If the parents were living, and one of them was a
Protestant, the Court of Chancery was directed to

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

see that they were brought up in the Communion of
the Established Church.

A middle course was taken with the debated
purchase and inheritance question. Under no con-
dition whatsoever were Catholics to be permitted to
buy lands, or gain any additional hold on the real
estate of the country. They were not even to take
leases for more than thirty-one years. Lands already
in the hands of Protestants must descend to the
Protestant nearest of kin. Lands in possession of
Catholics, whose children were Catholics also, were
to descend in gavelkind, as the Irish Committee had
proposed. The eldest son, however, might inherit,
as the Committee recommended under the common
law, and retain his privilege as sole heir to the real
estate if he declared himself a Protestant within a
year of his father’s death.’!

An act, passed under Charles the Second, had
required the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy as a
condition of acquiring property in corporate towns.
Had the law been observed, the late rebellion would
have been prevented. Limerick and Galway being
places of great military importance, the English
Council had now consented to the clause which forbade
fresh Papist families from settling there ; while Papists
already occupying tenements within the walls were
required to find security for their good behaviour.
A blow was aimed also at local superstitions, by
an order that all crosses, pictures, inscriptions, and

1 The Court of Chancery in such
cases was to make an order for the
maintenance of the younger chil-
dren up to a third of the value of
the estate. Nor did the act, as
is sometimes imagined, enable a

younger brother to supplant the
eldest by conforming. The eldest
son alone was laid under a direct
temptation to change his religion
from interested motives.

311

CHAP.
Il.
—_—"”

1704

312

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK Objects of public devotion should be destroyed by
othe magistrates ; gatherings at stations and places

1704

of pilgrimage were to be treated as riotous assem-
blies, and persons collecting on such occasions were
to be fined or publicly whipped.?

Such was this act as it affected Catholics after
being remodelled by the English Cabinet ; but pro-
visions were attached which reflected the double
edged intolerance of the members of the Anglican
Communion. A special section declared that no
person should take benefit by the act as a Protes-
tant, who did not conform to the Church of Ireland
as by law established. If, on the death of a Protes-
tant landowner, the natural heir was a Catholic, the
Catholic was disabled; but if the Protestant next of
kin, to whom the estate would lapse, happened to be
a Presbyterian, he was to be passed over in favour
of a more remote member of the Establishment. As
if this was not enough, the English Test Act, of
which in the previous correspondence not a word had
been breathed, was found to have been introduced
as a parenthesis. ‘The taking the sacrament, accord-
ing to the rites of the Established Church, was made
a condition of holding any office, civil or military,
under the crown, above the rank of a_ constable.
The exclusive privileges, so long desired by the Irish
Bishops, were thrown into their hands as a make-
weight in a bill of a totally opposite tendency. The
Presbyterians, the Independents, the Huguenot
immigrants, the Quakers, not protected in their
public worship, like the English Dissenter, by a Tole-
ration Act, were swept under the same political dis-

1 2 Anne, cap. 6. Irish Statutes.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

abilities, and were at once cut off from the army, the
militia, the civil service, the commission of the peace,
and from seats in the municipal corporations.

_ What could have been the object of this most
strange and most unlooked-for episode ? Was it a
move of Lord Godolphin’s, as Burnet says, to defeat
a bill which he could not directly oppose, by intro-
ducing a clause which he trusted would prove fatal
to it? Was it, as Dr. Reid considers, that Arch-
bishop King, finding his direct attacks on the Dis-
senters unsuccessful, induced his friends in England
to insert the clause in the last stage of a bill on
which he knew the Irish Commons to have set their
hearts, when they must either accept the form in
which it was returned to them, or lose it altogether?
The motives of public men are rarely so complicated
as the critics of their actions conjecture. Lord
Godolphin’s object was to pacify the Irish Parliament,
and obtain the necessary supplies without granting
the Union, or making commercial concessions which
would irritate the English manufacturers. The
Catholics were politically powerless. No favour
shown to Popery would improve the Government
majority. The Presbyterians, though half the Pro-
testant population, and incomparably the most earnest
in their Protestantism, were chiefly farmers, trades-
men, and artisans. Out of three hundred seats in
the House of Commons they commanded but ten, and
the little favour felt towards them had been shown
in a recent vote, which declared the Regium Donum
an unnecessary expense ; while the Test clause was
the surest means to reconcile the Bishops and High
Church Peers to an act which their Jacobite sympa-
thies might have otherwise inclined them to resist.

314

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

A slight agitation followed the announcement of

86 unexpected an addition to the act, but not suffi-

17

04

cient to cause uneasiness at the Castle. The bill
passed through the first and second readings without
discussion. On the 22nd of February the House of
Commons went into committee. The Catholics had
applied to be heard by counsel in opposition; the
request had been considered fair; and Sir Theobald
Butler, who had been Tyrconnell’s Solicitor General,
and Sir Stephen Rice, who had been Chief Baron,
spoke at the bar as their representatives. The
appeal of course was to the Articles of Limerick.
The act before the House admitted no distinctions,
and applied to the whole of Ireland. Catholics
specially comprehended in the Articles of Limerick
and Galway had been promised undisturbed posses-
sion of their properties; and if the act became law,
their sons, it was urged, should they choose to be-
come Protestants, could take away their control over
their estates. By the Articles generally all Catholics
were restored to such rights as they had enjoyed under
Charles the Second. In that reign they had possessed
an undoubted right of purchasing land, and of this
they were to be deprived. In that reign a son
succeeded to his father’s property though the father
might be a Protestant and the son a Catholic; while,
if the gavelling clause was carried, in a generation or
two there would scarcely be a remembrance of any
Catholic family in any part of Ireland.

It was needless to argue an inconsistency which

1 Southwell, who must have said, ‘made a slight stir, which is
known Godolphin’s real wishes, dying off.’—‘ Southwell to Notting-
reported that the bills had been ham, February, 1704.’ MSS. Re-
well received: ‘The Sacramental cord Office.
test, added to the Popery Bill,’ he

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

315

could not be denied. ‘Treaties, it was admitted in CHAP.
reply, were meant to be observed, but were not in- ——~-—

tended to last for ever. A power of revision resided
necessarily in the legislature; and the legislature
could not be prevented from passing laws which
might be required for the safety of the Government.

This position the Catholics did not attempt to
question. No articles, Sir Stephen Rice acknow-
ledged, could take away the right of Government to
protect itself against dangerous enemies. He pro-
tested only that the Catholics had given no fresh
provocation, or had made themselves in any way
legitimate objects of suspicion.

Here of course the real difficulty lay. To sincere
Protestants, the Catholics could not, in the nature of
the case, be other than objects of suspicion. They
had lost nine-tenths of their estates, and must, if they
were mortal, desire to recover them. As certainly,
they must be friends to the Pretender, and enemies
of the Hanoverian succession. They had themselves
admitted that no Catholic could conscientiously take
the Abjuration Oath.

‘The arguments,’ wrote Southwell, giving an account
of the discussion to Nottingham, ‘ were considered
and answered, and all the clauses against the Papists
passed unanimously, till we came to the sacramental
test, on which we had a two hours’ debate. It was
objected, that we were creating a new distinction of
Church and Dissenters, when there ought to be only
that of Protestant and Papist ; that it weakened our
Protestant interest, when we were provoking the
Papists afresh; that it was an ill-requital to the
Dissenters, who had so signalised themselves in the
defence of Derry ; that, in case of foreign invasion, 1t

1704

316

BOOK
4 Wh
—,,_——

1704

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

put them out of capacity, without great penalty, of
showing the same zeal; that it was more sensible
to the Dissenters here because they have no tolera-
tion by law as in England ; and some very few, in
the height of their resentment, were pleased to say,
they thought this was added to hazard the bill. All
this was answered, and showed that no particular
hardship was designed towards them; that, in fact,
there were more of the Church at Enniskillen and at
least one-half in Derry; that even in the North above
eight in ten of the gentry were Churchmen; that
although, in those parts, the commonalty might exceed
in Dissenters, parish officers were excused in the bill;
that, in cases of public danger, all people were
obliged, in duty and: interest, to oppose the common
enemy ; that, if ever we hoped a union with England,
it could: not be expected they would ever do it, but
upon the same terms that they stand upon; and that,
in England, the Dissenters have both writ for and
preached conformity when it was for their interest
and advantage.’ !

To throw out the clause was to lose the work of the
session. ‘l'wenty members of the House of Commons
preferred even this alternative as a less evil than a
resolution so impolitic and unjust. But the bill was
carried by an enormous majority. It passed with equal
ease through the House of Lords, and became law.

The act requiring the Catholic priests who re-
mained in Ireland to register their names and take
out licences, was returned from England with the
Popery Act, and was passed simultaneously. It re-
appeared without the dreaded provision, which was

1 ‘Sir Ed. Southwell to the Earl of Nottingham, February 26, 1704.’
SS. Record Office.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

‘to have exacted the Abjuration Oath; but had the
execution of the law been equal to its verbal severity,
it would still have sufficed to extinguish Irish Popery
within the compass of a generation. The existing
Secular Clergy were allowed to remain and officiate;
but their number was not to be recruited from
abroad, nor were any more to be ordained in Ireland.
To prevent evasion, every priest was required to
return his name, his parish, his age, the time and
place where he received his orders. If he could prove
that he was one of the old set he was to receive his
licence; if not, he was required to leave the country,
under pain of death if he came back. To make the
disappearance more rapid, a pension of 20/. a year,
afterwards raised to 30/., was assigned to every
priest who would come over to the Establishment.'
Finally, as the English Parliament had determined
the descent of the crown in a Protestant line, should
Queen Anne die without a natural heir, and ‘ inas-
much as it most manifestly appeared that the Papists
of Ireland, and other disaffected persons, did still
entertain the hope of disappointing the succession of
the crown to the House of Hanover,’ an attempt to
tamper with the Act of Succession in the Pretender’s
interest, by act or deed, was made high treason.’ ”

1 2 Anne, cap. 7. 2 2 Anne, cap. 5. Lrish Statutes.

o18

BOOK
Il.
ed

1704

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

CAREFULLY as the Bill for the Repression of Popery
had been drawn, it appeared at first as if it were to
take its place among the many statutes which existed
only as bugbears. By the 13th of the 10th of
William, Papists had been disqualified from prac-
tising as solicitors; yet the courts were as full as
ever of Catholic attorneys; and the attorneys, having
established their own existence in the teeth of one
law, found little difficulty in picking holes in another.
Any means were thought legitimate to defeat a
statute in itself unjust; and by annuities, by fictitious
conveyances, by incumbrances and settlements, by
fines and leases, by all the unnumbered weapons
lying in a lawyer's armoury, Catholic landowners
were still enabled to determine, after their own
pleasure, the descent of their properties; while the
executive was equally careless in enforcing the acts
immediately penal. Catholic gentlemen were not
disarmed. Catholic bishops held ordinations as usual,
and were not interfered with. The majority of
priests laughed at the Registration Act, officiated
without licence, and no one meddled with them.
Students went and came between Ireland and the
French and Spanish Universities. Catholic schools
continued open. Catholic tutors taught their pupils
undisturbed in private houses. In vain, two years
later, the Commons voted that magistrates who
neglected their duties were ‘ betrayers of the liberties
of the kingdom and enemies of the Protestant interest.’

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

It seemed as if laws against Celt or Papist in Ireland
were only made to be laughed at; as if they had
been passed to silence the clamours of Parliament,
and were paralyzed by the purposed inaction of those
whose business was to see them enforced. The cold-
ness in one direction was the more remarkable when
contrasted with the heat and vigour in another. The
Bishops had been bribed into consenting to the
Popery Bill by the clause against the Dissenters ;
and they settled to their work, when the law was
passed, with the zeal of heartfelt enjoyment. The
_ Presbyterian magistrates in Ulster were cleared out.
‘Men of little estate, youths, newcomers, and clergy-
men, having nothing to recommend them but their
going to church,’ were appointed in their places.
Out of twelve aldermen of Derry, ten were Noncon-
formists, and were ejected. At Belfast the entire
corporation was changed; and the power being now
in their hands in town and country, the Bishops fell
upon the grievance which had so long afflicted them,
of the Presbyterian marriages. Catholic marriages
did not trouble them; for Catholic priests were
lawfully ordained, and could perform valid sacra-
ments. Dissenting ministers were unsanctified up-
starts, whose pretended ceremonial was but a licence
for sin. It was announced that the children of all
Protestants not married in a church should be treated
as bastards, and, as the record of this childish in-
sanity declares, ‘ Many persons, of undoubted repu-
tation, were prosecuted in the bishops’ courts as
fornicators, for cohabiting with their own wives.’ !
Too late the English ministers became conscious

1 Loyalty of the Presbyterians in Ireland. Reign of Queen Anne,

320

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of their mistake, and endeavoured to repair it. The

—**— intolerable absurdity of crippling the right arm of

1707

Irish Protestantism, with the Pretender threatening
a descent on Scotland, was too glaringly obvious.
If the Test Act was to be the only reality, and the
Popery Acts were to be left to sleep, the Test must
be taken off again, and some fresh acts passed against
the Catholics, of which evasion should be impossible.
The Earl of Pembroke was sent over in Ormond’s
place to introduce, if possible, some elements of com-
mon sense into the distracted administration. Never
constant for more than a year or two toa definite
policy, the history of the English Government of
Ireland is, from first to last, a history of attempts to
rule by humouring the party which was for the
moment uppermost, of the wildest blunders per-
mitted for an immediate object, to be followed by
efforts always ineffectual to undo them after the
mischief had been accomplished.

Pembroke came to Dublin in the summer of 1707,
bringing with him George Doddington as secretary.
The Earl of Sunderland, brought for a time into
office, used the opportunity to press a reversal, if
possible, of the extraordinary policy of the Test
clause; and though his influence was far from para-
mount in Godolphin’s administration, it can be traced
in Doddington’s appointment, and in the language
of Pembroke’s speech at the opening of the Irish
Parliament, which dwelt generally, but emphatically,
on the danger from the overwhelming numbers of
the Catholics, the necessity for unanimity among
Protestants, and the desirableness of discovering
fresh means to strengthen the Protestant interest.

The mind of the Commons was still fastened upon

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

the object which, in the Session of 1703, they had
sought so earnestly and so ineffectually. In the
address they expressed their hopes for ‘a more com-
prehensive union.’ The Queen, was made to answer
as before, vaguely, that she would endeavour ‘ to
make the union of all her subjects as extensive as
possible.’ The words passed as more hopeful than
an absolute refusal; and the House settled itself to
the work of which the Journals indicate only what
was done, being silent over what was attempted.
The supplies were voted freely. Next to the sup-
plies the Test had been Lord Sunderland’s chief
anxiety. Doddington was obliged to report that the
Bishops’ influence among the Lords, and the High
Church leanings so strangely visible in the Lower
House, rendered the removal of it totally imprac-
ticable.' Suggestions for an improvement of the
Popery Bill were received more warmly. The

1 Doddington’s letter to Sunder- of them, they will put what mea-

land on the subject throws the
most curious light on the temper

of the Irish Parliament: ‘Astothe |

other grand affair,’ he wrote, on
the 14th of August, after mention-
ing the supply vote—‘I mean the
taking off the Sacramental Test ; it
was impracticable in this House,
and will ever be for as long as this
Parliament continues, which is
made up of two-thirds of as High
Churchmen as any in England.
You would hardly believe there
should be such a creature as an
Trish Protestant Jacobite, and yet
’tis most certain there are a great
many such monsters. I can prove
it. This country is very near as
much under the power and influ-
ence of the clergy as the people of
Italy are ; aud, if care be not taken

VOL. I.

sures they please on the civil
power.’ And again on the 28th:
‘This people ought to be gratified
with all laws that are for the
better government of human so-
ciety, and for their preservation
against the Papists and their adhe-
rents the High Flyers, with which
this country swarms. I entirely
agree with you, that nothing less
than the taking off the Sacra-
mental ‘l’est ean remedy the grow-
ing evils this country labours
under ; but unless the Government
will call a new Parliament, and
sincerely espouse the taking it off,
it will not be done. Two-thirds
of the members of the present
House of Commons are High
Flyers. In the other House the
Bishops, every man of them, are as

322,

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK Commons had been perplexed with details of the many
—** _ methods by which Catholic solicitors were untying

1707

the knots of the act of 1704. Lands had been given
away, leases had been granted for a thousand years
to hinder Catholic estates from falling to apostate
children. Heirs apparent, or eldest sons, of wavering
faith, had been smuggled away to England, or married
as minors to Catholic ladies, that the priest’s in-
fluence might be sustained by the wife’s. Special
acts were passed to meet particular instances ; and
the heads of a general act, from which escape would
be at last impossible, were carried through the Lower
House with rapidity and enthusiasm ; notwithstand-
ing all that Doddington had reported of the humour
of the majority of the members.

The Highchurchmanship, however, which in the
country gentlemen was controlled or modified by
Protestant traditions, appeared among the Spiritual
Peers in its true colours. To them a Catholic was
but an erring brother, while a Calvinist was a
detested enemy. The Catholics were good friends
to the Pretender, and, in the event of a revolution,
might unite ultimately with themselves. Whigs,
Low Churchmen, and Nonconformists were malig-
nant Hanoverians and foes to their very heart of
hearts, of Sacerdotalism and Episcopal authority.
Measures which would give additional strength to
Protestantism in the true and proper sense, were
things to be deprecated and resisted. They did not

country is priest-rid, very near as
much as the Portuguese and
Spaniards are.’—‘ Doddington to

high as Laud was, and have so great
an influence over the Temporal

Lords, most of whom have as little
sense as Lord Abercorn, that they
are at least six to one against the
honest Lords.. Believe me this

Sunderland, August 14 and 28,
MSS, Record Office.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

attempt direct opposition, but they introduced modi-
fications, which would make the bill as futile as its
predecessors ; and in this condition the heads of the
New Popery Act were sent over with others to the
English Council.

‘I beg leave in particular,’ wrote Doddington in
transmitting them, ‘to mention the bill for prevent-
ing the further growth of Popery, which the holy
prelates have been mumbling and doing their best to
render it ineffectual. The Papists are alarmed at
this bill, which was designed to strengthen the one
that passed formerly, and prevent the settling their
estates in such a manner as would evade the first
act, and hinder their estates from descending to
their Protestant children. When I reflect how un-
accountable an act it is for a Protestant Government
to authorise Romish priests to exercise their religion,
and at the same time the Dissenting ministers are
made lable to very severe penalties for acting accord-
ing to their persuasions, | cannot but hope some
cure will be found out to put an end to so unreason-
able a proceeding. We require alterations in the
Council, which in truth is a scandalous board, and by
such steps may allay that violent temper, which has
been countenanced and preached up here since the
death of the late King. And then a new Parliament,
with the countenance of the Government, will take
off that scandalous distinction, or rather infamous
clause, and do such other things as may be for the
real honour of the Queen and the good of her sub-
jects.’ *

The Popery Bill came back, but the Bishops’

1 ¢PDoddington to Sunderland, September 2.’ MSS. Record Office.
x¥ 2

323

CHAP.
TL

1707

O24

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK handiwork being left entirely or in part undefaced,
IL. |
—-~— a Committee of the Commons reported upon it un-

1707

favourably, and it was rejected.’ A second set of
heads were introduced by a private member, but at
so late a period in the session that nothing more
could be done with it. The Irish Parliament was
falling into a habit which became afterwards the
rule, of meeting only in alternate years. The
Catholics were reprieved, and the Bishops had secured
their gratitude in the event of half foreseen con-
tingencies.

+ Commons’ Journals, October 18, 1707.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION V.

Wurtz the Irish Jacobite House of Lords. was thus
openly taking the side of the Catholics, the Pretender
was preparing at St. Germains for a descent upon
Scotland. An attack on Ireland, whether as a feint
or as a reality, formed an important part of his plan.
As soon as he should have established himself among
his Highland friends, a French squadron was to come
round to Galway, where the Catholic inhabitants,
led by the country gentlemen, who had been officers
in his father’s. army, were prepared to receive their
allies. The Government had received information. of
what was intended, and, so far as they were able, had
taken measures to secure so important a town. The
difficulties which they experienced sufficed to show,
that the Limerick and Galway Clauses in the Popery
Act were no gratuitous insults to a loyal and un-
offending set of people, but resolutions of mere
self-defence, of which the fanlt was, that they were
left unexecuted. An order was sent to the mayor
to call before him the principal Catholic gentlemen
of the county, to offer them the Abjuration Oath,
and, if they refused to swear, to. secure their persons.
The mayor, though of necessity a Churchman by
profession, yet wore his churchmanship as an official
cloke, with a sound Catholic body concealed below it.
He invited the gentlemen to repair to Galway as he
was directed. They obeyed—Lord Bophin and half
a hundred others, with their servants and retinue of
friends. They declined the oath as a matter of course.
The mayor directed them to consider themselves

325

326

BOOK
ae

a7 08

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

prisoners on parole inside the walls, precisely in the
place where they would be most neat when the
French should arrive ; and Colonel Eyre the governor,

with a handful of idiees in the castle, found himself
overmatched and virtually at their mercy.’ The
condition of Galway was the condition of all the
counties where the Articles of Limerick had left the
Catholic strength unbroken. In the event of an
insurrection the only force which could be relied
upon to oppose the Pretender was as usual the Ulster
Militia, and the Ulster Militia had been simply anni-
hilated by the Test clause. The rank and file of the
regiments had been almost exclusively Presbyterian.
After the insult passed upon them, and no longer
permitted to have a single officer of their own per-
suasion, they refused to obey the summons when
invited to enlist; and Ireland, with Catholics, Pro-
testants, traders, landowners, farmers, all classes and
all creeds, disunited and mutually exasperated, lay
at the time of trial once more without defence.
Most precious commentary on the proceedings of all
parties who had been concerned in bringing her to
such a pass! The slightest success in Scotland would
have led to the landing of a French army, and
although an insurrection would have been less mis-
chievous than in 1641, and in 1689, for there was as
yet no glimmer of returning prosperity which could
‘be again ruined, fresh millions must have been sup-
plied from the English exchequer, and the wretched

business of reconquest undertaken once more from

the beginning.

Happily the Pretender’s expedition failed; the

} * ‘Colonel Eyre to Secretary Dawson, March 30 and Apel 11, 1708.’
“MSS, Dublin Castle.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

peril passed by; and English statesmen who had
leisure to spare for the unlucky country, and intel-
ligence enough to be conscious of the disgrace which
this perpetual mismanagement entailed on them, re-
newed their resolution to take warning, and for the
future to follow wiser courses.’

1 The militia catastrophe in
Ulster gave a tempting oppor-
tunity to the High Church party.
King William, whose popularity
among the Protestants had suffered
through his consent to the com-
mercial disabilities, was again be-
coming a national hero in contrast
with the Tory leanings of Queen
Anne. Whigs, Low Churchmen,
and Nonconformists, looked back
on the memory of King William,
and looked forward to the Hanover
succession with passionate regret
on one side and passionate hope
on the other. The Bishops and
their friends took occasion, from the
refusal of the Presbyterians to
enlist, to represent to the Queen
that they, and only they, were
loyal to herself. An address was
drawn by Pooley, Bishop of
Raphoe, and signed by himself and
‘his clergy, which throws an amus-
ing light on the temper of these
gentlemen.

To the Queen’s Majesty. The
Humble Address of the Bishop
and Clergy of Raphoe at a Visita-
tion held’ August 18, 1708, at
Raphoe in Donegal :

‘Please your majesty,— We,
-your majesty’s most dutiful and
loyal subjects, daily remember your
happy accession to the throne,
with an entire affection, which ad-
mits no rival alive or dead. We
_admire the wisdom of your con-
duct through the whole series of
your reign, particularly in that

stupendious (sic) instance the
Union. We adore God for the
various scenes of wonder which
have hitherto attended your arms
and those of your allies. By the
Pretender’s coming, seeing, and
flying North Britain instead of
overcoming, Providence seems to
indicate your majesty shall not
need their swords who will not
draw them unless as officers. The
hero Kugéne served as a private
soldier under your hero Marl-
borough. ’Tis to be feared that
subjects who will not be for you,
but on such conditions as repeal
those laws which are framed as
the bulwark against Popery and
all its adherents, may be against
you. As for us, we shall preach
active obedience for conscience
sake to her for whom God has
done marvellous things whereof
we rejoice, and pray that these
wonders may reach from Ouden-
arde to Versailles till Christendom
and your adversary shall humbly
beg that protection and honourable
peace which he proudly boasted to
give, but never on honourable
terms.
‘Joun RapHor.’

Unfortunately for the Bishop,
he could not forward this effusion
directly to the Queen. It could
be transmitted only through the
Trish Council, and he seems to
have been afraid of the satirical
criticism of Archbishop King. He

328

BOOK
II.
—_——_—

1708

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The Irish High Churchmen required a bridle.
Lord Wharton, a more determined Whig than Pem-
broke, was chosen to force the hand of those fanatical
or dishonest schemers, and, if possible, compel them
to consent to the repeal of the Test. The Irish
Bishops, more fortunate than they deserved, found
a champion, where they might least have looked for
one, in the vicar of Laracor. Jonathan Swift, against
whom Anne’s prejudices had closed the hopes of
advancement in England, had been recommended by
Lord Somers to Wharton’s patronage. Wharton, for
reasons of his own, paid no attention to Somers’s
request; and Swift, who never forgave an injury,
paid home this fresh instance of undeserved neglect.
He sketched a character of Wharton himself which,
merited or unmerited, will cling to his memory
while the English language endures. The Dissenters
he regarded with the intense detestation which men
of powerful minds entertain for what they call fanati-
cism; and, in his own extraordinary misconception
of the true character of the Irish problem, he left
behind him one more evidence, that the fanaticism
of fools may be keener sighted than the most mas-
culine of intellects. The removal of the disabilities

enclosed it to the Lord Justices

with a letter, in which he said :-—
‘Tis signed by all the clergy who
were present at the visitation,
except one, who declined, because
of the words, ‘with an entire
affection, which admits no_ rival
alive or dead.” All the rest
thought an entire affection for the
Queen couldn’t admit a rival alive
or dead, and therefore wouldn’t
alter the paragraph to humour one
who entertained any thought of.a

rival of her sacred majesty, not
foreseeing whither such thoughts
might tend.’

‘If the address must be read
publicly by some belonging to the
Council, I humbly beseech your
Excellencies that the Archbishop
of Dublin, or the Bishop of Clogher,
may not read it, lest they give it
a turn of madness, or make it look
as if it were words tending to
sedition..—MSS. Dublin Castle,
1708. ,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

being, as he knew, the measure which Wharton most
desired, he attacked it in a pamphlet, which supplied
the Opposition with an armoury of arguments—ar-
guments at the moment unanswerable, which later
history has too effectually answered. The Pres-
byterians, he insisted, constituted the only political
danger to which Ireland was exposed. He compared
the Catholics to a chained lion bound fast, with teeth
drawn and claws pared to the quick; the Presby-
terians to an angry cat free to fly at the throat of
any innocent passer-by. The Catholics, he said,
were as inconsiderable as women and children, power-
less to hurt, and doomed to certain disappearance in

329

CHAP.
Lae
~~’

1709

one or two generations. The greater part of their -

lands was taken from them; they could buy no more,
and the little that they retained, must every year
grow less under the law. The priests were registered,
and, as they dropped off, could have no successors.
The peasantry without leaders, without discipline,
without natural courage, were but hewers of wood
and drawers of water, and however well they might
be inclined were for ever powerless to do hurt.

The Viceroy, whatever his moral character, saw
deeper into the Irish problem than the future Dean
of St. Patrick’s. On the 5th May, 1709, he met the
Parliament. It was unchanged, for it had no natural
period except the death of the reigning sovereign, and
had not been dissolved. ‘The two main parties into
which the House of Commons was divided, were the
nominees on one side of the Peers and Bishops, and
those on the other who inherited the principles of the
Revolution. Between them lay an undetermined
‘section, which in the last session had inclined to the

High Flyers, but had been frightened by the Pre-

330

BOOK
aI.
————

1709

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

tender’s attempt, and by the extreme danger to which
Ireland had for a few weeks been exposed. The
Viceroy said, that ‘he was directed to lay before them
a consideration of infinite consequence,’ ‘to put them
in mind of the inequality in numbers between the
Protestants and Papists of Ireland,’ and ‘ the melan-
choly experience they had had of the good nature of
that sort of men when they had it in their power to
distress or destroy them.’ ‘They must consider,
therefore, whether bills were not wanting to confirm
the law for preventing the growth of Popery; and,
secondly, the evident necessity of cultivating and
preserving, by some means or other, a good under-
standing among all denominations of Protestants.’ *
The Commons replied, ‘that they had found, by
dearly bought experience, that the Protestant religion
was no longer safe than while it was not in the
power of Papists to injure them.’ ‘They called to
mind with abhorrence the satisfaction which too
visibly appeared in the faces and in the insolent
behaviour of the generality of them in the late
attempt of the Pretender.’ ‘ They felt themselves
bound to maintain the Church as by law established ;?
but they were conscious of the danger of division.’
‘They could not be negligent of their common safety,
or of the affection and courage which had been shown
by the Dissenters against the French and Irish
Papists.’
The concluding words evidently referred to the
1 House of Commons’ Journals, tinct from and even opposed to
May 5, 1709. the Established Church ; Atheists,
2 In a High Church pamphlet, Deists, Socinians, Sectaries, going

‘published five years after, there under the name of Protestants.’—
is the singular confession, ‘that A Long History of a Short Session

‘the phrase Protestant interest of a certain Parliament, Dublin,
“means in Ireland an interest dis- 1714,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

331

Test, and were a plain confession of the injustice of gaa.
it. But either Swift’s arguments had been too suc- ——-—

cessful, or they represented too nearly the average
Gpitions of Churchmen. Direct measures of relief to
Dissenters were found as impossible as in the pre-
ceding session. In the direction of safeguards against
Popery, the Lower House required no exhortations.
In spite of the act against reversals of outlawries, the
Queen, it was rumoured, meditated the restoration
of many or of all the families attainted for the last
rebellion. If Ireland was ever to have peace there
must be an end of these recurring threats of a dis-
turbance of the existing settlement. In the rear of
such a policy lay confusion, insurrection, and blood-
shed. The first act of the Commons was to demand
a promise, that the attainders should be maintained,
and they withheld the full supplies till it was given.
A dangerous Jacobite spirit had begun to show itself
in Trinity College. Edward Forbes, one of the
fellows, ‘had aspersed the memory of King William.’
The provost and the rest of the society had expelled
him; and the Lower House, in words which were
taken by the High Churchmen as a declaration of
war, petitioned the Queen to grant 5,000/. to the
College for a library, as a reward for the provost’s
zeal, and ‘the encouragement of good literature, and
‘sound Revolution principles.’ *

In this humour the rejected Penal Bill of the
previous session came again before them. It was
received in a spirit which showed the Bishops that, if
they meddled further with it, they might have to
submit to the repeal of the Test as wells It passed

1 Commons’ Journals. Session 1709,

1709

332

BOOK
jak
eee”

1709

‘THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

both Houses without difficulty, and the code of law
which was designed to transfer the entire soil of
Ireland to members of the Established Church, and
reduce the Catholics to landless dependents, was
finally completed. The habit, so long indulged, of
treating Irish penal laws as only made to be dis-
obeyed, had tempted the Catholic gentlemen too far.
Had they been contented to work quietly below the
surface, they might have undermined the first act till
all its purpose had been eaten out. But they had
danced upon it, and defied it, and laughed it to scorn,
and they had brought their fate upon their own head.

By the new act, every settlement, every lease on
lives, every conveyance made by a Catholic owner
since 1704, by which any Protestant or Protestants
had been injured, was declared void, and the loopholes
were closed by which the act of that year had been
evaded. ‘To defeat Protestant heirs, Catholics had
concealed the true value of their property. Children
were now enabled to compel their fathers to pro-
duce their titledeeds,. and make a clear confession.
Catholic gentlemen had pretended conversion to
qualify themselves for being magistrates and sheriffs,
for being admitted to the bar, or for holding a seat in
Parliament, while their children were being bred up
secretly in the old faith. The education of their
families was made a test of sincerity, and those
whose sons were not brought up as Churchmen re-
mained under the disabilities.

Nor, if words could hinder it, were the acts directed
against the priests to be any more trifled with. Fifty
pounds reward was now offered for the conviction
of any Catholic archbishop, bishop, or vicar-general ;
twenty pounds reward for the conviction of friar,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

Jesuit, or unregistered parish priest. To keep up
the supply of priests, and to enable a priest newly
made to swear that he did not know by whom he had
been ordained, large numbers of the Catholic clergy
had been in the habit of meeting at stations or
funerals, with a bishop in the middle of them undis-
tinguished by dress or ornament; and they had held
ordinations ‘ by laying on many hands together, that
the party receiving the orders might not know in
whom the power was lodged.’ It was now made
penal for a priest to officiate anywhere except in the
parish church for which he was registered, and the
last rivet was driven into the chain by the compulsory
imposition of the Abjuration Oath, which every priest
was made to swear at his registration. As if this
was not enough, any two magistrates received power
to summon any or every Irish subject above the age
of sixteen, to offer him the oath, and to commit him
to prison if he refused it.* They might also, if he
was a Catholic, ask him where he last heard mass,
and by whom it was celebrated. If the priest officia-
ting was found to have been unregistered he was
liable to be transported.

Once more passing back from these personal pro-
visions upon the land, for the more effective detection
of illegal trusts, leases, mortgages, or conveyances by
which Catholics might still endeavour to defeat the

1 The Abjuration Oath, as Crown. The oath was to be faith-

modified by the 22nd of the 1st of
Anne, contained nothing which
could have tried in any way a
loyal Catholic’s conscience. It
contained simply an admission
that Queen Anne was lawful
sovereign; and that the Preten-
der had no right or title to the

ful to the Queen, and to defend
her, and defend the succession as
determined by Parliament in the
Protestant line against the Pre-
tender and every other person. To
refuse it was, therefore, a confes-
sion of disloyalty.

304

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK object of the statute, a fatal clause was added, that
Ii: .
—— any Protestant whatever who discovered and was

1709

able to prove before a Protestant jury, the existence
of any purchase or lease of which a Catholic was to
have secretly the advantage, should himself be put in
possession of the property which was the subject of
the fraud."

The evasion of a law so contrived that every un-
scrupulous scoundrel in Ireland was its self consti-
tuted guardian became almost impossible. Of the
operations of the act, now at last made really effec-
tive, I shall speak in detail in a future chapter. That
it was unjust in itself, never occurred as a passing
emotion to any Protestant in the two kingdoms, not
even to Swift, who speaks approvingly of what he
deemed must be the inevitable result. That neither
this nor any other penal legislation would of itself give
peace to Ireland, that it would not even repress the
religion at which it was aimed, unless Protestantism
could assume a nobler aspect, and gird itself to nobler
work than in its present distracted and divided con-
dition was likely or possible, no one saw more clearly
than Lord Wharton; no one endeavoured more honour-
ably to enforce that much needed and ever neglected
lesson on the obstinate and bewildered Parliament.

‘My lords and gentlemen,’ he said, in closing the
session, ‘I need not put you in mind that the good
laws we have passed will be of little advantage to

' you unless life be given to them by a just and im-

partial execution. That will now depend upon your-
selves... and I make no question you understand
too well the true interest of the Protestant religion
in this kingdom, not to endeavour to make all such

1 Trish Statutes: 8 Anne, cap. 3.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

Protestants as easy as you can who are willing to
defend the whole against the common enemy.

It is not the law now passed, nor any law ‘hint the
will of man can frame, will secure you against
Popery, while you séntitiué divided amongst your-
selves. Unless there be a firm friendship and con-
fidence among the Protestants of this kingdom, it is
impossible for you either to be happy or safe ; and I
am. directed to declare to you, as her majesty’s fixed
resolution, that as her majesty will always maintain
the Church as by law established, so it is her royal
will and intention that the Dissenters shall not be
persecuted or molested in the exercise of their re-
ligion.”*

The words were as if spoken to the wind. The
passions of Irish Churchmen were as the passions of
Swift. The Dissenters were not relieved of the
undeserved note of ignominy which had been stamped
on them. The Bishops and their officials continued
to harass them so far as their power extended; and
the Presbyterian emigration to New England con-
tinued also, and gathered volume, to assist, as Hely
Hutchinson foretold, in dismembering the British
Empire. The Popery Act, meanwhile, was both
operative and inoperative ; operative so far as it now
at last compelled Catholic land and leaseholders to
affect an insincere conversion to escape the eyes of
informers ; inoperative so far as the religion itself,
in the extinction of which would have lain the only
justification of such an act, and the only security for
those who passed it—remained vigorous as ever,
gathering strength from the cowardice which shrunk

1 Commons’ Journals, August 30, 1709.

335
CHAP.
IT.
os”

1709

336

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

Book from acting upon its own laws. The Catholics may
Pee tfeel legitimate pride in the triumph of their principles

1709

over unsuccessful violence. ‘There is no disgrace like
the disgrace of a religious persecution which has
failed in its object. Yet the means to which the
best of them condescended to escape the penalties of
a legislation, which as unjust they held themselves
exonerated from obeying, furnish some justification
also of the desire to extinguish a creed of subtlety
and artifice.

The Abjuration Oath had been imposed at length
reluctantly in consequence of the last attempt of the
Pretender. The form had been purged of every
expression which could offend the conscience of a
loyal Catholic. The Pope was not named, and,
except so far as he assumed a right to decide be-
tween rival claimants to the British throne, a right
which no government can be required to acknow-
ledge, his prerogative was not touched upon. The
Catholic to whom the oath was an offence, declared
in his objection that he regarded the Pretender as
his lawful sovereign. But, since laymen were no
longer exempt, and the parish priests must take the
oath as it now stood, or lose their licences and be
transported, perjury under the peculiar circumstances
of the case was made a venial sin, and a system was
introduced in harmony with those features of the
Catholic organization which . Protestantism most
dreaded and most denounced; by which an oath
could be taken dishonestly, and the falsehood be
covered by absolution. Forswearing was not en-
couraged or distinctly allowed. It was still treated
as an offence which required penitential expiation,
and the power of pardoning it was reserved to

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

particular persons. Yet in that expiation, when it
was made, there was not included the only step which
would have given it real value, the public retractation
which would have taken away from the sinner the
advantage which he had gained by his guilt.

The following letter from a vicar-general to the
parish priest of Ballinrobe needs no explanation :—

‘ Reverend sir,— You know the abjuration as public
andscandalous perjury was hitherto reserved specially,
and shall be still in this our district, save the few
that we design shall act for us, and by our own
power, which we cannot subdelegate. Wherefore, if
any abjurers within this our district should pretend
to have been hitherto absolved, you must know by
whom, that such may be punished and made sensible
of their errors and ignorance, and those so unlaw-
fully absolved must be again absolved by you as one
now authorized, upon the following conditions and
terms: First, that each of them shall sign and ac-
knowledge the annexed declaration,* which you must
be sure to keep private, for we do not design to
expose anybody but as little as we can. In the
second place, they must oblige themselves henceforth
never to pretend to defend or command the taking
of said oath to anybody, but rather, as far as shall
lay in them, censure it as the Church does, and as it
deserves. Thirdly, that each of them shall, without
delay, cause the holy sacrifice of the mass to be at
least once offered for them, and perform what pil-
orimages, fasts, alms, and praying, you shall think
fit to impose, according to the condition and consti-
tution of each person, and finally that, for the

1 Not preserved.
Z

337

CHAP.

ed
1709

338 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book future, they protest against this and any other such
_**_ oaths censured by their pastors and Church. Upon
1710 performing and engaging to perform all which, you
will admit as many as shall come to you to the
holy sacrament of penance and the rest; but not
otherwise.
‘T rest, sir, your brother and servant,

‘Dom Derans.’ !

1¢Tnstructions for absolving those committed to a few.’ MSS, Dub-
that have taken the Oath of Abju- _ lin Castle, 1709-10.
ration, and the power of absolving

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION VI.

339

Ir Doddington was right in 1703, when he accused cuapr.
two-thirds of the House of Commons of being High ~ ae

Flyers, the half-dozen following years worked the
conversion of a great many of them. The Peers, lay
and spiritual, continued malignant; the Commons,
though ill inclined to Presbyterianism, were increas-
ingly eager to vindicate their Protestantism. They
had petitioned the Queen to reward the provost and
fellows of Trinity for their stout adherence to ‘ Re.
volution principles.’ King William was become the
national hero of the country gentlemen and city
tradesmen and merchants. On the 4th November,
the Viceroy, Chancellor, and Judges, the Mayor and
Aldermen of Dublin, walked in procession round the
statue in College Green. The glorious memory of
the immortal deliverer from Tyrconnell, Popery, and
confiscation, became the toast at public dinners—
the criterion to discover the temper of doubtful dis-
positions—a counter test, as hard for the High
Churchmen to swallow as the Dissenters found the
sacrament. ‘The Bishops struggled ingeniously, after
their methods, to resist the imposition of it. The
Bishop of Raphoe and his clergy allowed the Queen
no rival in their affections, alive or dead. The
Bishop of Cork announced in a sermon, that, to
drink to the memory of King William, was a blas-
phemous parody of the words used at the consecra-
tion of the sacramental cup. Another high dignitary
discovered that it was dangerously like prayers for
Z 2

1710

340

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK the dead. In Trinity College, among the younger
ee students, the display of loyalty to the Protestant

1710

champion provoked hostile demonstrations extremely
curious. The expelled Edward Forbes was the leader
of a party whom his expulsion had neither terrified
mor silenced. He himself followed his ‘aspersion of
King William’ by a book directly in favour of the

Pretender. The lads at their supper parties, instead
of the ‘Glorious immortal memory!’ drank to James

the Third under the disguise of the ‘Three B.’s’*
‘the Man that’s far away,’ or ‘the King before

George.’ There was something, perhaps, of Irish
contradictoriness about all this. Young Ireland

considered that it had a right to choose its own

sovereign. Scotland, before the union was decided,

had at .one time threatened to reject the Hanover
succession. Ireland thought she had an equal right
to vindicate her liberty, since the union for which

she had asked had been refused. On the night of

the 4th November the students’ chambers were dark;
on the night of the birthday of Ormond, whose
treason was divined instinctively, every window was
illuminated. ‘The King shall enjoy his own again,’
was roared from a hundred throats ; and curses and
execrations were yelled at the name of Marlborough.
By the side of the political Toryism there was a no
less singular religious reaction. Serious students,
preparing to be clergymen, were heard maintaining
‘that the orders of the Church of Rome were as
pure and holy as those of the Church of England;’
‘that it would be better to be ordained by the Pope
than by any English bishop;’ that the Revolution

4 ¢ Best Born Briton,’

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

54]

had been a rebellion; that King William had been cmap.

Le

an encourager of Presbyterians and Dutch rogues; —-~~_

and that the nation was governed: by Turks.’

These humours assumed at last a practical form.
On the morning of the 26th June, 1710, all Dub-
lin was agitated by the discovery, that the truncheon
had been stolen from King William’s statue, and
the face plastered with mud. The opportunity had
been taken when Parliament, which had been sitting
since May, had adjourned for six weeks. Protes-
tant feeling was so grossly outraged, that even the
Lords, who were still in Dublin, were obliged to
affect indignation. They met and offered 100/. re-

ward for the discovery of the offenders, and they
declared in their Proclamation, ‘that the persons:

concerned in that barbarous fact, had been guilty of
the greatest insolence, baseness, and ingratitude.’
The guilty parties proved to be three college students.
They excused themselves on the plea of boyish
frolic. The explanation was accepted, and no serious
punishment was thought necessary; but when the
Commons reassembled in August, they expressed the
most vehement indignation at an act which they in-
terpreted as a direct manifestation of Jacobitism, and
they thanked Wharton for his exertion in identifying

‘the insolent miscreants’ who had been concerned

in it.®

On all sides the temper was growing sore. ‘The
Bishops, exasperated at Wharton’s intimation that
they would not be allowed to meddle with the

1 ¢ Enquiry into the State of. 2 ¢ Wharton to Sunderland, June
Trinity College, forwarded by Sec- 27,1710.’ Ibid.
retary Budgell to Addison, May 3 Commons’ Journals, 1710,
80 1715.’ MSS. Record Office.

d42.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book Dissenters, seized the first opportunity that offered

i i

—— to measure strength with him on a point where

1710

they felt confident of support. The Regium Donum
had been restored, and there was a tacit understand-
ing that, so long as they kept within the limits which
they already occupied, and did not endeavour to
extend themselves, the Presbyterian Congregations
should not be interfered with.

The pluralism, gross and flagrant, of the Esta-
blished Church, left many districts entirely without
spiritual care. Some of these neglected places had
applied to the Presbyterian synod to send them
ministers, and the synod had rashly complied. Much
ill-feeling had ensued. At last, Presbyterians had
ventured to preach to large bodies of people at
Drogheda, a place where there was no such excuse, and
the Bishops resolved to make an example of them.

The congregation, described, with unapostolic scorn,
as consisting of ‘base persons, coopers, shoemakers,
and tailors,’ were threatened with the stocks. The
ministers were arrested, carried before the mayor,
and bound over to take their trial at the Assizes.
They appealed to the Viceroy, and Wharton ordered
the prosecution to be dropped.’

The House of Lords was now dragged into the
quarrel, The Bishops, supported by the Lay Peers,
whom they moved like pawns on a chess-board,
complained to the Queen. The Presbyterians, they
said, using the language which Swift had put into
their mouths, were the cause of all the disorders in
Treland, and the Earl of Wharton was standing by

1 The story is told at length in letters upon the subject among the
‘the Loyalty of the Presbyterians Church MSS. in Dublin Castle.
in Ireland.’ There are also several

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

them and encouraging them. The synod defended
themselves stoutly. They had created no dis-
turbance, they said. To settle ministers in places
where there was no clergyman, and to convert
Catholics to Protestantism, was no crime. They bore
no enmity to the Church. They were willing to
work side by side with the Church against the
common enemy. They charged the Bishops ‘ with
having placed an odious mark of infamy upon at
least half the Protestants in Ireland.’ *

The answer of the English Cabinet was Wharton’s
recall. It was the moment of the great crisis of
Queen Anne’s reign and the change of ministry.
Godolphin and Sunderland were driven from office,
and the Whig Viceroy fell with his friends. St.
John came into power, supported, through some
strange freak of popular feeling in England, by a
majority in the House of Commons. All the subtlety
of his genius was directed to the disappointment of
the Hanover succession; and the government of
Ireland was made over once more to Ormond, the
idol and hope of High Churchmen and the Jacobite
traitors.

The gulf already opened between the High
Flyers and the Protestant conformists became at
once wider than ever. As the Peers and Prelates
showed their colours more distinctly, the country
gentlemen grew more passionately Hanoverian.
Five-sixths of them now were, or thought themselves,
Whigs.’ They saw before them the spectre of a new

1 MSS. Record Office, Ireland, common conversation. They toss
1710. the Government as they would a
' 2 Whiggism is what five parts tennis ball; talk of the Queen and
out of six are at present infected her new ministry at such a rate as
withal, or seem to be so in their any modest man would be ashamed

343

CHAP.
18 &
——————

1710

344

BooK revolution.

II.

ee 6

1710

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

They determined to stand by one an-
ther; to watch the Government every moment; and
if Ormond, like Tyrconnell, attempted changes in
the shrievalties and the magistracy, to thwart him
with all their force. In the army there was the same
feeling. Great as was Ormond’s popularity among
the soldiers, Marlborough’s was greater. The
officers of a regiment at Limerick drank ‘ Confusion,
damnation, plague, pestilence, and famine to alk
archbishops, bishops, and. priests.’ One midnight
they brought out their hounds, twenty couple of
them, led a fox round and round the bishop’s
palace, laid the dogs on the scent, and with the
baying pack, and whoops and shouts, and winding
horns, startled the slumbers of the episcopal family.’

The Bishops, on the other hand, were in high
spirits from an evident proof of the favour felt to-
wards them in London. Ormond arrived the fol-
lowing midsummer, bringing with him, as the result
of Swift’s negociations, the remission of firstfruits to
the clergy of the Establishment; and Ormond met
Parliament in July with the joyful announcement of
the Queen’s liberality. Like Bolingbroke in Eng-
land, he concealed the plans of his party behind
elaborate promises to support Protestantism and the
Hanoverian dynasty; and he informed the Commons.
also, with marked emphasis, that the Queen had
acceded to their request, and had granted the 5,000/.

—‘ Maurice Hussey to Secretary

to repeat. They have so many
Dawson, October 1710.’ MSS.

hundred thousand Whigs in this

country that wont be run down.
If my Lord of Ormond comes to the
government, he will never be able
to do what he proposes to himself,
nor what, will be expected of him.’

Dublin Castle.

1 “William Parker to Secretary
Dawson, October 27.’ AZSS, Dub-
lin Castle.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

to Trinity College as a reward for their Protestant
zeal,

At first the signs were favourable for a short and
smooth session. The country gentlemen—it speaks
well for their as yet simple and uncorrupted habits'
—were anxious to be at their homes for the harvest,
and so inclined to get through their work rapidly.

Anticipating trouble, the Government had. pro-
bably deferred the opening of the session to a mo-
ment when they knew that the members would be
impatient of a long stay in Dublin.” The elements
of discord, however, were too many and too various,
and the prospect rapidly clouded. The grant to the
College, with the reasons alleged for it by the Com-
mons, the encouragement of ‘ Revolution principles,
was-a morsel too hard for Jacobite digestion. Jealous
for the Queen’s honour, the Lords inserted a para-
graph in the address, ‘that her majesty had ex-
tended her favour to the College at Dublin at such
a juncture as must testify to the world, that what
her majesty bestowed was not given to promote
those principles, upon which it was first applied for,
but to encourage university education, the neglect of
which had been the means of the growth of igno-
rance, profaneness, and infidelity, and the loose and
wild notions and tenets which had industriously
been spread abroad.’ ®

1 ¢TLiving men can remember
when we were as remarkable for
our sobriety as we are now for
rioting and drunkenness; when
our ancestors of the best families.
had their wine brought in dozens,
and sack and spirits were suld at
apothecaries’ shops as cordials for
the sick.’—Reflexions and Resolu-
tions proper for the Gentlemen of

Ireland, Dublin, 1738,

' «Sir Edward Southwell to
Lord Dartmouth, July 13.’
Record Office.

3 Commons’ Journals, August 4,
1711. Lords’ Journals, July 17.
‘Southwell to the Earl of Dart-
mouth, July 20.’ MSS, Record
Office.

MSS.

346

BOOK
rt

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The Commons, deeply sharing the feelings with

——~ which the whole country had been agitated, looked

1711

on these words of the Lords as the first step of
an aggressive campaign. Snatching at the glove
that was thrown to them, they voted by a large
majority, that the Lords had highly infringed their
rights, privileges, and liberties; had misrepresented
her majesty’s goodness; and had insinuated, to the
dishonour of their House, that the principles upon
which the application was made were such as her
Majesty disapproved. The Lords pretended that, by
Revolution principles, the Commons had not meant
the revolution under William, but had desired to
justify rebellion and anarchy. This charge, the
Commons said, was false, scandalous, and malicious;
highly and unjustly reflecting on their loyalty and
honour. They drew a fresh address of their own, pro-
testing ‘that the principles on which they had applied
for her Majesty’s bounty to the College, were such as
they could never be ashamed to own, being no other
than those to which they owed the preservation of
their religion, their liberties, and properties.’ *

In a House of which more than half the members
were nominees of the noble families and great land-
owners, the passion must have gone deep before it
could have assumed a form so violent. The Lords
replied undauntedly with a double shot.

The first was an attack on the Dissenters, whose
interests they conceived that, in some way or
other, their antagonists designed to further. Pos-
sessed with an extraordinary obliquity of vision,
which inverted the position of persecutors and per-

~1 Commons’ Journals, August 8. with Lord Dartmouth, August
é Cf. Southwell’s correspondence 1711. MSS, Record Office,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

secuted, thirteen Bishops and eleven Lay Peers
appealed to the Queen against the Presbyterians as
savages who denied to their conforming brethren the
common offices of humanity. They demanded pro-
tection from the rage and obstinacy which threat-
ened the destruction of the Church. They com-
plained that the miserable 1,200/. a year was applied
to the propagation of schism and the disturbance of
the peace of the realm, and they required that the
grant should be withdrawn. St. John,’ already
meditating the Schism Act, was but too willing to
advise compliance. [or the remainder of the reign
the Regium Donum was unpaid.

To the accusation of the Commons the Lords re-
joined in language as haughty as their own. The
Commons had charged them with malice and untruth.’
They charged the Commons with having assailed
them in language more opprobrious than had been
used by another House in another place, when ‘it
voted the House of Lords useless.’ Whatever cause
her majesty might have had to approve the conduct
of the College, they humbly conceived she could not
mean to encourage the principles of Revolution—
principles, they said, sufficiently explained by a
sermon preached on 30th of January, and dedicated
to the Lower House, ‘in great measure maintaining
and justifying the execrable murder of her royal
orandfather, King Charles the First.’ ?

Harvest had come and gone. Determined to
fight out the quarrel, the Commons had been con-
tented with a short recess. On the reassembling,

1 Reid’s History of the Presby- copy of the address is in the R
tertans in Ireland,’ vol. ili. p. 16. cord Office.
2 Lords’ Journals, November. A

348

BOOK
II.
——

1711

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the battle raged furiously as ever. In an address
to the Lord Lieutenant, they renewed with emphasis
‘their steady adherence to the principles of the late
Revolution.’ The Jacobite members moved to omit
words so provocative, but were defeated on a division ;
and, the day after, anticipating a counter blow, they
carried a vote, ‘that whoever, by speaking, writing,
or printing, should arraign or condemn the principles
of the Revolution of 1688, was an enemy to their own
House, to the Constitution in Church and State, and
to the Hanover succession, and was a friend of the
Pretender.’ With this characteristic resolution
ended the last session of a House of Commons
which had been coeval with the reign; which had
passed the acts for the repression of Popery, and,
though too late penitent, the Test clause, and was now
perishing in defence of the same broad principles of
liberty which flung Romanism into chains while it
was dangerous, and struck them off when its power
to hurt had disappeared.

Finding it impossible to proceed with such a
House in a policy which was to prepare Ireland to
receive the Pretender, Ormond decided at once on
getting rid of it. The Parliament was prorogued,
and never met again. When the constituencies
should have been prepared sufficiently, and there was
ground for hope of a High Church majority that
could be depended on, the unusual experiment was
to be tried of a dissolution and a new election.
Ormond returned to London to repair to the army in
Flanders, and the government was left to the Chan-
cellor, Sir Constantine Phipps, a friend of Swift and
an English Tory.

1 Commons’ Journals, November 8, 1711.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

Convocation meanwhile, which was still allowed to
sit, kept the fire burning, and continued to inflame
the Queen against the unhappy Dissenters whom,
in the next Parliament, they hoped to be able to
annihilate. Ina highly curious address the Bishops
lamented over the growth in Ireland of impiety and
atheism, due in reality to the school of Toland, and
Tindal, and Asgill, but which it pleased the clergy to
attribute ‘to the sectaries who came over in the time
of the wicked and detestable usurper, Oliver Cromwell,
and had spread the enthusiasm which, under a specious
pretence of sanctity, was ever accompanied with sedi-
tion.’ Both Government and Church, they said, had
erred in being over-lenient. Concession had only
invited encroachment, and but for the late happy
change in government, brought about by the pro-
vidence of God, Episcopacy had been utterly undone.

The form which Providence had assumed was
that of Bolingbroke, who believed extremely little
in either God or devil. These reverend gentlemen
however, with the extravagant injustice which only
religious hatred can inspire, insisted that the Presby-
terians would make common cause with deists,
socinians, enemies of revealed religion, and even
Papists themselves, to dissolve the present form of
government. The Low Churchmen and Whigs,
they said, were little better. Impiety, profanity,
and immorality universely prevailed in the society
affected by their influence. ‘Wicked and_ blas-
phemous healths were used by persons disaffected
to the constitution; the prayers in the Litany for
deliverance from plague, pestilence, and famine,
were turned into a curse upon bishops, priests, and

deacons, and all congregations committed to their

350

BOOK
I

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

charge, who refused to drink to the glorious and

os immortal memory of the dead.’

1711

The Bishops, and only the Bishops, understood
Ireland, and how to deal with it, not perceiving that
they themselves, with their Jacobitism and their
blind and stupid bigotry, were the real cause of the
weakness of Protestantism. To the Dissenters and
the Whigs they added, as a third plague of Ireland,
the Papists. ‘The Papists,’ they said, ‘lived con-
tinually in hope of aid from the Catholic Powers to
root out the Protestants, and shake off the yoke of
Britain.” They described them as ‘visibly exalted
with any ill success to her majesty’s arms, and de-
jected with accounts of victory, their dependence
being on France for being restored to their estates.’
In noting the causes of the little impression which
had yet been made upon the Roman Catholic masses,
they pointed, with some sagacity, to ‘ the unsteadiness
of the measures which had been used towards those of
that persuasion; sometimes measures of great se-
verity, and then again indulgence and toleration, the
laws made against them being rarely executed, and
they in consequence, when in greatest difficulties,
hoping for a return of connivance.*

1 “Address of Convocation to the Crown, 1712.’ MSS. Record Office,
Treland.

-FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

SECTION VII.

351

MEANWHILE a second feud, violent as the quarrel CHAP.
between Lords and Ganthione: had sprung up be- thier

tween the Government and the city of Dublin. To
secure a Tory House of Commons, the first step was
to appoint Tory sheriffs in the counties, and Tory
mayors in the towns. The Dublin corporation set
an example of resistance, and from the certainty that,
if successful, the precedent would be followed else-
where, the whole powers of the Castle were exerted
to bend or break them. ‘The usual practice had
been for the aldermen to elect freely such members
of their body as the majority preferred. An obso-
lete claim was revived by the Government to nomi-
nate a select number of candidates, between whom
the choice was to lie. Both sides were obstinate.
The city elected a Whig mayor, whom the Govern-
ment refused to recognize. The Catholic mob were
for the Castle; the well-to-do citizens and free men
were to a man for the corporation; and, for two
years, Dublin was without a municipal government.
The sheriff slipped away to England to avoid com-
promising himself with either party, and courts
could not be held for want of jurors, and: justice
was in abeyance through the suspension of all lawful
authority.’

Ormond’s presence being needed in London, the

1 An enormous mass of papers pare Shrewsbury to Bolingbroke,
connected with this strange busi- February 2 and March 19, 1714,
ness are in Dublin Castle. Com- MSS. Ireland. Record Office.

1712

I352

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK Duke of Shrewsbury took his place as Viceroy. The
eer English constituencies had returned a large Tory ma-

1712

jority. Queen Anne had by this time probably come
to a final resolution to support the Pretender’s claims
to the succession. Bolingbroke was growing con-
fident of success; and Shrewsbury, more uncertain
of his own intentions than Bolingbroke probably
supposed, was sent over to make sure of Ireland.
Rumour, busy with his name before his arrival,
announced that he had been received into the Church
of Rome, that the duchess was a professed Catholic,
that a chapel was being fitted up for them in the
Castle. To the surprise of everyone he allowed
favourites of Lord Wharton to remain in offices
about his own person, and, more remarkably, imme-
diately after his arrival, he agitated the Tory party
by a signal celebration of King William’s birthday.
This, however, might be only part of a game which
Bolingbroke had instructed him to play. The im-
portant matters were the Parliament, and an empty
treasury; and the Bishops’ projects against the Dis-
senters made it necessary to proceed to an election.
It was felt to be dangerous. If the new House
proved like the last, the Ministers seem to have
resolved to make an end of the Irish Constitution.?

her majesty ought to exert her
power to the utmost upon any un-
easiness given on your side to her-
self or her servants. Neither can
I answer that even the legislative
powers here may not take cogni-

. Long History of a Short Session
of a Certain Parliament.

2 Swift, who was in England,
and in close communication with
Bolingbroke, sent a significant
warning to Archbishop King:—‘ If

your House of Commons,’ he said,
‘should run into any vivlence dis-
agreeable to us here, it will be of
the worst consequence imaginable
to that kingdom; for I know no
maxim more strongly maintained
at present in our court than that

zance of anything that may pass
among you in opposition to the
persons and principles that are
now favoured by the Queen.’—
‘Swift to Abp. King, October 20,
1713. Swifts works, vol. xvi. It
appears from an unpublished letter

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

But the Tories were satisfied that they would have
a majority.
said, and the House of Lords with them;’ thus
supported, ‘they had the House of Commons in their
pocket, and any one who cautioned them was ‘ up-
braided with the odious name of Whig’! The
Chancellor, when the elections were in progress, re-
ported the success as beyond expectation. He was
specially delighted with ‘ the good spirit of loyalty in
the mob;’ and assured Swift that, ‘by the nicest
calculations, the Castle would have a majority of three
to two.’ ”

Sir Constantine’s ‘mob’ specially distinguished
themselves in Dublin. He had been advised to end
the mayoralty quarrel before the election. Possibly
he preferred to keep the fire smouldering, that it
might be the easier blown into flame. Any way
there was an Irish row of a genuine kind. The house
of the Archbishop of ‘Tuam, one of the few Liberals on
the bench, was attacked. A watchman on duty there
was knocked down, and, but for a reinforcement of
police, the Archbishop himself would have been

of an Irish judge.’ Mr. Justice cut out a scheme for advancing

Nutley, that Swift might at this
time have exchanged St. Patrick’s,
to which he had just been pro-
moted, for an Irish bishopric. ‘ His
Grace the Primate’ (Narcissus
Marsh), writes Sir R. Nutley, ‘died
on the second instant at two in
the morning. I am of opinion
that the deanery of St. Patrick’s
is a fine preferment for a lord
lieutenant’s chaplain to jump
into after one or two months’
service ; and if you can be tempted
to part with your fine house in
Dublin for an ill-contrived one on
a country bishopric, I can easily

VOL. I.

some eminent, worthy, active, pre-
late to the primacy, and so three
good persons may be promoted at
once. —‘ Sir R. Nutley to Swift,
November 5, 1718.’ MSS. Record
Office. ‘The chaplain, Dr. God-
wyn, was made bishop of Kilmore
and Ardagh immediately after.
The Queen’s objections, probably,
were as usual fatal to Swift.

1 Letters signed with a cypher
to Swift, December 1713. MSS.
Record Office.

2 ‘Sir Constantine Phipps to
Dean Swift, November Y, 1713.’

AA

‘ They had the Council with them,’ they ——-—

d54

BooK «dragged into the-street ‘for a Whig.’?

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The election

—-~ ‘going in favour-of the Opposition, young Cotter,

A713

Sir James*Cotter’s eldest son,? led an attack on the
Protestant voters as they were going to the poll.
One man was killed;many were injured. The Castle
guard turned out ‘to disperse the rioters; but they
‘were recalled by an instant order within the gates,
‘and the too officious: officers on duty were put under
arrest. In the midst of wild uproar the Castle
candidates were declared elected, and the Chancellor
:and the-Council flattered themselves, that, by the free
‘use of such means, ‘they had secured such a House
of Commons as was never known in Ireland.’*? They
discovered that they had made a serious mistake.
The first intimation of the truth was in:the choice
-of a speaker. Sir Richard Levinge, the Castle candi-
‘date, was defeated in a close fight by Alan Brodrick.
‘The Liberal majority increased rapidly as the elections
‘were enquired into. ‘The scenes at Dublin had been
‘repeated: at half the towns in the provinces, and Tory
after Tory was unseated. ‘We are threatened now
with an unquiet: session,’ Sir John Stanley wrote to
Bolingbroke. The’ Viceroy began to‘flatter and pay
court to Brodrick to stave off a quarrel. The last
-hope was to get the money vote past quietly and end
the session. But no such fortune was possible.
. The. Nonconformists, on: Shrewsbury’s arrival, had

‘1 ¢The pretence; as well as the
“thing, was somewhat extraordi-
nary,’ wrote thé Bishop of Kildare,
“in describing the scene to Swift,
October.°20, 1718. MSS. Record
* Office.
-2 Sir James Cotter had been a
distinguished supporter of King
i James. : His son, on his father’s

death, had been placed by the

‘ Court of Chancery under a Pro-

testant guardian. He had been
stolen away, brought up a Catholic

in England, and married as a minor

to a Catholic lady. The career of
this :idol-of young Catholic Ireland
had a wild ending, as will be seen.

3 Long History of a Short Session.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

presented him with an address for the removal of the
Test, intimating that, if their petition were refused,
large numbers of them intended to emigrate to New
England. Shrewsbury gave an icy answer; and in
his speech to Parliament he said, that it was rather
the Established Church which required laws for its
better security. The Lords announced, in words
supplied them by the Bishops, ‘that Ireland would
be happy if she could be saved from Popish priests
and Dissenting preachers.’ The Viceroy replied,
‘that the Church should be supported against the
designs of Papists and the encroachments of any
whatsoever.’ ‘The Lower House, plunging at once
into the conflict and touching lightly on the Church,
reinsisted on the obnoxious word Revolution. They
complimented Shrewsbury, perhaps ironically, on the
part which he had himself taken in 1688;1 and pro-
ceeded to denounce, and even threaten to impeach,
Sir Constantine Phipps for his interference in the
election to the Dublin mayoralty. They voted that
he had been the principal cause of the disorders and
divisions of the realm ; that he was working in
secret in the interests of the Pretender ; and they
petitioned the Queen to remove him from office.

An untoward accident blew the fire into a fiercer
flame. The two Houses of Convocation, having
drawn an address of their own, had an audience in
the presence chamber to present it to the Viceroy.
Robert Molesworth, Lord Molesworth afterwards, the

1¢7To complete your Grace’s God, we owe the preservation of
character, you have also, ina most _ our religious liberties and proper-
eminent manner, been instrumental __ ties.’—‘ Address of the Commons,
in bringing about the glorious Re- November 30, 1713.’ Commons’
volution in 1688, to which, under Journals,

AA?

356

THE ENGLISI IN IRELAND.

Book member for Swords and a privy councillor, said in a
Il.
—— whisper which was audible over the room:

1713

‘They that have turned the world upside down are
come hither also.’

Molesworth had long been noted as dangerous.
He had been a friend of Asgill. He was suspected
of intimacy with Toland. His opinions on religious
matters were probably no worse than Bolingbroke’s.
But Bolingbroke’s sins were mantled with the political
robes of Toryism. Molesworth was a Whig and a
Hanoverian.

The clergy started as if stung by a snake. Church
and State, God and man, they said, were insulted in
such monstrous wickedness. Holy Scripture had
been profaned and the Queen outraged in the
person of the Viceroy, who was present when such
shocking words were spoken. They laid their wrongs
before the House of Lords. The Lords demanded a
conference with the Commons. The whole Parlia-

~ ment, they said, must combine ‘to do justice to that

venerable body the Convocation, and make the
guilty person ‘sensible of the horrid crime laid to his
charge, of impiously profaning the lively oracles of
God.’? Molesworth’s name was struck from the list
of Privy Councillors. The Lords required the Com-
mons to show the same zeal which they had shown
when they removed Asgill, and expel him from their
House.

The Commons passed to the order of the day.
They concerned themselves little with the wrongs of
the clergy. They desired only to secure themselves
and the country against the treachery of the secret

' Commons’ Journals, December 22, 1718,

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

friends of the Pretender. A rumour spread that he
was coming to Ireland: they brought in heads of a
bill offering a reward for his capture alive or dead.
Edward Forbes, the ex-fellow of Trinity College, had
published a book advocating his claims. He was
threatened with arrest. An indictment was drawn
against him. He fled to England, and threw himself
on Ormond’s protection, and Phipps quashed the
prosecution. A prologue had been spoken in the
theatre on the Queen’s birthday, which, from the
high laudation of the ‘immortal memory of William,’
had been construed into an affront to the reigning
sovereign, and the orator had been arrested by
Phipps’ order. Not wishing to be accused of fac-
tion, the Commons did not choose to refuse the
supplies, but they made a statement of grievances a
condition of their grant; and, when the Speaker
presented the money bill in one hand, in the other
he presented a list of complaints. The Commons
again insisted that the Chancellor should be dis-
missed ‘for the peace and safety of the Protestant
inhabitants of the kingdom.’ ‘ Distinctions of parties
had been fostered’ at a time when ‘ unanimity among
Protestants’ was more than ever necessary. ‘ Her
majesty’s loyal subjects had been traduced as enemies
to her person and government,’ ‘exposed to the
insults of Papists, and the vilest part of the people.’
The persons who had been instrumental in these
misrepresentations, ‘they could not but suspect to
have views directly opposite to her majesty’s service
and the good of the kingdom.’

Shrewsbury refused to accept a money bill so
accompanied. He sent for the Opposition leaders.
He told them that ‘ the Queen was dissatisfied with

358

BOOK
thas
(a

1713

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

their heats.’ He enquired whether, if they were
allowed to continue to sit, ‘they would drop the
matter against the Chancellor.’* His labour was
thrown away. They threatened to send a Com-
mittee to London to lay their grievances before the
throne, and the Viceroy found himself compelled to
dispense with the supplies, and to prorogue the Par-
liament till the following autumn. The expenses of
the Government were reduced on all sides, to be
brought, if possible, within the limits of the here-
ditary revenues; and Bolingbroke determined to
show Ireland that he intended to be her master, and
that if she could not be trusted to legislate for
herself, he could legislate for her from London.

So closed the session, which was to have laid
Ireland at the feet of ecclesiastical Toryism, and
prepared the way for the accession of the Pretender,
and the exclusive dominion there of the Peers and
High Church Bishops, who were’ mad enough to
believe that, when the Whigs were put down, and the
Presbyterians and French Calvinists driven out of
the kingdom, they could themselves hold a mono-
poly of power, and fashion people and country after
their own formulas. Shrewsbury returned to Eng-
land, leaving the sword in his absence to the de-
tested Phipps and the secretary Sir John Stanley.
The army had shown dangerous tendencies; being
devoted to Marlborough, and especially indignant at
the peace of Utrecht, it was feared that in case of dis-
turbance, the soldiers might side with the Whigs, and
orders were sent to disband the suspected regiments.
This order was carried out with difficulty. Ker’s

1 “Shrewsbury to Bolingbroke, January 5, 1714” SS, Record
Office.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

dragoons at Cavan and Colonel Pepper’s at Athlone

309

CHAP.

refused to part with their arms; five companies of Se

infantry openly mutinied; but they were all at last
persuaded or overawed into: submission,’ and: the
country lay still in sullen calm,

Bolingbroke, meanwhile, was carrying through
the English Parliament the famous Schism Act.*

By a singular combination of accidents Queen Anne’s:

last ministry proved able for a time practically to
repeal the Toleration Act; to prohibit Dissenters,
under severe penalties, from teaching their own
opinions to high. or low, in school or college.. Poh--
tical liberty, as Bolingbroke well understood, had its
root in liberty. of religion. With religion once safely
encircled with an iron ring of Prayer-Book and
Articles, the revolutionary spirit would be broken;
and, under the supremacy of a Church, where zeal.

was impossible and enthusiasm suffocated in formulas,,.

intelligent statesmen could resume a control, with
which Protestantism, while it continued alive, was
for ever interfering. He carried his bill through:
the Parliament at Westminster. He had intended,
doubtless, that a willing House of Commons should
pass a similar bill for him in Dublin. As. Ireland.
was mutinous, she could be at once taught that her.
constitution existed on sufferance, and that the de--
sired work could equally well be accomplished by a
clause attached to the English act. Bolingbroke
himself rose in the House of Lords, and moved that
the provisions of the law should. be extended to
Treland.

1 ‘Stanley to Bolingbroke, April curity of the Churches of England
15, 1714” MSS. Record Office. and Ireland as by law established.
. 2 ‘Act to prevent the Growth of 12 Anne, cap.7. English Statutes,
Schism, and for the further Se-

1713

360

ik hi

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Shrewsbury, himself fresh from a conflict which

wx > hall taught him better to appreciate the relative

1714

value of amen parties, attempted to stay the progress
of so rash a measure. The Church bigots, led
blindly by a chief who in his heart despised them
more heartily than the most contemptuous of Whigs,
clamoured down opposition. The motion was carried,
thirty-three liberal Peers, among whom to their
honour were four Bishops,’ leaving on record their
ineffectual protest.? But the castle in the air was
no sooner ‘finished than the foundation sunk, and the
ambitious superstructure fell down in ruins. On the
Ist of August, 1714, the day on which the Schism
Bill was to come into operation, the Queen died;
and the Tory ascendancy, on which the liberties of
England and Ireland had so narrowly escaped ship-
wreck, was over. In a few weeks another Par-
lament met, and Oxford went to the Tower, and
Bolingbroke and Ormond were attainted fugitives.

1 Ely, St. Asaph, Bangor, and
"Llandaff.

* The miseries we apprehend
here are greatly enhanced by ex-
tending this bill to Ireland, where
the consequences of it may; be
fatal. For since the number of
Papists in that kingdom far ex-
ceeds the Protestants of all de-
nominations together, and that the
Dissenters are to be treated as
enemiies, ‘or -at least as persons
dangerous to that Church .and
State, who have always in all times
joined, and still would join, with
the members of that Church
against the common enemy of
their religion; and since the army
there is very much reduced; the
Protestants thus unnecessarily di-
vided seem to be exposed to the

danger of another massacre, and
the Protestant religion in danger
of being extirpated. We may fear
the Scots in Britain, whose national
church is Presbyterian, will not
so heartily join with us in our
defence when they see those of
the same nation, same blood, and
same religion, so hardly treated by
us. And this will be still more
grievous to the Protestant Dis-
senters of Ireland, because, while
the Popish priests are registered,
and so indulged by law as they
exercise their religion without
molestation, the Dissenters are so
far from enjoying the like tolera-
tion, that the laws are by this bill
enforced against them.’—Parlia-
mentary History, vol. vi. p. 135,
136.

FIRST ATTEMPT AT UNION.

The House of Hanover was established firmly on
the throne, and the political supremacy of the Bishops
of the Church of Ireland was at an end for ever. Yet
the baneful influence of principles, the absurdity of
which is now so patent to the simplest student of
the Irish problem, survived for two generations to
work disaster and confusion, and to paralyse the
sinews of Protestantism. Jealousy of the Presby-
terians rankled stillin the most powerful intellects
which the Church of Ireland produced. It made
useless to the true interests of his country the
gigantic understanding of Swift. It led Berkeley
into the same theories of passive obedience, which
had crippled the resistance to Tyrconnell; had per-
plexed and irritated William; had divided those
who, united, might have prevented the second. civil
war, and might have made unnecessary the second
series of -confiscations. Worse than all, it per-
petuated the disunion of the two great branches of
the Protestant colonists, who, if the Reformation was
a lawful revolt against unjust authority, were in
essentials one. It prolonged the disabilities of that
section of the Protestants who alone possessed mis-
slonary power, whose crime was the ability to make
proselytes among the Celtic Catholics. Last of all,
in our own days, the spent force of the division of the
Protestant interest in Ireland has shown itself in the
disestablishment of the once haughty Church which,
had she taken the Presbyterians within her limits,
when they were willing and eager to be her friends,
might have defied for another century the malice of
her enemies.

362

BOOK
ti;
_—_————o—

1715

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER III.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.
SECTION I..

Tue loyalty or the apathy of the: Irish Catholics in
the rebellions of 1715 and 1745 has been pleaded as
an argument to prove the injustice or the folly of
the penal laws.. We are asked to believe, that their
devotion of England was proof even against gra-
tuitous cruelty; that twice they let pass an opper-
tunity for achieving their freedom, rather than soil
their honour with the: taint: of rebellion. It is true,
and it is the most remarkable fact in Irish history,
that Ireland did remain, on these occasions, undis-
turbed. Even when, later in the century, encouraged
by the revolt of the American colonies, the Irish
Protestants rose at last and. wrenched out of the
grasp of the English Parliament the legislative in-
struments of oppression, by which they had been so
long racked and tortured; when the sympathy be-
tween the Irish Nonconformists and the American
States was so keen that Paul Jones found a welcome
in every Irish harbour that was unoccupied by an
English squadron; when English commerce was
swept out of St. George’s Channel, and the Holyhead
passage yachts were searched and plundered by
privateers under the American flag, fitted out and

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

3638

manned by Protestant adventurers from Wexford cHap.
and Dublin, it is true, that the staunchest friends ie

which the English Government possessed in the
island were the representatives and great; grand-
fathers of the Catholic Irish peasantry;- to whom
America: is now the land of promise, and whose
dream'is a liberated Ireland under the protectorate of
the Stars and Stripes. In 1760, when Munster was
in agrarian revolt, and the French, striking, as they
supposed, at a vulnerable point in England’s armour,
attempted. an‘invasion there, the minutest serutiny
failed to detect either correspondence or sympathy
between Versailles and the Tipperary Whiteboys.
In 1745, Irish Catholic Bishops were in communica-
tion with the Castle, prepared, should any movement
be attempted in favour of the Pretender, to give in-
formation of it; but the occasion never arose. ‘The
inference, notwithstanding, that a people so well
disposed:ought to have been trusted and eneouraged,
may be premature, and even altogether erroneous.
This attitude of the Catholic clergy was due to their
having learned to look en England as their protector
against the Protestant Parliament. The Catholic
masses, deprived of political power, had ceased to
strugele against their chains. Mutilated and miserable
as the penal legislature had. been made ;. immoral in
its’ details, unaccompanied with any one of those
remedial measures, without which coercion becomes
tyranny, yet the distinct assertion of authority had
produced an impression on the imagination of the
people, and in its partial success pointed to the only
method by which England and: Ireland could really
be made one. Among the peculiarities of the Celtic
peasantry, one of the most striking is a contempt for

1715

364

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK those who are afraid of them; a submissiveness and
i3 ° . ar)
—_-~— even real attachment, which is proof against much

1715

injustice and many cruelties, to a master who is a
master indeed. The relations of men to one another
become healthy only when the truth is seen and
confessed. Elizabeth forbade her viceroys to meddle
with religion, and she had to encounter three bloody
insurrections. Under Charles the First there was a
Catholic majority in the Irish Parliament with the
practical enjoyment of civil and religious equality.
The reward was the rebellion and massacre of 1641.
A third of the confiscated estates was restored to the
Catholics at the Restoration. The titular bishops
were received at the Castle. Catholic laymen be-
came magistrates, sheriffs, judges, officers in the
army. At length they had their own Parliament;
and they showed their gratitude for these imdul-
gences by repealing the acts of settlement, and by
attainting 3,000 Protestant landowners.

Once more they had been made to yield to superior
force, and this time the force had not been afraid to
assert itself. The beaten party was compelled to
know that they had no alternative but to yield, and
ninety years followed of undisturbed political tran-
quillity; good humoured submissiveness in the place
of chronic anarchy; and, instead of indignation
against a tyrannical law, a feeling rather of gratitude
for the comparative lenity with which, in general, the
law was enforced.

In 1715 the exasperation and bitterness produced by
the last war were subsiding, but had not yet disap-

peared entirely. ‘There were many officers still in

Connaught who had fought at Aghrim, and Galway
had been lately prepared to receive a French expedi-

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

tion. Tens of thousands of young Irishmen were in
the French service, and thousands more were con-
tinually recruited under the name of Wild Geese, and
shipped off from the secluded bays of Cork and
Kerry. They went out as for ever expatriated, but
they intended to return in better days with the
French army, which was to give them back their
liberties; and had Bolingbroke succeeded in gaining
a footing for the Pretender in England, or had
Ormond afterwards effected his intended landing at
Waterford, it would have been seen that the old
party of Tyrconnell and Sarsfield had life enough
remaining to strike once more for Irish liberty. On
the whole, however, except among the Bishops and
Anglo-Irish Jacobites, the cause of James the Third
created no enthusiasm. The native Catholics had no
cause to love the House of Stuart. They had not
forgiven the Act of Settlement. They had not for-
gotten the cowardice and flight of the Pretender’s
father. Unless they could separate the crowns
of the two kingdoms as well as the legislatures,
they had reason to believe that the policy of one
English king towards them would not differ very
widely from that of any other English king; and,
taught by the experience of 1692, they preferred
that the battles of Ireland should be fought else-
where.

‘The Papists,’ said Swift in 1725, and his great
authority is echoed by every contemporary docu-
ment, ‘would doubtless gladly have their superstition
restored under any prince whatever, yet the Pre-
tender’s party is at anend. Very few now alive are
in his interest. The Papists in general of any sub-
stance or estate, and the priests almost universally,

366

BOOK
II

——)—

1715

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

are what we call Whigs in the general sense of the

‘“_ term. They feel the.smart and see the scars of their

former wounds. They well know they must be

. made a sacrifice to the least attempt towards a

change.'

Thus the aceession of the House of Hanover passed
off as quietly in the wilds of ‘Kerry as in Kent and
Sussex. Guns were fired, bonfires lighted, tuns of
claret broached and emptied in the streets of every
town in the four provinces; and no word of dis-
affection was heard above a whisper from the Giant's
Causeway to Valentia.

1 ¢ Address of the Drapier to both Houses of Parliament.’—Sw:/t’s
Works, vol. vil.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION II.

367

THE persistent determination to govern under the oHap.
oes Sa ee III.
forms of the constitution, to maintain the exterior ———~

show of liberty among a people who could not be
trusted with the reality, although under some aspects
plausible and honourable, yet prolonged the agony
of the Irish nation, and, like all insincerity, created
more evils than it cured. The Irish Parliament was
to be maintained; but, to prevent the Parliament from
being troublesome, it was chained by Poynings’ Act ;
three-quarters of the population were disfranchised ;
and, when the Parliament was -recalcitrant, laws
were passed in England over its head. Trial by
jury, the most precious birthright of Englishmen,
was regarded as the inalienable privilege of every
subject of the British Crown, and as such it was main-
tained in Ireland, but the forms -of freedom avail
only to those who can make a wholesome use of
them. Convictions could not be .obtained against
Catholic bishops and unregistered priests, and the
destruction of the Catholic religion ‘had to be pursued
through the circuitous action of a law which under-
mined the foundations of society. ‘The acts of Anne
for the repression of Popery had been framed to
throw into Protestant hands the entire land of
Ireland. ‘The opportunities for evasion had been at
length closed so carefully that, for a family to pre-
serve their estates who continued to avow them-
selves Catholic, had been made really difficult. The

1715

368

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK object aimed at may have been not in itself unjust ;
_*"— the means by which it was pursued were detestable.

1715

A son, who had quarrelled with his father, could
demand a maintenance on declaring himself a Pro-
testant, and there was thus a premium on dishonest
conversions, and an encouragement to disobedience
in children. A Protestant informer, who could con-
vict a Catholic of concealing his property, could
dispossess the owner in his own favour. The dis-
abilities extending to leases, to trades, and profes-
sions, the temptation to spiritual dishonesty, was
carried down among the middlemen, the tenant
farmers, the lawyers, and the shopkeepers; and the
ranks of the Protestants were swelled by gentlemen
and men of business who, in forfeiting their self-
respect, lost with it the sense of common right and
wrong. |
The first of the two acts had been comparatively
unsuccessful. The loose wording of the penal clauses
had created a belief perhaps that, like so many other
laws in Ireland, it had been designed merely as a
threat. It had been neutralized by transparent con-
cealments and fictitious conveyances, and in the six
years in which it remained unsupplemented, thirty-
six Catholics only had conformed. The second act—
the clause especially which enabled any Protestant
to make his fortune by a successful information—
convinced them that if they would retain their pro-
perties they must abandon their creed; and produced
in reality or appearance, instant and extensive con-
versions. Many Catholics, probably, sold their
estates and emigrated to France. Many more pre-
ferred their homes under hard conditions to per-
petual expatriation; and, before 1738, a thousand

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

369

Catholic families of rank and consequence had been CHAP.
received into the Establishment; some in appearance ————

only; some in indifference; some from the common-
place belief that truth is on the side of the strong; some,
possibly, but very few, from real conviction. What-
ever the motive, the result to the country was the same.
‘The greatest part of the Catholic gentlemen,’
says an Anglo-Irishman of the time, ‘ who are either
distinguished for understanding or fortune, have
actually come over to our Church, and renounced
the errors of Rome. If some are not sincere, their
children and grandchildren will certainly be so, and
it is likely therefore that the people will follow. ‘If
once, this writer continues, and the parallel which
he draws must be remembered, since it was the
moral justification of these laws in the minds of those
who passed them—‘if once the Popish clergy were as
effectually removed as the Huguenot ministers are
in France, we should soon see our churches filled with
converts as much as theirs; and as they are already
sentenced by our laws as civif enemies to our con-
stitution and country, so nothing but the executing
of those laws, and providing for the instruction of the
Trish, can perfectly heal the wounds and maims of our
divided nation. I can by no means think our laws are
chargeable with a persecuting spirit in this matter of
_ the Popish clergy ; nor do I think there is a nation
under heaven which would have borne with them
so long with such gentleness and lenity under such
dreadful provocation; and their attempting so often,
by massacre and rebellion, to overturn our constitu-
tion, and make one grave for our laws and people.”

1 Reflexions and Resolutions for the Gentlemen of Lreland, 1758.
VOL. I. BB

1715

II

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

With the accession of the House of Hanover

—_— and the failure of the rising in Scotland in 1715,

1715

Romanism had become in fact, in the eyes of the
intelligent laity, a lost political cause. From an
authoritative creed controlling the actions of states

it dwindled into a mode of opinion; and whatever
ground might be found -either in France or Spain

for future interference in Ireland, the occasion would
no longer be religion. “The Catholic gentry, so long

as they adhered to their creed, -were cut off from —

the public life of the empire, and every motive

of interest. or ambition tempted them to conformity.
In the better cultivated parts of the country, even
among the peasantry who had no land to lose,
and no eareer to ‘which to aspire, the feeling for
Popery from other causes was for a time rapidly
waning.

They resented the extortionate paymerits
demanded of them for the support of the priests.
The potato, though spreading fast, was still an excep-
tional article.of food:among them before the middle of
the last century. They continued to live chiefly upon
meat, and, when:Lent.came with its compulsory fasts,
the conscientious among them were in danger of
being starved.’ On all estates where the Protestant
landlords resided, their tenants transferred to them
the affectionate fidelity with which they had regarded
their hereditary leaders. ar unlike the Presbyterian

artisans, they clung to their homes, and were ‘averse
to American rambles.” ‘ When the leaven of Popery

1The observing of Lent is a
great cause of idleness, It is not
only.a:time of fast. but of famine.
The poor Irish are fed on very
bad flesh seven-eighths of the
year. In Lent they are famished.
They are so hunger-starved in this

dreadful time that I have heard a
good Catholic wish the priests
would allow them to eat the kites
and hawks, rooks, crows, and foxes
in that season.’—Reflexions and
Resolutions.

2 Ibid.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

371

had not soured their natures, they were faithful and CHAP,
attached servants;’ and when opportunities were ———-

opened out to them they were ‘capable of being made
excellent husbandmen, soldiers, sailors, workmen,
merchants, and scholars.’ ‘The earth-tillers,’ as they
had been contemptuously called in the old days, were
in fact showing all the qualities which, when they
were kept at work and kindly treated, had always
been seen to belong to them. Their superstitions
were dying out, and they were ‘ Papists rather from
custom than conviction.’ ‘ The living so long among
Protestants had itself introduced a kind of reformation
among them.’ ‘They thought charitably of the
salvation of Protestants, more slightly of the Pope’s
authority, and they read the English translation of
the Bible.’ They understood and acknowledged that
they were suffering the actual consequences of the
rebellion and massacre of 1641; ‘ that their con-
tending for a Popish prince and interest in Ireland’
was folly ; ‘and that their zeal that way had been
as vain and silly as the old sacrificing their lives in
the quarrels between the Kildares and Ormonds.’
‘They had obtained juster notions of Irish history.’
‘They saw how they had been made the tools of
other men’s ambition.’ ‘'The affectation of speaking
Trish was gone ; scarcely one in twenty of them did
not understand and speak English well. ‘They
were being brought to like and know English cus-
toms, manners, and habits ;’ and such of them as
had made money by trade or manufacture, ‘were
running fast into the neatness and plenty of the
English way of living.’’ Such is the description
of the settled districts in Ireland given by one of the

1 Reflexions and Resolutions for the Gentlemen of Ireland, 1788.
BB 2 ,

1715

372

BOOK

—-—_"’

1715

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

resident Protestant gentry in 1738, indicating a dis-
position which, had fair play been allowed to the
industry of the country, must have soon obliterated
the traces of old animosities. Although there were
remarkable exceptions, hereafter to be noticed, reli-
gious differences were generally losing their bitter-
ness, and even the penal laws themselves were made
a means of extending charity and good feeling.
Many Catholic families retained their properties
without sacrificing their creed, by conveying them to
a Protestant kinsman or neighbour. ‘The terms of
the statutes were so stringent that they were obliged
to trust entirely to honour and good faith; yet in
no known instance was their confidence abused.
Where children, really unworthy, claimed the pro-
tection of the clauses which would render them
independent of their parents, Protestant judges and
chancellors were not found to ignore in their favour
the elementary principles of morality. —

A few instances of appeals for maintenance will
show how the law was practically worked.

The first recorded case is that of the Cusacks.
By the act of 1703, a Catholic gentleman, whose
eldest son was a Protestant, became tenant for life.
He was placed in the position of an owner whose
estate is entailed, and since many children had been
disinherited by Catholic parents as a punishment for
changing their faith, the restriction, under the cir-
cumstances of the country, was not unreasonable.
Robert Cusack’ possessed real property, worth
something over a thousand pounds a year. By his
first marriage he had one son, named Adam. Be-

1 Younger brother and heir of Adam Cusack, puisne judge of the
Court of Common Pleas in 1672.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

coming a widower, he married again, and had another
son and a twin daughter. Family quarrels followed.
The eldest son, supported by his mother’s brother,
insulted his stepmother, disobeyed his father, squan-
dered money in idleness and extravagance. The
father withdrew his allowance; the son, of course with
the worst motives, declared himself a Protestant,
and appealed for maintenance to the Court of Chan-
cery. ‘The case came before Sir Richard Cox, in
1705. The son pleaded that the settlement made at
the first marriage had been tampered with. The
father replied, that he had acted only within his
legal powers. The original settlements were ex-
amined and reported on. ‘The Court allowed the son
80/. a year during his father’s lifetime, which was
afterwards raised to a hundred."

Infants were not allowed to plead conversion,
though supported by Protestant relatives. Applica-
cation being made for maintenance for a boy of nine
years old, the court ruled that the act gave no
relief till ‘a child had come to years of discretion to
conform.’* Fitz Patrick v. Fitz Patrick was a case
resembling that of the Cusacks. An elder son
married against his father’s consent, turned Protes-
tant, and applied for an allowance. The Chancellor,
severely condemning the son’s conduct, gave him 80/.
a year, as the least which the law would permit, and
enabled the father to encumber the estate very heavily,
for the use of his Catholic children.®

Although the law encouraged informers, their occu-
pation was odious. Their attempts to possess them-
selves of other men’s properties were defeated when

1 Case of Cusack v. Cusack, 30,1762. Howard's Popery Cases.

1704-5. MSS. Dublin Castle. 3 Ibid.
2 Fitzgerald v, Fitzgerald, June

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

defeat was possible; and again, informers themselves
were often in collusion with those against whom
they informed, in trust for some concealed party.
Cases of course can be produced of an opposite
kind;' and the practice of the courts was a very
school of lying, and a discipline of evasion. No laws
could have been invented, perhaps, more ingeniously
demoralizing. Yet unquestionably the acts were
not, as a whole, carried out with the triumphant
recklessness of a dominant faction. ‘The Catholics
had themselves rendered legislation necessary, by
introducing the question of religion into the disposi-

tion of inheritances.”

The judges in these decisions

at least recognized the necessity of preventing the
law from being abused by profligate children.

1 The case of Martin Blake is
a good illustration of the worst
operation of the act, and shows
among other things, that it some-
times defeated its own object.

Martin Blake, a Catholic, bought
some lands in the name of Sir
Henry Bingham, and other lands
in the name of Lynch. Sir H.
Bingham, evidently in collusion
with Blake, brought an action of
ejectment under the Popery Act,
for the lands bought by Lynch,
and got a verdict. Afterwards
Blake became a Protestant, and
Sir H. Bingham conveyed the
estate to him openly. But, on proof
twelve years later, that Blake had
enjoyed the profits of the lands
ever since the original purchase,
and that Sir H. Bingham never
meddled with them, all the lands
were decreed to the discoverers,
and Blake was made to account
for the rents which he had received
meanwhile, ‘ there being a manifest
combination to elude the act.’—
Howard’s Popery Cases, June 16,
1727,

2 The Nugents’ case indicated a
real grievance. Hyacinthe Nugent,
eldest son of Thomas Nugent, of
Pallas, called Lord Riverstown, a
Catholic, with large estates, con-
formed to the Established Church,
and married Susanne Catharine,
daughter of Sir Tristram Beres-
ford — the Popery Act _ being
accepted by the Beresfords as
guaranteeing a settlement on the
wife. Lord Riverstown refusing
to make an allowance, the son
joined the English army in Spain,
and served as a cornet of dragoons,
Thence he returned to Ireland,
when, ‘by pernicious Popish coun-
sels and other wicked insinuations,’
he was prevailed on to forsake his
wife and return to Popery; and, ‘in
order to elude the law and injure
his wife, went, ‘by means of his
Popish relations, into France to
the service of the French king,’
The case came before Parliament,
and, by a private act, in 1711, the
wife was allowed a maintenance
out of Lord Riverstown’s estates.
—MSS. Dublin Castle. :

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION III.

Tuer working of the second branch of the penal
laws directed against the succession of the clergy,
may be described more briefly.. These laws, though
more definite in theory than the laws affecting pro-
perty, more in accordance with the general practice of
Europe, and justified by provocations with which no
people in the world but the English would have dealt
so forbearingly, remained a dead letter on the statute
book, and were heard of only in periodical lamentations
over their neglect. The Catholic religion, though
proscribed and insulted, was suffered to grow un-
checked, to take exclusive possession of the increasing
mbers of the peasantry, to educate them, to mould
and shape them from their cradles to their graves,
and to neutralize the natural disposition to please
their political superiors, which, had they been let
alone, would have swept them into conformity.

‘If the Popish clergy were as effectually removed as
the Huguenot ministers,’ says the writer whom I have
so often quoted,' ‘we should soon see our churches
filled with converts.’ It was first necessary that there
should be churches for them to fill. Zealous as they
had been for their own privileges—clamorous against
Dissenters—in possession of all the wealth of the an-
cient sees—so rich that, when they went to England,
they required separate vessels to carry their horses
and servants to Holyhead—with sufficient influence
over the peers and the leading gentry to perpetuate

, 1 Reflexions and Resolutions for the Gentlemen of Ireland,

375

CHAP.
Eide
— —_—"

1719

376

BOOK
ii.

———-—

1715

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the disabilities of the Presbyterians, and drive them
by swarms into exile, the hierarchy of the Irish
Establishment had provided, in 1728, for the spiritual
instruction of the entire island 600 beneficed clergy.
That was the sum of their militant forces all told. So
poor were the incumbencies, that though pluralities
were unabated, and eight, nine, sometimes twelve or
thirteen cures of souls were heaped on one man, his
whole income did not always reach 100/. a year. On
these 600 men were thrown, by the law, not only the
Church services but the duty of providing schools
in every parish; yet the Government allowed the
Bishops to prohibit the scattered Protestant settle-
ments from electing pastors of their own; and, in
the face of so extraordinary a combination of neg-
ligence and bigotry, the execution of the law to
prevent the incoming of priests from abroad, or the
ordination of fresh priests at home, was of course
impossible. It was left to stand a confession of
impotence, to bring law itself into contempt. While
‘he gave so miserable an account of the Establishment,
the Primate was obliged to add, that there were 3,000
priests in Ireland. All, or almost all of them, were
by that time, according to the letter of the statute,
liable to transportation ; and to death as felons if they
returned. Yet chapels were built, and mass was

1 Thereare in Ireland 600 incum-

insignificant in themselves to be
ents and, I fear, near 3,000 Popish

worth considering. ‘The bulk of

priests. ‘The Primate (Archbishop
Boulter) to the Duke of New-
castle, March 7, 1728.’ MSS. Re-
cord Office. By contrasting the
number of incumbents with the
number of priests, the Primate
indicates that the curates were
either too few in number, or too

our clergy,’ he goes on, ‘have
neither parsonage houses nor
glebes. Yet, except we get more
churches and chapels, and more
resident incumbents, instead of
gaining ground on the Papists, we
must lose to them as we do in
many places,’

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

said openly without interference. Occasionally
when there were threats of invasion, some spasmodic
onslaught was directed half insincerely from the
Castle. But sheriffs shrunk from issuing warrants.
Grand juries might send up bills, but petty juries
refused to convict. Informers, so ready to betray
Rapparees and Tories, could neither be bribed or
frightened into giving evidence against the clergy.
Country magistrates, without a certainty of support
from the Government, would not court unpopularity
by gratuitous activity, which might embroil them
with their tenants ; and the Government at home, in
alliance usually with one or other of the Catholic
powers, made a merit of yielding to the interces-
sion of foreign ambassadors, and ordering the suspen-
sion of the laws against their co-religionists." Even
when there was real alarm, and the Castle authorities

1 From the multitude of reports
I select two almost at random.
In the alarm of 1715 the grand
jury of King’s County desired
Secretary Dawson to acquaint the
Viceroy, ‘that the late insolent
behaviour of the Papists in that
county was owing to the priests
not being brought to justice,’ and
‘that several persons who were
active in summoning persons to
give evidence against them had
been threatened.’ ‘That priests
officiated generally who had not
taken the Oath of Abjuration, and
who were not registered.’ ‘That
many indictments had been pre-
sented by the Grand Jury, but
only one priest in the county had
been tried and convicted.’

The Grand Jury of Galway re-
ported that :—‘ Great numbers of
friars had within very few years
come into the kingdom, and settled

themselves in that county. At the
close of the late reign great
discouragement had been given by
the men then in power to such as
were active im suppressing friaries
and putting the laws in evecution.
After such discouragements they
conceived it would be of singular
use to issue commands to the
magistrates to be more vigorous
for the future, and to direct the
military power to assist them.
At the late quarter sessions great
numbers of priests had been pre-
sented for celebrating mass, not
having taken the Oath of Abjura-
tion, and several Papists of the
first rank for carrying arms, not
having qualified themselves so to
do. ‘Those presentments were in
the hand of the clerk of the
peace, but no process had issued
pursuant to them.” — MSS,
Dublin Castle, 1715.

378

BOOK
II.
—_,-——

1715

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

had roused themselves to more vigorous resolution,
the magistrates had learnt by experience, that negli-
gence was less dangerous to them than promptitude.
In a common-place book of some responsible person,
perhaps one of the judges, there is a passage on the
subject which is curiously explicit. ‘The Papists,’
says this writer, ‘by law are allowed a priest in
every parish, which are registered in pursuance of
an act of Parliament made ten years ago. All
bishops, regulars, and other priests, not registered,
are banished, and none allowed to come into the
kingdom under severe penalties. The design was,
that there should be no succession, and many of
those then registered are since dead. Yet, for want
of due execution of the laws, many are come in from
foreign parts, and there are in the country Popish
bishops concealed that ordain many. Little enquiry
of late has been made into these matters. As to the
Roman Catholics I think it impossible, while they
continue such, to reconcile them to his majesty’s
interest; and, therefore, all means ought to be used
to prevent their doing mischief. Our laws are already
too severe against them, but meet with no execution, and
the management towards them has been so uncertain
for fifty years last past, in truth ever since the Reforma-
tion, that none dare trust the Government so far as to
exert themselves in earnest against them; for such an
act, in a few years, it 1s imputed to him as a crime.’ }

As in later times, an Ecclesiastical Titles Bill passed
through Parliament with acclamation, yet, from the
first day that it received the consent of the Crown, was
treated with ostentatious contempt, so these seem-
ingly barbarous statutes against the Irish Catholic
| 1 MSS. Ireland. Record Office, vol. eeexxxix.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

clergy were but as unshotted cannon, loud sounding
and conspicuously impotent. Those priests who
went through the form of registering themselves
and taking the oaths were treated as poor creatures,
and were removed from their cures to make way
for bolder spirits.’

In 1721, in Dublin itself, under the very shadow of
the Castle, the Catholic Primate resided, ordained
clergy, and exercised jurisdiction without attempt at
concealment. A bishop of Meath and a body of
Capuchins found shelter under the roof of an officer
in the service of the Crown ;” and there were other es-
tablishments of Augustinians, Franciscans, Carmelites,
and Dominicans, whose existence was perfectly well
known to the authorities. The bishops lived in quasi
retirement for a few years after the passing of the
Act, but they emerged as they found themselves un-
molested, and their assistance soon came to be made
use of in the Government of the country. English
administrations, one after the other, thinking of
nothing but the convenience of the moment, saw the
Catholic Irish doubling and trebling their numbers,
and took no heed of a phenomenon which would not
ripen in their time to mischief. The Catholics were

1 ‘The priests take the Oath of
Abjuration, but confess it as a sin
to other priests, and receive
absolution. It is a melancholy
reflection of living among men
whom neither oath can bind, nor
justice and lenity oblige to fidelity
to our Established Church. We
receive daily information of mul-
titudes coming lately into this
kingdom, and their superiors turn-
ing out the registered priests as a
dull inactive sort of people, and

placing others in their stead, who
will be more useful to their evil
purposes.” — ‘Gilbert Ormsby to
Secretary Dawson, October 13,
1712.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

* Todos estos frailes capuchi-
nos viven en la misma capilla que
fué fabricada en la casa de M.
Clemens, pagador en la tesoria de
su  Mag*.’— MSS. Record Office.
The account from which .I quote
being in Spanish proves whence
these monks had come.

380

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

a weapon in their hands to keep the Protestant

‘hese gentry from being troublesome. They allowed the

1715

penal laws to stand, and the odium of them to rest on
the Irish Parliament. But the success which would
have been the justification of those laws, they took
care to make impossible; thus ensuring their eventual —
repeal with the ignominy which necessarily attaches
to tyranny which has failed.

So cruel or so careless was the administration of
Sir Robert Walpole, that he would not even make
known his real wishes. If the Catholic clergy were
not to be punished, they ought to have been recog-
nized. A carefully considered plan was submitted
to the crown, by which a supply of secular priests
could be maintained and licensed, while the regular
clergy should be removed.’ But the Irish Parliament
were still allowed to believe, that England sincerely
wished that Popery should be extinguished. Viceroy
after Viceroy was permitted to urge from the throne
a more thorough execution of the law; and the
Protestant gentry, conscious of the dangers to which
they were increasingly exposed by the multiplication
of the Catholics, in defiance of a law which it was
inevitable that they must resent, were encouraged in
their perplexity to invent fresh penalties of which
the threat might perhaps prove a deterrent. Left
to themselves they could have perhaps themselves
removed a law which they could not carry out. Sir
Robert Walpole preferred that they should stand
over the Catholics with a brandished whip, and that
he and England should earn the gratitude of the

bishops and priests, by arresting the arm ere it

could fall.

Charles Hogg to the King, December 10, 1723.’ MSS. Record
Office.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION IV.

Since forcible conversion was tacitly abandoned,
the form of Protestantism which could hope to be-
come the religion of Ireland, could be only that
which showed spontaneous vitality. Congregations
were willing to support Catholic priests; congrega-
tions were willing to support Presbyterian ministers.
The clergy of the Anglo-Irish Church existed only
on endowments. The Presbyterians made converts
among the Catholics; the Church made none, or
only such as she could have better spared, which were
made for her by the Popery Act; while, for every
reluctant or interested conformist, she lost ten,
twenty, or thirty of the scattered Protestant peasantry
in the southern provinces, to whom she forbade
their own ministrations, and who, since they could
not have what they desired, preferred the priest and
the goodwill of their neighbours. Cruel and even
blind as England was to Ivreland’s interests on so
many sides, she at least perceived the absurdity of
maintaining the Test clause. If the peasantry were
not to be driven, there was still a chance that they
might be won; and no sooner was George the First
on the throne, and the Tory junta dismissed and
scattered, than Wharton’s policy was revived, and the
removal of the Test, so unhappily and inadvertently
imposed, became the most ardently desired object of
the new ministers. When the rebellion began in
Scotland, an insurrection in Ireland had been confi-

381

382

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BEDOK dently looked for.’ The militia were again called
——— out. The Presbyterian leaders held a meeting at

Belfast to consider how they should act; and, though
strictly disqualified, they came to an honourable
resolution, ‘to risk everything for his majesty’s
service, and trust to the clemency of the Government
to screen them from prosecution. They communi-
cated their intentions to Mr. Conolly, a distinguished
member of the Irish Council. Conolly wrote to the
Lords Justices guaranteeing their loyalty; and, at his
request, commissions were issued to the Presbyterian
gentlemen. The ranks of the regiments were im-
mediately filled; and, over and above the regular
troops, thirty thousand men were at once in arms,
sufficient, if rebellion had been attempted, to crush
it out on the instant. The lesson was not thrown
away. Owing to the leaven of Jacobitism in
the Establishment, the Presbyterian was the only
body on whom England could thoroughly rely in a
struggle with the Pretender. The Queen’s death had
dissolved the last Parliament. A new election, it was
hoped, would give the Liberal party in the Lower
House a sufficient majority to enable the Government
to force the repeal of the Test clause upon the Peers.

The Regium Donum, which had been discontinued
for four years, was restored and increased. Sunder-
land, a tried friend to the Dissenting interest, was
appointed Viceroy. Sunderland himself was unable
to leave London; but he received a deputation from
the Ulster Synod, and promised them all the aid in

his power. The Duke of Grafton and Lord Galway

came over as Lords Justices, and by them Parliament
was opened on the 14th of November.

1 «Sir William Caulfield to Secretary Delafaye, August 1, 1715.’
MSS. Record Office.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

The battle seemed to be won, when Conolly, the
Presbyterians’ especial supporter, was elected speaker
by a large majority.

The speech from the throne recommended ‘such
unanimity as might end all distinctions, save those
between Protestant and Papist.1. The Commons,
after a passionate censure of the late Tory Ministry,
charging it with having brought the Protestant
interest to the edge of destruction, took into con-
sideration the heads of a bill for the security of the
Kine’s government, in which, among other provisions,
was a clause indemnifying the Presbyterians who had
accepted commissions, and declaring that, for the
future, Nonconformists might hold rank in the army
and militia without danger of prosecution. .A. measure
of relief so small and tentative, so obviously politic
and just, was not carried without violent opposition.
It was carried, however, and was sent to the Upper
House. At once the animosities which had broken
up the last Parliament revived in all their fury.

The Bishops and clergy had been unable to pre-
vent the establishment on the throne of the House
of Hanover, the symbol of the principles which they
most feared and hated; and disappointment made
them furious. So violent were the clergy, that few
of them could be found to mention the names of the
King and the Royal family in their prayers before
their sermons.”

The Peers and Commons formed themselves into
a loyal association for the protection of the King’s
person. The Bishops could not refuse to participate

1 Commons’ Journals, November 2 “Most of the clergy neglect to
14, 1715, mention his majesty and their

384

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

without confessing themselves traitors ; but the Pri-

—*— mate, after a three days’ struggle, when everyone

1715

but himself had signed, at length attached his name
with an ill grace on the margin of the page, from
which it could be cut off when the Pretender came
to his own.’

To men in such a humour the Dissenters Relief
Bill was as oil on the fire. Perceiving that the clause
would be carried in the Lower House, the Arch-
bishop of Dublin anticipated its appearance by in-
troducing the heads of a second Indemnity Bill of his
own, holding the Dissenters harmless for what they
had already done, but maintaining their disabilities
for the future as rigidly as ever. Everyone of the
Bishops supporting him, he carried his point, and,
instead of considering the heads which came from
the Commons, the Lords sent in the Archbishop’s
bill by the side of the other, for the Council to digest
them into one, and transmit it to England.

In the Council the question was rediscussed, and
the Duke of Grafton laboured hard to bring about a
compromise. The Bishops condescended to admit
that they did not wish the Dissenters to be prose-
cuted for having taken arms when called on by the
Government to defend the country. They agreed at
last that commissions in the militia should be opened
to them then and always; but the regular army, in

Royal Highnesses in the prayers
before their sermons, which is an
omission we cannot redress without
a direct order from the King.’—
‘Secretary Delafaye to Lord
Stanhope, January 22,1716.’ MSS.
Record Office.

1¢The Primate signed at the
bottom, from whence his name

might be cut off in time conve-
nient. He did it, but with a very
ill grace, two or three days after
everybody else.’ — ‘ Delafaye to
Stanhope, January 24,1716.’ MSS.
Record Office. The bond with
Lindsay’s name attached, as Dela-
faye describes, is in the Record
Office.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

the fear that admission to military service would be
a prelude to future demands, they were determined
to keep for ever closed against them.!

A proposal by one of the Council, that Noncon-
formists should hold commissions in the army during
the continuance of the rebellion, was carried only ina
full board by a majority of one. Unless the Church
was disestablished, or unless the Archbishop of
Canterbury could be persuaded to interfere, the
Duke of Grafton was obliged to tell Lord Stanhope
that no measure of relief, which was not a mockery,
could be carried through the Upper House as at
present constituted. As qualified by the Council
the bill might pass. If returned in the shape in
which it left the Commons, it would be infallibly
rejected.’

The resolute obstinacy, three parts disloyal and
one part bigotted, of the Irish hierarchy explains the
subsequent practice, which has been made a subject
of such bitter reproach by Irish patriotic writers, of

1 Swift frankly explains the carried; but it is more than

reason :—

‘ However indifferent men may
be to religion,’ he says, ‘ they
know if latitude was allowed to
Dissenters, the few such employ-
ments left us in cities and corpo-
rations would find other hands lay
hold on them.’—‘ Address to both
Houses of Parliament by the
Drapier.’ Works, vol. vii.

? The House of Lords, to render
the good intentions of the House
of Commons ineffectual, have
passed another bill with the same
title and to the same purpose, but
without the above clause. Both
are now before the Council to
frame one bill out of the two.
We hope the clause may be

VOL. I.

probable, if the bill returns to us
without alteration, it will be re-
jected in the House of Lords.
We advise, therefore, that the
bill be so altered by you that the
exemption relating to the army
might continue only during the
present rebellion, and from thence
to the end of the ensuing session
of Parliament. Thus qualified,
the Bishops will let it pass
through the House of Lords, else
it will be lost by a large majority.
Better speak to the Archbishop
of Canterbury. The Archbishop
and others, we believe, have written
to him.’—‘ Grafton to Stanhope,
February 15,’ MSS. Record Office,

CC

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

filling so many vacancies on the bench by English-
men. Something might be said for a genuine Protes-
tant ascendancy in Ireland,—something for the
native Catholics who desired to increase their hold
upon a country which they believed to belong to
themselves. What plea of policy or equity could be
found for leaving so critical a part of the British
dominions at the discretion of a handful of prelates,
whose existence depended on the support of a King
whom they in their hearts disowned, and the swords
of the northern Protestants whom they abhorred
and trampled on ? '

A way out of the difficulty was suggested, which
shows in its very structure how proof against the
plainest monitions of prudence and justice was Irish
High Church prejudice.

a hundred thousand able-bodied
entirely well-affected men. These
are they that bravely kept footing

1 A remarkable letter was
written at this time by some
Irishman of consequence to Lord

stand

Molesworth, and by Molesworth
forwarded, without the writer’s
name, to Stanhope.

‘The Archbishop of Tuam is
like to die. You know thiscountry,

‘and our unfortunate condition in

relation to gentlemen of that rank.
There is not one that can justly be
called a Whig, not among those
that were made since the King’s
accession. Yet several were as
hearty Whigs as you and I before
they were made Bishops. I mean
they seemed so. It would be very
good if we had three or four
eminent staunch Bishops that
would not be shocked, and would
in the gap against the
majority. This would bring the
clergy round. One clause in the
Security Bill they are fighting
against would give liberty to at least

in Ireland when other Protestants
fled the kingdom—that fought
naked for King William, our
liberties, our religion, and all that
was dear to us. We cannot ex-
pect them to fight our battles if
we do not let them rise above
common soldiers) We are now
raising thirteen regiments here,
and I dare aver it, unless four parts
in six be dissenting common
soldiers, the most won’t be Protes-
tants. . . . I am rather of opinion,
therefore, that Bishops should be
sent from England. I used to
wish only Irish to be chosen; but,
after being disappointed so often,
it seems hopeless to expect that
the most promising Irishman will
remain Whig.’ — MSS. Ireland.
Record Office, March 27, 1716.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION,

‘There must be no law,’ wrote Henry Maxwell,
a distinguished member of the Irish Parliament, to
Lord Molesworth, ‘to hinder the Protestants of this
country to unite against one commonenemy. The body
of our Dissenters consists of the middle and meaner
sort of people, chiefly in the North. Not many of
them are estated men compared with those of the
Established Church ; so that, when these disabilities
are taken off, want of fortune and interest will
always hinder them from coming into the militia in
dangerous numbers. Pass that part of the law, and
you will do nothing but good. As to the army, it
would be highly to the prejudice of the King and his
service if that clause should pass. The number of
Dissenters in our House does not exceed, if it reaches,
to the number of six. In the late Parliament they
came to but four. They can never have an interest
to reach to ten, and they are of little weight when
they are there, for their education is generally nar-
row. In the House of Lords there is not one Dis-
senter of weight; so that if the clause come over, it
will divide and break the King’s best friends in our
House, and will give the King’s enemies, which is
the only thing they want, a handle of clamour; it
will widen and perpetuate our divisions, which, if
that law do not pass in your Council, are in a fair
way of being healed. Reject it, and it will be a
handsome compliment to the Church, and things will
go easily in both Houses.’?

Consistently anxious to remove entirely these
pernicious disabilities, Stanhope and Sunderland
declined to act on Maxwell’s suggestions. The

1 ¢H, Maxwell to Lord Molesworth, April 9, 1716. MSS. Ireland,
Record Office. 3

co 2

387

CHAP.
Pit.

1716

388

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

military strength of Protestant Ireland lay, as they

_**— well knew, in the despised Dissenters ; and to dis-

1716

qualify brave and loyal men for advancement in the
regular army because they professed a creed which
was the established religion of Scotland, was too
intolerably absurd. The bill was postponed till the
bench of Bishops could be leavened with some
healthier elements. The Commons passed a resolu-
tion that the Dissenters who had received commis-
sions had done seasonable service, and that whoever
prosecuted them was an enemy to the King and the
Protestant interest. There, for the moment, the

matter was allowed to drop. An attempt was made

to bribe the Presbyterians into dropping the further
prosecution of their claims, by promising them in-
stead of a removal of the Test, the English Tolera-
tion Act, which would leave their religion undis-
turbed, while the disqualifications for service were
maintained, They declined an offer which they
justly regarded as an insult. They insisted that
they were entitled to the same privileges which were
conceded to the Scotch Episcopalians; who, though
as disloyal as they were themselves loyal, and, like
themselves, were Dissenters from the Established re-
ligion, yet suffered under no vexatious exclusion from
civil or military employment. ;

Stanhope would not part with the hope of securing
them substantial justice at last. After 1715 the
Irish Parliament met only in alternate years, voting
double supplies. In 1719, under the Viceroyalty of
the Duke of Bolton, the opportunity was taken of a
fresh alarm to revive the question. The Duke, in
opening the session, recommended a better agreement
among Protestants in the presence of the strict union

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

and notorious disaffection of the Catholics. A sketch
of a bill had been sent from England to be produced
if the temper of the two Houses promised favourably.
It was an equivalent to a simple repeal of the Sacra-
mental Test clause. Conolly, when asked his advice
by the Viceroy, recommended that the initiative
should be left to the Irish Parliament. Whether the
Lower House would concede a large measure of
relief he considered extremely doubtful. The Peers
would reject any measure of relaxation, however
mild, if it was recommended from England. The
bill was, therefore, kept back. The Viceroy told
the Parliament, that he trusted they would discover
some means by which an agreement could be brought
about ; and the King sent a special message of
earnest entreaty, that the Presbyterian claims
should receive consideration.

The humour of the Upper House, it very soon
appeared, was unchanged; while the Commons, as
the rebellion was forgotten, were less disposed to
generosity than before. The Brodricks had hitherto
been steady on the Liberal side. The old Speaker,
now Lord Midleton, continued constant to his
principles. His son, young Alan, for some unknown
reason, had gone over to the Bishops’ faction; and,
backed by a knot of High Churchmen, who were
called the Cork squadron, resisted a relaxation of
the Test with the fiercest determination. Archbishop
King, failing to see the sarcasm which he was utter-
ing against the Establishment, declared that the tests
were its only protection, and that, without them,

1 The Bishops had introduced any part of their estates. They

clauses into their leases, forbidding had induced many great land-
the erection of meeting-houses on owners to follow the example. :

389

CHAP.

——_——__—
1719

390

BOOK
Lae
tll

1719

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Protestant Ireland would be Presbyterian. A Toler-’
ation Act, such as they had refused before, more
meagre than that which now stands on the Irish
statute book—a bill giving Nonconformists a bare»
permission to meet for worship in their own chapels,
while the tests were sternly upheld, this was all that
could be obtained. The heads were sent to England ;
and the Viceroy wrote, that nothing more need be
looked for.*

Stanhope gave up the contest. No longer at-
tempting to throw open even the commissions in
the militia, he contented himself with adding a
paragraph, giving the benefit of the act to Dissenters
already under prosecution. Even this slight amend-
ment was received with suspicion. Young Brodrick
argued that, under cover of such a clause, a Dissenter
might have stolen into a fellowship at Trinity
College, or might have taught in a village school,
and. yet escape punishment. His chimerical terrors:
were with difficulty removed by the crown lawyers,
and, on the 16th of October, this wretched mockery
of justice and common sense passed through the
Lower House. !

For the Peers, lean as it was, the bill proved
almost. too much. The majority of Irish noblemen
were already absentees ; but on a question on which
passion was stirred so deeply the attendance was

unusually large. Had the Bishops’ phalanx been

The practice was sprealing. The not venture to press a division.—
Government party brought the ‘The Duke of Bolton to Secretary
subject before the Commons, and Craggs, July 16, 1719. MSS.
proposed a resolution that,in lay Ireland. Record Office.

leases, such clauses should be 1¢The Duke of Bolton to
inadmissible. The opposition was Secretary Craggs, July 18.’ Ibid.

so strong, however, that they did .

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

unbroken, they would have still been irresistible,
and the bill would have been lost. Fortunately the
advice to supply the vacant sees from England had
not been neglected. Sixteen Prelates were in their
places : of them the Viceroy had now secured the
support of six, and the neutrality of a seventh.
The three Archbishops struggled as if the Christian
faith itself was at stake. ‘The Primate called schism
a damnable sin. ‘The Archbishop of Dublin in-
sisted, in the usual style, that a door was being
opened to every kind of wild extravagance. The
bill was eventually carried by a majority of 39 to
26.1 The minority, with the Archbishops at their
head, recorded their protest in the Journals. Arch-
bishop King complained to his brother of Canter-
bury, that the good cause had been betrayed. by false
brethren intruded on the bench from England. Un-
less God, by unforeseen Providence, supported it,
the Church of Ireland he considered to be lost; and
the occasion of his panic was the simple permission
to the Presbyterians, who had saved Ireland from
Tyrconnell, who formed two-thirds of the Protestant
population of Ulster, to open chapels of their own.
Though they were incapacitated from holding public
employments, though their marriages were invalid,
though they were forbidden to open a single school,
or hold any office in town or country above the rank
of petty constable, the mere existence of Noncon-
formists as a body legally recognized was consi-
dered of fatal omen to the Church of Ireland. The

1 Of the six Bishops who voted and only one was an Irishman,
for the Government five were Of the nine who were in the
English Whigs appointed since minority, seven were Trish and
the accession of George the First, two English.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Church of Ireland must have been a very feeble in-
stitution.’

And now recommenced the Protestant emigration,
which robbed Ireland of the bravest defenders of
English interests, and peopled the American sea-board
with fresh flights of Puritans. Twenty thousand
left Ulster on the destruction of the woollen trade.
Many more were driven away by the first passing
of the Test Act. The stream had slackened, in the
hope that the law would be altered. When the
prospect was finally closed, men of spirit and energy
refused to remain in a country where they were held
unfit to receive the right of citizens; and thence-
forward, until the spell of tyranny was broken in 1782,

1 Trish Statutes, George I. cap. 3.
The hesitation of the Govern-
ment and the long delay in the
promotion of Berkeley, is a fa-
vourite subject of complaint
among Irish Protestants; nameless
Englishmen having been promo-
ted over the head of their most
distinguished scholar. Berkeley’s
Toryism was more extreme than
Swift's, and what Irish clerical
Tories were, the reader will have
partly seen. His Treatise on Pas-
sive Obedience was published during
the Harley-St. John ascendancy,
and was written avowedly in sup-
port of Phipps and Ormond and the
Jacobite conspirators. Lord Stan-
hope had, notwithstanding, been so
struck with Berkeley’s genius, that
he had intended to promote him
in 1716. An Irish clergyman, an
acquaintance of Lord Molesworth,
wrote to remonstrate against an
appointment, which would mis-
chievously strengthen Archbishop
King. ‘The treatise’ (on Passive
Obedience), this person said, ‘ came
out at a time when ‘a dangerous
attack was made by the late

ministry on the liberties of the
kingdom, for which service Dr.
Berkeley has been highly esteemed
by all the Jacobites in Ireland.
He travelled with Lord Peter-
borough; has been, and still is, a
creature of Dean Swift; and is
reckoned here as much in the
Tory interest as the highest
Churchman of them all.’—‘ Rey.
Duke Tyrrell to the Right Hon.
R. Molesworth, May 14, 1716.’
MSS. Record Office.

Molesworth interfered, and the
good intentions of the Government
towards Berkeley were postponed.
The world forms its judgments
heedlessly; and seeing that Berke-
ley was a great man, and that he
was long passed over in favour of
his inferiors, it rushes to the
conclusion that he was unfairly
neglected. When men of genius
lend themselves to politics and
the support of measures like the
Presbyterian disabilities, their
opinions may be at least as legiti-
mate a disqualification for office as
the religious belief which they
detest.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

annual shiploads of families poured themselves out
from Belfast and Londonderry. ‘The resentment
which they carried with them continued to burn in
their new homes; and, in the War of Independence,
England had no fiercer enemies than the grandsons
and great-grandsons of the Presbyterians who had
held Ulster against Tyrconnell.

The Irish Council were startled at the dimensions
which the Exodus assumed. ‘The worst of it,’
wrote Archbishop Boulter, ‘is, that it carries off
only Protestants, and reigns chiefly in the North.’?
Parliament ordered an inquiry and _ heard,evidence,
as if it was some inexplicable mystery. An official
report distinctly stated, that the Test was at least
one of the causes.” The ministers reminded the
Government that, when the Test clause was first
passed, an early repeal of it was promised; the
promise had not been kept, and ‘ the hardships under
which their people laboured on that account were so
grievous, that they were transporting themselves to
America for the sake of the liberty and ease which
they were denied in their native country.’* Still the
Trish Parliament could not bring itself to recognize
its own folly. The Duke of Newcastle, in 1732,
intended to make another effort. A bill was sent
over for the more effectual disarming of the Catholics;
and as the Test had been imposed by a clause intro-
duced in England into a Catholic penal bill, the Duke
thought it might be removed by a similar mancuvre.
He consulted Archbishop Boulter who was then Pri-
mate. But Boulter, though himself wishing the Dis-

1 ¢The Primate to the Duke of 1729.’ Ibid. .
Newcastle, November 23, 1728,’ 8 “Address of the Protestant
MSS. Record Office. Ministers of the South of Ireland,

2 ‘Report on the Causes of the 1729. bed,
Emigration from Ireland, June 6,

394

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

senters well, warned him that he would fail. Times

_ i! were changed, he said. There was less irritation

1732

against Popery, and more anger against England. A
clause introduced by the English Cabinet would, on
that account, alone be rejected by the patriots of
the Lower House. The clergy would oppose it to
aman; they were so bitter that the Whig Bishops
sent from England could hardly restrain them from
railing against Dissent in their sermons. ‘ Dean
Swift’ was already in the field, and ‘had sounded
the alarm.’ The thing could not be done.1

‘It is indeed extraordinary,’ Newcastle replied,
‘that such a clause should be liable to meet with
difficulties in either House in a country where no
distinctions should be kept up among Protestants,
which might be the occasion of disuniting them.’ ?

Extraordinary it might be, but it was a fact which
could not be changed.’

And so the emigration continued. The young,
the courageous, the energetic, the earnest, those
alone among her colonists who, if Ireland was ever
to be a Protestant country could be effective mis-
sionaries, were torn up by the roots, flung out, and
bid find a home elsewhere; and they found a home
to which England fifty years later had to regret
that she had allowed them to be driven.

Singular complication! First a Protestant exodus
to America, and then a Catholic from the same
country. Hach emigrant, and each class of emigrants,
carrying away in his heart a sense of intolerable
wrong, and a hungry craving for revenge.

1 ¢The Primate to the Duke of February 5, 1732.’ Ibid.
Newcastle, January 4 and 15, $ ‘The Primate to the Duke of

1732. MSS. Record Office. Newcastle, February 19.’
2 “Newcastle to the Primate,

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION V.

Tue responsibility for the mismanagement of Ireland
must be divided equally between England and the
Irish colony. With a perversity of misunderstand-
ing, whatever salutary measure England recom-
mended the Irish Parliament thwarted. When the
Trish Parliament saw their way clearly, England was
wilfully blind, or deliberately cruel.

- With their shipping destroyed by the Navigation
Act, their woollen manufactures taken from them,
their trade in all its branches crippled and confined,
the single resource left to those of the Irish who still
nourished dreams of improving the unfortunate
country was agriculture. The soil, at least, was
their own ; a soil which needed only to be drained,
cleared of weeds, and manured, to produce grass-
crops and corn-crops as rich as the best in England.
Here was employment for a population three times
more numerous than as yet existed. Here was a
prospect, if not of commercial wealth, yet of substan-
tial comfort and material abundance.

' The Irish peasant was indolent. The glorification.

of idleness, the contempt of work as base and ignoble,
had been instilled into him for fifty generations, and
was in the granules of his blood. The earth-tillers
everywhere had been the drudges of the tribe—
wretches too mean for the honourable employments
of stealing and murdering; and of the fruits of their
ignominious toil they had been allowed no more by
their own chiefs, than sufficed to keep them alivey

395

396

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book ‘The Elizabethan landlords had been scarcely lighter
_**_ masters. The peasants sowed the crop for the masters

1716

to reap; and it was not till the Puritans broke in
upon the pleasant ways of the old oppressors, and
instead of the sword of tyranny ruled Ireland with
a sword of justice, that any labourer could call his ©
work his own. The reign of Charles the Second,
while the Cromwellians were still in the land, was
looked back upon in the following century as an
island of prosperity in the ocean of general wretched-
ness. In Charles the Second’s time the absentees
were few. ‘The huge estates had not yet devoured
the smaller allotments, nor the plough and peasant’s
spade been laid by to rust, while the bogs crept back
over the meadows which the Cromwellians had re-
claimed. The poor Irish were brought for a gene-
ration into the same condition with their fellow
labourers in other parts of the world, and they had
the same encouragement to industry. But the
change was too shortlived to alter a type which.
had been moulded by centuries of injustice. The
Puritan farmers, under the pressure of Jeremy
Taylor and his brother bishops, sold their holdings.
Tyrconnell and Catholic ascendancy broke up the
scattered Protestant establishments, destroyed their
stock, and threw the country into a wilderness
again. Many never came back to resume their
profitless task, and the land jobbing finished the ruin
which the war had left incomplete. Whole counties
fell into the hands of favourites or speculators; and
the management was left to middlemen, who again
pared the peasant to the bone. The trade in but-
ter and salt meat, which England had graciously
consented to leave, with the vast profits, of which

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION,

I shall speak elsewhere, to be made out of wool
smuggling, tempted alike landowners and _lease-
holders to stock meadow and mountain with sheep
and black cattle. In 1727 the average size of the
farms, in the three southern provinces, ranged from
800 to 1,000 Irish acres. The tenants were for-
bidden in their leases to break or plough the soil.?
The people no longer employed were driven away
into holes and corners, and eked out a wretched
subsistence by potato gardens, or by keeping starv-
ing cattle of their own on the neglected bogs. Their
numbers increased, for they married early, and
they were no longer liable, as in the old times,
to be killed off like dogs in forays. They grew
up in compulsory idleness, encouraged once more
in their inherited dislike of labour, and enured to
wretchedness and hunger ;° and, on every failure of
the potato crop, hundreds of thousands were starv-
ing. Of corn very little was grown anywhere in
Ireland. It was imported from England, Holland,
Italy, and France, but in quantities unequal to any

1 ‘Heads of a bill for promoting
husbandry, 1727.’ MSS, Dublin
Castle.

2 ‘Besides this, of late years,
many landlords have begun a
practice to tie down their tenants
by express covenants, not to break
up or plough their land; by which
covenants, highly prejudicial to
the public good of the country,
our desolation and want of tillage
is increasing. —Jbrd. Swift also,
in his pamphlet on The Use of
Irish Manufactures, says, ‘The
landlords everywhere, by penal
clauses, prohibit their tenants from
ploughing.’

8 In 1729 the population of

Ireland was roughly guessed at a
million and a half. The author of
an Essay on Trade, published in
that year, and addressed to Lord
Carteret, gives this number as the
estimate currently received; but
he adds, that there was a difference
of opinion, and by a calculation of
his own raises it one-fourth higher.
The hearth-money collectors re-
turned in 1726, he said, 374,286
houses in Ireland as paying duty,
besides colleges, hospitals, barracks,
and other exempt tenements. In
all he thought there might be
416,000 houses, which, allowing
five inmates to each, would give a
population of over two millions,

(398

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book ‘sudden demand. The disgrace of allowing a nation

IT.

——-— of human beings to subsist under such conditions,

1716

forced itself at last on the conscience of the Irish

Parliament, and though composed of landowners who

were tempted as much as others to let their farms
on the terms most profitable to them, the House of
Commons in 1716, resolved unanimously to make an

effort for a’ general change of system, and to reclaim

both people and country by bringing back and stimu-
lating agriculture. They passed a vote that cove-
nants which prohibited the breaking soil with the
plough were impolitic, and should have no binding
force. They passed heads of a bill, which they
recommended with the utmost earnestness to the
consideration of the English Council, enjoining that
for every hundred acres which any tenant held, he

‘should break up and cultivate five; and, as a fur-
ther encouragement, that a trifling bounty should

be granted by the Government on corn grown for
exportation.

_ And what did England answer?—England which
was so wisely anxious for the prosperity of the Pro-

testant interest in Ireland ?— England which was

struggling so pathetically to make the Irish Peers and
gentlemen understand the things that belonged to
their peace. The bounty system might, or might —
not, have been well calculated to produce the effect:

which Ireland desired. It was the system, however,
which England herself practised with every industry

which she wished to encourage; and it was not on

economic grounds that the Privy Council rejected a

bill which they ought rather to have thrust of their

own accord on Irish acceptance. The real motive

was probably the same which had led to the suppres-

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

‘sion of the manufactures; the detestable opinion that,
to govern Ireland conveniently, Ireland must be kept
weak. Although the corn consumed in Ireland had
been for many years imported, the English farmers
were haunted with a terror of being undersold in
their own and foreign markets, by a country where
labour was cheap. A motive so iniquitous could not
be confessed—but the objections which the Council
was not ashamed to allege were scarcely less disgrace-
ful to them. The English manufacturers having se-
cured, as they supposed, the monopoly of Irish wool
on their own terms, conceived that the whole soil of
Ireland ought to be devoted to growing it. The
merchants of Tiverton and Bideford had recently
memorialised the Crown on the diminution of the
number of fleeces which reached them from the Irish
ports. They attributed the falling off to the con-
traband trade between Ireland and France, which
shortened their supplies, enhanced the price, and
gave the French weavers an advantage over them.’
Their conjecture, as will be hereafter shown, was
perfectly just. The contraband trade, as had been
foreseen, when the restrictions were imposed, had
become enormous. But the Commissioners of the
Irish Revenue were unwilling to confess to care-
lessness. They pretended that the Irish farmers,
forgetting their obligations to England, and thinking
wickedly only of their own interests, were diminish-
ing their stock of sheep, breaking up the soil, and
growing wheat and barley.? The allegation un-

1 ¢ Petitions from Tiverton and 2 “Reply of the Commissioners
Bideford, November 16 and De- of the Revenue, February, 1715.’
cember 30, 1714.’ MSS. Record bed.

Office.

399

CHAP.
Has
—--——”’

1716

400

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

spook happily was utterly untrue. But the mere rumour
Scan of a rise of industry in Ireland, created a panic in

1716

the commercial circles of England; although the
change existed as yet only in desire, and the sheep-
farming, with its attending miseries, was increasing
rather than diminishing. Stanhope, Walpole, Sunder-
land, and the other advisers of the English Crown,
met the overtures of the Irish Parliament in a spirit
of settled hostility, and with an infatuation which
now appears like insanity, determined to keep closed
the one remaining avenue by which Ireland could
have recovered a gleam of prosperity.

The heads of the bill were carried in Ireland with-
out a serious suspicion that it would be received
unfavourably. A few scornful members dared to
say, that England would consent to nothing which
would really benefit Ireland, but they were indig-
nantly silenced by the friends of the Government.
It was sent over by the Duke of Grafton, with the
fullest expectation that it would be returned. He
learnt first, with great suspicion, that ‘the Tillage
Bill was meeting with difficulties.’ ‘It was a mea-
sure,’ he said, ‘which the gentlemen of the country
had very rage at heart, as the only way left them
to improve their estates, while they were under such
hard restrictions in point of trade.’’ ‘It would be
unkind,’ he urged in a second more pressing letter,
‘to refuse Ireland anything not unreasonable in
itself.’ ‘He conceived the Corn Bill was not of that
nature, and therefore earnestly requested his majesty
would be pleased to indulge them in it.’?

1 ¢The Lords Justices to Lord 2 ¢The Lords Justices to Lord
Stanhope, January 22, 1716.’ Stanhope, Jan. 30.’ Ibid.
MSS. Record Office.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

Stanhope forwarded in answer a report of the

English Commissioners of Customs, which had the
merit of partial candour: —‘ Corn,’ they said, ‘ is sup-
posed to be at so low a rate in Ireland in comparison
with England, that an encouragement to the exporta-
tion of it would prejudice the English trade.’ ?

The Lords Justices returned the conclusive rejoin-
der that, for some years past, Ireland had imported
large quantities of corn from England, which would
have been impossible had her own corn been cheaper.
‘ They could not help representing,’ they said, ‘the con-
cern they were under to find that verified which those
all along foretold who obstructed the King’s affairs,
and which his friends had constantly denied, that all
the marks they had given of duty and affection, would
not procure one bill for the benefit of the nation.’ ”

The fact of the importation of corn from England
could not be evaded, but the commercial leaders were
possessed with a haunting terror of Irish rivalry,
which could not be exorcised. The bill was at last
transmitted, but a clause had been slipped in,® em-
powering the Council to suspend the premiums at
their pleasure; and the House of Commons in dis-
gust refused to take back a measure which had been
mutilated into a mockery.

Reintroduced in 1719, under the viceroyalty of the
Duke of Bolton, the bill met with a fate no better.
The Duke, like his predecessors, gave it his warmest
support. He showed that the objections of the Com-

1 ¢Tord Stanhope to the Lords _ surreptitious manceuvre in Ireland

Justices, March 2.’ MSS. Re- itself after the heads left the

cord Office. House of Commons. ‘Duke of
2¢The Lords Justices to Stan- Bolton to Secretary Craggs, August
hope, May 22, 1716.’ Lbvd. 14,1719.’ bed.

8 It had been done by some
VOL. I. DD

401

CHAP,
TLE
Sia

1716

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

missioners of Customs were perfectly childish. The
proposed bounties were but half those which were
actually given in England, and the relative prices
in the two countries made the under-selling of the
English by the Irish growers a complete impossibility.’
The ineffectuality of an argument so conclusive
showed that the avowed motive, bad as it was, yet was
not the real one. Stanhope and Secretary Craggs
gave an evasive answer, that the House of Commons
in Ireland had already rejected the bill when it was
offered them, and this time it was not returned at all.

Too inclined already to a passive acquiescence
in the destiny which England was forcing on them,
drawn by their immediate interests in the direction
of the convenient sheep-breeding, which the con-
traband trade made so profitable, and ‘driven,’ as
Swift bitterly described it, ‘into barbarity for the
sake of peace,’? the Irish gentlemen might have been
excused if they had now given up the battle; and
indeed each year saw the ranks thinning of those
who still struggled against the destiny of the country.
Many a landlord who, with good examples round him,
and in a wholesome social atmosphere, would have
lived usefully and honourably, and have made Ire-
land the better for his presence, was sinking down
into a drinking, swearing, duel fighting, scandalous

being. But the few who refused to despair fought
desired, can never sell to the same

1 «The price of corn is generally
advantage as the English, nor can

as high in Dublin as in London.

A bushel of English wheat is one-
fifth heavier than Irish, and so
with other grain. The bounties
of the Irish bill are but half of
those in England; so that it is
impossible for the exporters of
Irish corn to undersell the British,
but directly contrary, for the Irish,
though they have the premium

even expect markets but when
corn is so very scarce and dear
in England that they cannot be
supplied from thence.—‘ Duke of
Bolton to Secretary Craggs, August
14,1719.’ MSS. Record Office.

* Tracts on Irish affairs. Swift's
Works, vol. vii.

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

manfully on ; and, eight years later, though direct
encouragement they could obtain none, yet after a
famine, in which thousands of the peasantry had
died, they did succeed in wringing out of the English
Council a consent that the prohibitory clauses in the
leases should be cancelled, and that in every farm a
certain small portion should be under the plough.
After a great potato failure, when the roads were
covered with starving beggars, and in every cabin
there was one dead or dying, the Irish Parliament
at last did at length, in the year 1728, obtain thus
much in the way of concession.
instalment of justice and common sense they owed
less to themselves than to the intercession of Arch-
bishop Boulter, who, though unable to persuade his
brother prelates to consent to the emancipation of
the Dissenters, succeeded in persuading the Duke
of Newcastle that, to condemn the Irish to recurring
famine, was neither safe nor wise.’

matters of state, whether England
followed it or not, was always on
the side of liberality and justice.
Archbishop though he was, he
was free from the cant of his
profession. Throughout his volu-

1 ¢The Primate to the Duke of
Newcastle, March 7,1728.’ MSS.
Record Office. I quote from the
original. Boulter was an Eng-
lish Whig, and had been Bishop of
Bristol. He succeeded Lindsay as

And even this poor -

Primate in 1724, and was, for many
years, the chief adviser of the Eng-
lish Government in Irish affairs.
He is evil spoken of in patriotic
histories as the upholder of the
English interest, and the advocate
of the promotion of Englishmen to
Irish offices. His prejudice in
favour of his countrymen was
owing simply to the inveterate
wrong-headedness in Church mat-
ters of the Irish clergy and men of
rank, His main object, of which
he never lost sight, was the repeal
of the Test Act. His advice on

minous correspondence the name
of God scarcely appears, if at all.
Yet his practical excellence would
have gained him credit had it
been found in a person more spiri-
tually-minded as the visible fruit
of doctrinal piety. In the famine
of 1741 he fed thousands of the
Dublin poor with meal for many
weeks at his single expense, spend-
ing, as a brother bishop wonder-
ingly said, ‘no less than 25/1 a
day.—‘The Bishop of Dromore
to ——, April 18, 1741.’ Ibid.

DOD YZ

404

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

BooK But neither can the history of Ireland be under-
IL.
——-— stood, nor can the conduct of the English Govern-

1719

ment on the one hand, and that of the Protestant
Colony on the other, be equitably judged, without a
knowledge of the conditions and habits of another
section of the Irish people. The representatives of
the great Catholic families who preserved their es-
tates, under the Articles of Galway and Limerick, had
either sold them and gone abroad, and were serving
in the French or Spanish armies, or had conformed
to the Establishment, or else had taken shelter from
the penal laws behind some Protestant friend or kins-
man, and had escaped molestation by withdrawing
into privacy. In Ireland itself, few or no Catholic
gentlemen of high birth or connexion cared to put
themselves forward in situations which would draw
attention to their humiliation, and they preferred the
repose of dignified seclusion to noisy or complaining
agitation. The names of men like Lord Antrim,
Lord Kenmare, Lord Fingal, Lord Athenry, or Sir
Stephen Rice, are unheard of in scenes such as those
which I am about to describe. But there was a rank
below them, men of moderate property, small squires
or squireens; large middlemen, holding long leases ;
scattered over all the country—Catholics in reality,
if affecting Protestantism to escape the inconye-
niences attaching to their faith. Again~ there were
ons and grandsons of the old families, who had been

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION,

dispossessed under the Act of Settlement, still calling

405

CHAP.

themselves gentlemen, too proud to work, too poor —~—~

to live honourably without it; all together forming a
section of society the least reputable, the least man-
ageable, the least worthy in a human or intelligible
sense of any class perhaps calling itself civilized in
the known world. ‘These were the men who, in old
times, had formed the retinues of the robber chiefs,
or had sought for glory and the praise of bards and
harpers, by driving their neighbours’ cows, or burn-
ing down their neighbours’ haggards. These were
the men who, in the long desperate struggle of the
Trish leaders to keep at bay the growing rule of Eng-
land, had fought at the side of Shan O’Neill, or
Desmond, or Tyrone; and when the English sword
proved at last the sharpest, had earned pardon and
reward by bringing their comrades’ heads in bloody
sacksful to the conquerors. These were the men
who, when the Lords of the Pale, and the Earls of
Ormond and Antrim would have taken Ireland out
of the hands of the Parliamentarians, and sought
redress of their wrongs by loyalty to their lawful
King, stained an honourable if mistaken cause with
innocent blood, and made the name of Irish rebellion
for ever infamous by the massacre of 1641. These
were the men who, when the ten infernal years of civil
war were ended in confiscation and forfeiture, avenged
the wrongs of their bleeding country by midnight
murders as Rapparees and Tories, or else as cosherers
were not ashamed to be fed in idleness and vice by
the tenants of the lands which they had lost. These
too are the same men whom we have known in later
years, either as the spendthrifts who still lived by
robbery in the shape of debts which they could never

1719

406

BOOK
II

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

pay; as the hard riders, gamblers, drunkards, duel-

—--— lists; the rakes of Mallow, the half savage, half hu-

1727

morous Irish blackguards that figure in the legends
of the first years of the present century, as the
professional political agitators, as the place-hunters
under the disguise of patriots, the heroes of the tragi-
comedy of the cabbage garden, or the Fenians of the
raid of the ‘ Red River.’ |

Of such men as these, all of them essential
children of anarchy, recruited by idle younger
brothers, disreputable members of otherwise honour-
able families, landless heads of attainted houses,
who lived in dreams of a free Irish Parliament, and
of reinstatement in their old domains, there were
always many thousands in Ireland, who formed an
element perpetually active for evil. Had industry
been allowed to grow, and to bring with it, as it must
have brought, order and law, and steady occupa-
tion, they would have disappeared before civiliza-
tion like the Red Indians, or like the wild animals
of the forest. In the wretchedness to which Ire-
land was degraded, they throve as in their natural
element.

Arthur Young has drawn their portraits as he saw
them in 1770 :—

‘I must now come,’ he says, ‘ to a class of persons
to whose conduct it is almost entirely owing, that the
character of that nation has not that lustre abroad
which it will soon merit. This is the class of | ttle
country gentlemen, tenants who drink their claret
by means of profit rents, jobbers in farms, bucks,
your fellows with round hats edged with gold, who
hunt in the day, get drunk in the evening, and fight
the next morning. These are the men among whom

PROTESTANT ADMINISTRATION.

drinking, wrangling, quarrelling, fighting, ravishing,
&c., are found as in their native soil.’?

Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona.

These gentlemen were flourishing in full vigour
under Queen Anne and the first George. Pictures
of them, more or less accurate, can be put together
out of the records in Dublin Castle, and they and
their doings will form the subject of the following
book.

1 Young’s Tour in Ireland, vol. ii. Appendix, p. 118.

408

BOOK
II.
—,—

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

IELOLO RACV INGE:

tO

GHAR Bik at.

IRISH IDEAS.
SECTION I.

Wuen the Pretender attempted a descent on Scot-
land in 1708, and the French fleet was to have come
to Galway to make a diversion in Ireland in his
favour, preparations had been made for an extensive
Catholic rising throughout Connaught. The Scotch
expedition failed. The French did not show them-
selves on the Irish coast. The exclusion of the Pres-
byterians from the militia, had given the intending
insurgents a tempting opportunity ; but the Catholics
knew that, unless supported by corresponding move-
ments elsewhere, even if successful at the beginning,
they would have to deal once more with the whole
strength of England ; and they were too prudent to
risk another desperate struggle single-handed. But
though their hopes were quenched for the moment,
the purpose was not abandoned. In 1711, when the
Tory ministers came into power, the Pretender’s
chances seemed again favourable. Rumours of a
restoration were flying fast and thick in the Irish
air. Large companies of friars were reported as
riding through the Western counties from village to
village, telling the people ‘that the ould abbeys were

IRISH IDEAS.

about to be set up again.’ There were ‘ more of them
than had been seen for many years.’ They were
well-dressed and well mounted, mysterious appari-
tions, risking the dangers of the law for some unas-
certained purpose, yet creating, wherever they went,
the vague ferment of excitement and expectation of
change.’ They had found the benefit in the last war
of having Connaught entirely to themselves. Estates
there had been bought in the interval by English
speculators, who had intruded themselves into Ros-
common, Mayo, and even Connemara itself. En-
couraged by these neighbours, more than one of the
old Galway families had deserted the national cause,
turned Protestant, and gone over to the enemy. If
there was to be another rebellion, a first step to-
wards success would be to purge the country both of
the home renegades and these dangerous aliens.
Political speculations were reinforced by agrarian
grudges, which created instruments ready made to
the hand.

Between the scanty half-savage inhabitants of wild
districts, who claim a right to land which they will
not cultivate, and civilized men who desire to make
a rational use of it, there is always an irreconcilable
feud. The improver buys an estate, with a popula-
tion who have lived upon it from immemorial time
in their own barbarous way. He perceives that, with
more intelligent treatment, he can treble the value of
his purchase, and raise the condition of his tenants
by compelling them to work. ‘They have no desire
to be raised. They deny his right to meddle with
them. Heclears them off, and introduces others who
will do as he tells them; and there is at once war—

1 ‘Miscellaneous Depositions, 1711. Co. Roscommon.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

war in which each side believes that justice is on its
side, war which can end only in the extermination of
one or the other party. The English settlers had
taken possession of vast tracts of mountains, built
enclosures, raised vast stocks of sheep and black
cattle and established Scotch herdsmen, necessarily in
exposed situations, to take charge of them. Gentle-
men of the old blood—Sir Walter Blake especially—
were following the example, adopting English habits,
and, still worse, the English creed. Before the ex-
ample spread, or the new system took deeper root,
the Irish determined to make an end of it.

The campaign opened in Eyre Connaught, a part
of Connemara, In the early winter of 1711, large
armed parties in white shirts traversed the country
in the long nights, ‘ houghing and destroying the
cattle belonging to persons who were unacceptable to
the Irish as having taken lands to farm.’! From Eyre
Connaught the movement spread with the mysterious
rapidity of a plan carefully concerted. It swept
along Lough Corrib and Lough Mask, through Mayo,
past Castlebar to Sligo; then down through Roscom-
mon and Galway, and south into Clare. Notices were
dropped at the shepherds’ cottages, or were nailed
against the doors, informing them that war was de-
clared against the stockmaster, that it would be con-
tinued till the stock was destroyed, and bidding them
stir at their peril. All night long would be heard the
roaring of the wretched cattle, as they fell under the
knife; wild cries, and ‘volleys of shots from bogs
and mountains, and the huzzas of the Houghers.’ ”

1 “Petition to the Duke of Or- of Cloyne, February 7, 1712.’
mond from twenty Gentlemen of Jbid. ‘Sir William Caulfield to
Galway, Nov.1711. MSS.Dublin. Secretary Dawson, February 16,’

2 ‘Edward Crowe tothe Bishop bid,

IRISH IDEAS.

Ait

If the settlers or their servants ventured out, they CHAP:
found their houses burning when they returned. —~—~

At daybreak the hill sides were seen strewn with
carcases of oxen and sheep lying dead in hundreds or
in thousands. The bands by whom the slaughter was
accomplished seemed to have started from the earth.
Nothing could be traced to the local peasantry. They
professed mere ignorance, amazement, and terror. It
was found only that, wherever a butchery had taken
place, they were gathered in crowds on the morning
following to buy the bodies, which the owners were
glad to dispose of at any price which they could get.
The warning letters were signed ‘ Evan;’ but who
Evan was none could guess, for he was omnipresent
in four counties. Here and there suspected persons
were arrested, but no evidence could be found
against them. The story which they generally told
was, that the gangs at work were ‘King James’s
old soldiers,’ and that the object was to harass Con-
naught ‘till an army could arrive which they ex-
pected from France.’ Beyond question it was the
work of Catholics, for Protestants were the only suf-
ferers. But whether it was really a prelude to a
rebellion, whether it was an agrarian attack on the
grazing system, or whether it was revenge for the
passing of the penal laws, no certain conclusion could
be arrived at. The accounts of the attitude of the
priests were contradictory. There was no doubt that
they knew the perpetrators, and as little that they
would tell nothing. Sir William Caulfield, who
hated them, confessed that he could find no proof of
their guilt. They would have preferred, naturally
enough, he said, to see people on the land instead of
stock ; but in words, so far as he could hear, ‘they

Vit

412

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

had condemned the barbarous method by which the

ca ground was being cleared.’ Priests at Tuam, on the

1711

other hand, had been heard to pray ‘ for Evan’s good
success. An Augustinian friar, at Kilmore, had
desired all his congregation to join with him in im-
ploring a blessing on Evan’s head. Another father
had read one of Evan’s proclamations in the pulpit,
and preached a sermon in his praise as the poor man’s
friend.’ The High Sheriff of Galway arrested Dr.
Maddin, the priest of Loughrea, as one of the ring-
leaders. The mob rose in fury, surrounded the house
where the priest was confined, and would have torn
the sheriff in pieces but for the appearance of a
troop of dragoons.

The original mystery was never completely un-
ravelled. The English landowners were few and
widely scattered. The rising was so sudden, the
surprise so complete, and the destruction so uni-
versal, that they were unable to combine or collect
at any one point sufficient force to attack the
houghing parties at their work. They had to lie
still behind barricaded doors, and congratulate them-
selves that the attack this time was on their pro-
perty and not upon their lives.

On one occasion only a gang was fallen in with,
which showed that the work was directed by men of
intelligence and education.

At the end of November, 1711, a soldier belonging
to the garrison, who was shooting near Galway, was
stopped by a number of men with blackened faces,
who took his gun from him. He observed that they
all spoke English. The leader wore several heavy

1 ‘George Fowler to the Archbishop of Tuam, March 8, 1712.’ MSS.
Dublin.

IRISH IDEAS.

gold rings. He produced from his pocket a hand-
some chased flask and drank some wine from it. He
had a bag full of Spanish coin, a handful of which he
offered his prisoner, promising that if he would join
the band he would make a gentleman of him. Appa-
rently he was one of the better born Rapparees, with
the courtesies of his profession; for when the soldier
declined his offers, he gave him back his gun, saying
that he had more arms already than he needed, and
bidding him go tell the Governor of Galway that, if the
garrison meddled with him, he would burn the town
to the gates, hough the soldiers as he had done the
cattle, and carry the officers’ heads away on pikes.’
The vast area of country which was wasted proves
that the devastation was the work of many hands.
Very few of the perpetrators were detected, and still
fewer were punished. One or two were executed.
Others, though caught red-handed, were acquitted by
the juries. Throughout Connaught the Irish Catholic
gentry combined to prevent any effective prosecution
_ or discovery; and, if innocent themselves, they proved
that their sympathies were entirely on the side of
those whom they knew to be guilty. To stop the
destruction, and, if possible, unravel the mystery, the
Government at length offered a free pardon to all
who would confess and give securities for their
future good behaviour. The Houghers’ object was
substantially accomplished. Terror had done its
work. Connaught was recovered to the Irish for
half a century, for no stock breeders would risk
their capital for mere industrial use in a country
where it could be thus swept away with impunity,
and those who remained fell, for protection, into Irish
habits, and reared their sheep for the smuggling wool

413

CHAP.
i
——,—_”

veel

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

trade, which the native ordinances were pleased to
permit. Sixteen young gentlemen in Galway then
gave in their names, having nothing to fear, and
nothing more to lose. The most substantial and most
respected of the Irish proprietors of the West became
bail for them.' One of a similar party in Clare,
who surrendered under the proclamation, volunteered
a detailed account of the proceedings. Connor
O’Loghlin, son of Rory O’Loghlin, a Catholic gentle-
man of good birth and station, said that his cousin,
Captain Charles O’Loghlin, after making him take an
oath of secresy, invited him to join ‘in houghing the
cattle of the merchants and new comers that were
engrossing the lands.’ He, his cousin, and seven or
eight companions, made up the gang. They did not
confine themselves to the settlers, for the first object
of their attentions was one of the purest Milesians in
Ireland, Sir Donogh O’Brien, who was a Protestant.
Sir Donogh, on second thoughts, they concluded not
to meddle with. He was capable of ‘summoning all
the priests in the country,’ demanding an account from
them of the doings of their parishioners, and after-

1 List of persons that rendered Richard Kearigane

themselves as Houghers in the Richard Pearle

county of Galway, pursuant to the Herbert O’Flaherty

proclamation, and entered into Francis Murphy

recognizances under John Stanton, John Armstrong

Esq. :— Henry Joyce.
Martin MacDonogh, of Ballydaly All these persons were gentlemen,
Darby O’Flaherty and entered into recognizances—
Bryan King 100/. each for themselves, and their

| James Naghten securities 50/. each.
Denis Fahy Among the gentlemen who be-
John McMoyle Burke came bail for them I find the names
James Caheron of Edmund McDonogh, Bryan Fla-
Daniel Grany herty, Godfrey Daly, Robert Blake,
Nicholas Supple and Edmund Burke. MSS. Dub-

Bryan Morris lin Castle.

IRISH IDEAS.

wards ‘of taking account with such.’ Sir Walter
Blake, another Irish conformist, was a safer victim.
They killed three hundred ‘ great rams and weathers’
on Sir Walter Blake’s estate; afterwards, armed with
guns and swords, they stole away at night by bridle-
paths into the Galway mountains, took up their quar-
ters at a friend’s house, where they were handsomely
entertained ; and, after a day or two of feasting and
hard drinking, went to their work again, and cleared
the adjoining farms.’ The careless recklessness of the
party showed how needless was disguise, how com-
pletely they felt themselves secure in the sympathy
of the county.’

For the present the work was effectually done.
No cattle-farmer remained in the West save those
who consented to submit to the laws and customs of
Connaught. The lesson was repeated when necessary.
Forty years later Lord St. George attempted to plant
a part of Connemara with Protestant families, build-
ing them decent houses, barns, stalls, and cattle-sheds.
No Catholic tenants appear to have been removed to
make way for them; but the mere presence of these
heretical strangers was intolerable. The Houghers
rose, levelled houses and outbuildings, swearing that
no Protestant should settle in the district. In this
instance the guiding hand could be traced with cer-
tainty. ‘The priests,’ wrote a gentleman on the
spot, ‘told the people they were contending for the
Holy Catholic religion.’ °

1 ¢ Jnformation of Connor O’Loghlin, Lieutenant Markahan,

O’Loghlin, sworn before Robert
Miller, Justice of the Peace, 1713.’
MSS. Dublin Castle.

2 The deposition ends with the
statement of young O’Loghlin, that
allthe aforesaid persons—Captain

Ensign Connor Hogan, William
Kempsey, Bryan Hogan, &c.—were
‘Papists to his certain knowledge.’

5 ¢ Anthony Miles to the Earl of
Kildare, July 30, 1757.’ Church
MSS. Dublin Castle.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Later yet, and falling into a lower circle, the
Houghers became identified with the Whiteboys, and

spread over the four provinces.

Unable to shake off

their enemies by open force, they could at least make
the land, which the Protestants had usurped, a barren
possession to its new owners."

1 The following proclamation is
a specimen of the literary capabili-
ties of the later Houghers, men of
inferior station to the O’Loghlins of
Clare, but showing traces of the
classical education given in the
hedge schools :—
‘Hougherstown, Co. Wexford,
July, 1779.
‘Tsaac Cullimore,

‘We, the undernamed per-
sons, doth insert these lines here to
give you notice that we are still in
very good health, thanks be to God!
and doth intend to see justice and
equality rectified in our barony,
though much oppressed by domi-
neering Quakers. So we dance
with joy, and reason we have to see
your brother John the Atheist
inhumed, and likewise doth deter-
mine to pay the doleful Reedstown
a triumphing visit once more—and,
that before this day sennight, and
please God, to hough, maim, and
slain the oxen which are in your
possession on said lands under the
protection of M. M., and will erect
an altar on said lands, and offer
them as victims to the Infernal
Gods, who will conduce him with
security into Charons custody, who,
in his magnificent boat, will trans-
port him over the river Styx into
Plutos region, and Devil speed him
and all the precedents of his infernal
generation.

‘ So we suppose that you thought
we to have been dead, and to have
entirely omitted our antient customs

—we have been obscure this time
past and on that account you
have sent down cattle and after-
wards a herd to produce bene-
fit out of said lands. But as long
as the Almighty God will leave us
breath to draw, you shall never reap
the value of one farthing out of the
above-mentioned farm. So, Isaac,
we take the more easy way to con-
duce you to the state of obtaining
God’s grace, and to come in unity
with your friends and neighbours.
So, when we will transact this
precedent matter, if you do not
become more tranquill and mild,
you shall quickly be despatched,
and shall be dismissed to a D. T.8.,
who will punish and smash you
according to your cruelty to your
clients in the parish of Tacumshaw.

‘And likewise, if you do not
desist from taking lands, and give
up them farms which you have in
the said parish, Isaac nor his family
shall be no more, and Neemstown
in like manner shall become a
Reedstown.

‘So your inimical antagonists
remain in good health,

‘John Hougher, Peter Burn-
stack, Phil Slasher, Patrick
Fearnot, Columm Kill, Syl-
vester Quaker-rouser, Ed-
mund Smart, Edward Stout,

and several others too laborious to
insert.

‘This to infernal Isaac Cullimore,
of Neemstown, Wexford.’ MSS,
Dublin Castle.

YRISH IDEAS.

SECTION II.

THE immunity from ordinary crime, which so honour-
ably distinguishes modern Ireland, was no charac-
teristic of its condition in the last century. To settle
differences by fighting had been ingrained, by many
centuries of unbroken habit, into the temper of the
people. When private wars and forays were no
longer possible, duelling took their place, and was so
frequent and deadly, that it was proposed, at one time,
to make the survivor responsible for the maintenance
of his victim’s family. Duelling, and the strange
forms which it assumed, will be treated of in a future
chapter. At present, the reader’s attention is to be
called to acts of violence of another and yet more re-
markable kind, which, like duelling,were sanctioned by
public opinion; and, notwithstanding repeated efforts
of the Irish Parliament, were practically shielded
from punishment. The Houghers revenged the wrongs
of their country by mere destruction. Another set
of young gentlemen of the Catholic persuasion were
in the habit of recovering equivalents for the lands
of which they considered themselves to have been
robbed, and of recovering souls at the same time to
Holy Church, by carrying off young Protestant girls
of fortune to the mountains, ravishing them with the
most exquisite brutality, and then compelling them

to go through a form of marriage, which a priest was -

always in attendance ready to celebrate. The High

Church party in the English and Irish Governments

could not bring themselves to treat a sacrament as
VOL. I. EE

417

CHAP.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

invalid however irregularly performed, and the unfor-
tunate victims were thus driven, in the majority of
instances, to make the best of their situation, and
accept the fate from which there was no legal escape.
In vain Parliament passed bill upon bill making
abduction felony, and threatening penalties of the:
harshest kind against the officiating ecclesiastics. So.
long as the marriages themselves were regarded as
binding, the families injured preferred to cover their
disgrace, and refused to prosecute. The heroes of
these performances were often highly connected.
Political influence was brought to bear for them, and
when convicted, which was extremely seldom, the
Crown pardoned them.' The priests, secure in the
protection of the people, laughed at penalties which .
existed only on paper, and encouraged practices
which brought converts to the Faith, and put money
in their own pockets.* High sheriffs, magistrates,
and grand juries took their cue from the Castle, and
hesitated to embroil themselves with their Catholic
neighbours when they knew that they would not be

supported. If occasionally, in indignation at some

marriages as are made void by this

1 Arthur Young says that there
was but one instance on record,
where a person guilty of forcible
abduction had been executed. This
was probably James Cotter, whose
case will be presently mentioned.

2 ‘The Commonsallege,’ I believe
with truth, ‘that the priests direct
their people to marry Protestants,
as experience shows that, in those
cases, the whole family ‘become
Papists.’—‘The Duke of Devon-
shire to the Duke of Newcastle,
December 25, 1743.’ ‘ We have
reason to believe the priests are,
in a great measure, supported by
gratuities on occasion of such

‘bill.”’—‘ Memorandum of the Irish
‘Council on sending to England “the —
Heads of a Bill to make more effec-
tual an Act to prevent the taking
away and marrying children against
the wishes of their parents and
guardians.” ’—MSS. Dublin Castle.
1745. In a statute passed on this
subject degraded clergymen are °
said to have officiated on these
occasions as well as priests. In
the very many instances which I -
have examined, Ihave found only .
priests to have been eoncerned; ©
but perhaps I have been unfor- °
tunate.

IRISH IDEAS.

exceptionally furious outrage, they attempted to

exert themselves, the faint assistance which they
were allowed even from the army, when there were
troops in the neighbourhood, taught them that in

future their safest course was to remain passive. A >

remarkable instance occurred in Tipperary in 1754.

A young lady had been carried off and violated with .
the usual brutalities. She escaped to her relations ;—
the priest who married her was taken and identified; .

and the lady was bound over to prosecute at Limerick.
Mr. Lovitt, the high sheriff, undertook to convey the
prisoner thither from Clonmel. There were several
companies of soldiers in the town, and he applied to
the commanding officer for an escort. The officer
said that his orders were in no case to grant more
than a corporal’s guard. He would give him twelve
men and no more. The high sheriff in vain insisted
that five times as many would not carry a priest
through Tipperary as a prisoner, if his life was sup-
posed to be in danger. The officer had his instruc-
tions from Dublin, and could not exceedthem. Three
thousand people gathered on the road. They stopped
and searched every coach and chair that passed, to
find the lady whom they meant to murder to silence
her evidence. ‘The sheriff’s party was attacked, the
under-sheriff was half-killed, the soldiers were beaten
and dispersed, and the priest was rescued; while such
was the general rage at the affront to the sacred per-
son of this reverend gentleman, that Mr. Damer wrote

to the Secretary that no Protestant in the country,»

who slept in a thatched house, dared speak or act in
such matters.’
Violence and paralysis of authority will be called
1 MSS. Dublin Castle. 1754.
EE 2

A20 .

BOOK
Ill.
—-~———

, 1756

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the consequence of unjust legislation. Had the
Catholics been treated equitably, it may be said, they
would have been orderly members of society. The
answer is that crimes such as these were the normal
growth of Ireland; they had descended from a time
when Protestantism was an unknown word, and
Popery and Irish ideas were supreme in the land.
They were the native growth of the soil, which yielded
only to higher culture where the English sword gave
strength to English law. Abduction may mean any-
thing, between the escape of romantic lovers from the
tyranny of parents, and the most villanous of ima-
ginable atrocities. A few stories taken almost at
random from the huge mass of depositions suffice to
show that, under any circumstances and under any
conceivable form of civilized government, the per-
formers in them, principals and accessories, secular
and spiritual, could have been only fit for the gallows.
These outrages were no deeds of stealthy revenge
upon oppressors by men whom injustice had driven
mad. They were acts of war done in open day, in
the face of the whole people, and supported by their
sympathy.

A common and comparatively harmless specimen is
to be found in the deposition of Mr. Armstrong, a
Tipperary clergyman: ‘ Mr. Armstrong said that, in
the midst of divine service in the forenoon of June 6,
1756, Henry Grady, with several ruffians, arrived with
a blunderbuss, guns, pistols, and other arms, came
into the church of the town of Tipperary, and, with
their arms cocked and presented, called out that none
should offer to stir, that if any offered to stir from »
their seats they would shoot. The said Grady ad-
vanced up the aisle with a cocked pistol presented in

IRISH IDEAS.

‘421

his hand; on which the informant went from the oHap.
reading-desk, spoke to said Grady, and entreated him Rye

to retire and desist. On which he retired once or
twice to the door, and then advanced with two of his
accomplices, who were not known by the informant ;
but one had a gun cocked in his hands, and swore he
would shoot the informant, and the other had a gun
in one hand and a hanger drawn in the other, with
which he struck the informant on the arm, and cut
through the surplice and gown. Immediately after
Grady and one of the said persons went into the pew
in which Miss Susannah Grove sate, and carried her
off by force. Most of all the ruffians who were armed
retired with their arms presented, and their faces
towards the congregation, till they came to the church
door, which they locked, and carried off the key. . .'

Personal passion rarely or never shows in these
brutal stories. Young girls were not the only victims.
Elizabeth Dobbin, a wealthy widow, at Belfast, sixty-
two years old, was one night seized in her bed,
dragged downstairs, flung upon a car, which was
waiting in the street, and conducted by an armed
party to a house in Carrickfergus. A priest was
introduced dressed as a beggar. One of the ravishers
presented himself as the intended husband, who
answered her agonized entreaties to be spared by a
threat that, if she refused to marry him, ‘he would
tear her limb from limb.’ She was then stripped
and violated, one of the confederates ‘standing the
while at the bedside with a drawn sword in his hand.’”

Catherine Stackpoole, another elderly widow of good
fortune, living in Cork, was disturbed in her sleep by

1 MSS. Dublin Castle. March 2, 1741” MSS. Dublin
--2 Case of Elizabeth Dobbin, Castle, a

1741

422

.BOOK
Il.
——_——

1757

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

a clamour at her door. On rising to enquire the

meaning of the disturbance, she found herself in the
arms of Mr. Austin Fitzgerald, a gentleman of un-
blemished Geraldine descent. Fitzgerald hurried her

down the stairs, tied her on a horse in her nightgown,

and galloped off with her to the nearest mountains
with a dozen young fellows as his escort. She was
taken down at a lonely cabin, and compelled, under
the same threats of instant death, to go through a
form of marriage. A priest, ready prepared, pre-
sented himself, said a few words, and declared the
ceremony complete. J itzgerald was then left alone in
possession of his prize. A desperate struggle followed,
a scene indescribable here though laid accurately in
all its details before the Castle authorities. The
bridegroom ultimately took flight, bitten, scratched,
and torn. The woman escaped in the darkness, made
her way back to Cork, and at a cost of 500/. to her-
self succeeded in bringing Fitzgerald to trial. He
was convicted on the clearest evidence and was sen-
tenced to death. The execution was delayed. Ap-
plications for pardon were put in by his relations.
The high-spirited lady wrote with her own hand to
the Duke of Devonshire, who was then viceroy, re-
lating her story, and insisting on justice being done.
The Duke gave her fair words, but month followed ~
month, and no warrant came down to send Fitzgerald
to the scaffold. At length the outraged woman died
of her injuries, and the Duke of Bedford, who had
succeeded to the government, recommended the ra-
visher to the mercy of the Crown."

Let the reader multiply these instances by many

1 ¢Case of Catherine Stackpoole, 17 57.’ MSS, Ireland. Record Office.

IRISH IDEAS.

423

hundreds ; let him understand that the cases which CHAP.
“came before the courts were but a fraction of those, —~——

which shame and dread of notoriety kept concealed,
‘and that universally there were the same accompanti-
ments of unmanly brutality, and he will form some
notion of this aspect of Irish life in the last century.

A family of Protestants, named Keris, were settled
on a farm in Clare. The father and mother were
in prosperous circumstances. They had a single
daughter named Honor, a girl of fourteen, who was
the heiress of their wealth. One afternoon in March
1733, two gentlemen, a Mr. Thomas Lucas and a Mr.
Edmond Stock, came to the Keris’s house; and in-
timated that some acquaintances of theirs, one of
the O’Loghlins, perhaps the Hougher, and a certain
William Blood, intended to break into their house
that night and carry Honor to the hills. The
object of the visit was to frighten the mother, and
to induce her to allow them to remain to: protect
her and her child. ‘The wolves had stolen in in the
shape of watch-dogs. There were no police in those
days. At nine o'clock in the evening the door
was burst open. Blood with two companions rushed
into the room where the family were sitting, struck
the father to the ground with a bludgeon, and
looked round for his victim. At the first alarm
‘she had flown upstairs. Blood proceeded to search
the house with a candle in one hand and a pistol
in the other, saying that he would shoot any-
‘one that stirred. He found the child cowering in
the corner of a loft, brought her down fainting, and
‘swore he would carry her away dead or alive. The
wretched mother flung her arms about her. The
ruffian seized the mother by the throat and, with an

1733

424

BOOK
RL;

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

oath, dashed her to the ground. The. gentlemen

~——— who had stood by, affecting terror, threw open the win-

1733

dows, and bade the girl spring out, where there were
confederates waiting to seize her. The women ser-
vants now ran in to help their mistress. The brave
young fellows set upon them with their sticks, and
beat and mangled them till they fell on the floor.
The father lay stunned and senseless; the mother’s
clothes were torn from her back; and, amidst curses
and yells of triumph, Honor Keris was dragged to
the door, flung upon a horse like a sack, and borne
away in the moonlight. The ravishers stopped at a
cabin a mile and a half distant, to let her recover her
senses. There the mother, who had followed scream-
ing along the road, came up with them. She found
-her daughter shivering with cold and terror, and
implored them, in the name of mercy, if they would not
give her up, yet to let her rest for the night where she
was. That was not in the bargain, one of them cried,
snatched her up, tossed her back on the saddle,
and set off again ata gallop. By rare fortune this
girl was saved. The father, having recovered his
senses and finding himself alone, made his way to the
house of a Mr. Ross Lewin, an English magistrate
in the neighbourhood. Lewin mounted half a dozen
of his servants, went off in pursuit, and overtook
the ravishers before they could reach the mountains.
The young gentlemen did not care to face Lewin’s
pistols; they dropped their prey, insolently saying,
however, as they rode off, that they would have her
again some day, and Lewin’s own daughter besides.’
Each magistrate depended on his own resources to
enforce the law. The parties were well known ; they

1 Dublin MSS. Dublin Castle, 1733.

IRISH IDEAS.

did not even care to conceal their identity; but there
was no force available to arrest them. The Keris
family lived in nightly fear of a new attack—of find-
ing their home in flames, or their cattle houghed. But
no one was punished. Authority was as powerless in
Clare, as in the days of the chiefs. Law, indeed, all
over Ireland was a phantom, which few had cause to
fear who dared defy it. Anarchy, not tyranny, was
Ireland’s scourge; and the medicine which she needed
was not concession, but the forgotten hand of Crom-
well.

Escape on these occasions was the exception.
Almost always successful outrage was carried to the
utmost limit of enormity.

Rebecca White was an orphan girl residing in her
own house, on her own property at Cappagh, co.
Tipperary. As such she was a tempting prey to the
young blades and bucks of the neighbourhood. An
uncle lived with her as guardian, but was a poor pro-
tector. On a dark night, in the middle of the winter
of 1718-19, three Fitzgeralds, a William Brien, and
several other persons, all described as gentlemen,
armed to the teeth, with swords, guns, and pistols,
swooped down on Cappagh. The door was broken
open. The women who, knowing the object of the
visit, threw themselves in the way, were knocked
down and kicked into quietness. Rebecca White
was torn out of bed in her shift, dashed against the
wall to stupefy her; and to make her easier to handle,
and was then borne away many miles, to an empty
police barrack, among the bogs on the edge of county
Limerick. The key of the house was found, and the
door opened. A young unregistered priest came for-
ward as usual ready to perform the sacrament, and

426

* BOOK
Guat
—-_

“1719

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the whole party then surrounded their prisoner, who
had partially recovered from her swoon, and deliber-

‘ately told her in a manner evidently serious, that, un-
less she consented to marry one of the Fitzgeralds,

they would all violate her in turn, and then murder her.

With this announcement ringing in her ears, she
was carried upstairs to what was called the officer’s
room. ‘The priest followed and began to read.
Terrified as she was she still resisted and forbade him
to goon. He said that if he stopped, he would be
killed. He asked her if she would be Fitzgerald’s

‘wife. It was like asking the lamb, with the butcher's

knife at its throat, if it would be slaughtered.
The marriage was declared to be complete. The

victim was left to her ravisher ; and her wild shrieks
‘wrung some ineffectual pity from the wretches who

were listening to her agonies.’
The reader is requested to understand that he has

‘before him, in these stories, an account of real facts

which happened not much more than a hundred years
ago, in a country constitutionally governed by English

Jaw, under the English crown. The evidence is the

sworn deposition of the sufferers themselves, and of
such other witnesses as could be prevailed on to give
their testimony. Human creatures have at various

‘times made devils of themselves, but, probably, no

age, and no part of the world, have produced speci-

‘mens quite so detestable as these Irish gentlemen.

In unmanliness, in cowardice, in ferocity, in a combi-
nation of all the qualities most hateful and despi-
cable in man’s nature, they had achieved a distinction

as yet unmatched. Yet such was the condition of Irish
‘public opinion, that their performances were en-

1 ‘Deposition of Rebecca White.” MSS. Dublin Castle. 1719.

IRISH IDEAS. —

427

couraged by the clergy, and were so much in favour CHAP
with general society, that they were allowed to escape it el

retribution. When all is said, the desire of England
to place the responsibilities attached to landed tenure
in safer hands was not indefensible, nor were the
‘objections unnatural to the intrusion into the country
‘of men calling themselves priests, who were willing
to lend themselves to such atrocious and accursed
acts of infamy.

A combination of superstition with deliberate
villany has been many times observed in Catholic
countries. ‘The brigand chief, who has cut a throat
in the morning, and burnt a village in the afternoon,
will go through his evening devotions at the shrine
of the Madonna with the ardour of unaffected piety.
A similarly curious anxiety was at times displayed
for the soul of some outraged Protestant woman by
men whom, unless for the purpose of incurring merited
damnation for their unpunished wickedness on earth,
it would be difficult to credit with the possession of
souls themselves.

Among the wealthy yeomen of Cavan was a certain
Walter Tubman, residing near Carrigaline, who had
an only daughter named Jane. On a forenoon in
November, 1730, her father, mother, and brothers
being absent at the neighbouring fair, and no one
being at home but Jane Tubman, her cousin Mar-
garet, and some servants, a young Edmund McKier-
nan, an unwelcome acquaintance, lounged in, and
after a few jests, to which he received no answer,
he caught hold of Jane, and told her she must go
with him. McKiernan was apparently alone. There
were other houses within call. The woman flung open
the door, thrust her arm into the staple, and shouted

1719

1730

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

for help. McKiernan, unable to move her, swore if
she did not withdraw her arm he would break it.
Immediately after she found herself in the grasp
of half a dozen powerful men, dragged into the
road, and flung across a horse’s back. She was an
unusually strong girl. She clutched at their hair
and pulled it off in handsful. She tore their shirts
open. Half a dozen times she threw herself on the
ground, to be tossed back upon the horse with exe-
crations: one of the men at length held her on by force,
another thrust his hand into her mouth, and when
she made her teeth meet through his fingers, a third
gagged her witha handkerchief. At length sense-
less and exhausted, the blood streaming from her
nose, she lay sweoningon the saddle. The party
then divided. Five fell behind to prevent pursuit,
and turned back the Tubman’s farm-servants, who
had followed to rescue their young mistress. McKier-

nan and two others went on with their victim over

bogs and curraghs, till they arrived late at night at
the cabin of a widow Kilkenny deep in the moun-
tains. Sick, faint, and hoarse, covered with blood,
bruised and wounded im many places, the unhappy
girl was here lifted off and carried in, and McKiernan
at once, and without a moment’s respite, told her she
must prepare to be his wife on the instant. Dreadful
as her condition was her spirit did not fail her. She
said he might murder her if he so pleased; she would
rather die than submit to his purpose.

The widow, pretending compassion, affected to in-
terpose. She said that no harm should befall the poor
creature that night ; she should sleep with her own
daughter; the door should be locked, and McKiernan
should not come near her. She believed the old

IRISH IDEAS.

429

wretch, as she had no choice but to believe. Ina _ CHAP,
romance she would have found a real protector, and ———~

before morning deliverance would have come. Reality
is more cruel than imagination. She had no sooner
thrown herself exhausted on the bed, than the door
was burst open; McKiernan rushed in, flung the
other woman out of the room, bound Jane Tubman
hand and foot, and then mercilessly violated her.

When she recovered consciousness in the morning
she found herself surrounded by a gang of desperadoes,
all Papists, and, as presently appeared, Papists who
attended to their religious duties. They told her that
they were McKiernan’s guards, and that a hundred
men should not take her from them. For a week she
was carried from place to place, never resting two
nights under the same roof. At the end of it ‘an old
dirty fellow’ was introduced, ‘ with a long beard, and
in his hand a string of beads.’ She was made to stand
up, McKiernan holding her, while the priest repeated
afew words in Latin, and then said that she was
lawfully married. With admirable spirit she still
defied both of them; her body was in their power,
but her will and conscience were still her own; and
she sternly refused to make her chain more easy by
consenting to wear it. Her father and her father’s
friends would find her yet, she said, and would see
them all punished.

Unless her father was strong enough to inflict the
punishment with his own hand, McKiernan knew,
unfortunately but too well, that from Irish justice
he had nothing to fear. ‘ Damn your father’s soul,
he coolly said. ‘ If you escape, and go back to your
friends, I'll burn your father’s house over his head,
and take you away again.’

1730

430°

BOOK

1G

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

There was a chapel at no great distance from the’

+ place where she was last detained; McKiernan and

17380 .

his guards were punctual in their attendance at mass ;_
and, with a laudable zeal for her soul, tried to per-—
suade her to go with them. ‘Damn you, you little »
bitch,’ was the beautiful exhortation of these pious’
children of Holy Church, ‘not one of your profession »
will ever go to heaven.’ i
-In the depth of her misery, the high spirited Jane
Tubman refused to allow others to run useless risks to °
save her. A woman named Susannah MacDowell, who ;
appeared afterwards as a witness in the prosecution, :
offered to carry a message to her friends. Knowing >
how feeble was the Castle government; how unwilling :
to risk offending the Catholic mob, by assisting the ’
magistrates to act vigorously ; anes fearing too that
if her father interfered he might only expose himself ’
to popular vengeance, she bade the woman go tell both -
him and her other relations that, for the present, :
they must stay at home, and keep quiet. McKier- »
nan had sworn to her that, ‘unless the magistrates |
sent a free pardon for himself and his men, damn »
his soul, her father and they should all sup sorrow.’ |
‘Hitherto he had kept his people from doing them '
harm ; but, damn him, he would keep them off no»
longer.’ |
At last, after three dreadful months, she stole away ©
into the darkness one night, when McKiernan was off
his guard, found her way over bogs and mountains
to a Protestant settlement, sent word to her father,
and was taken home.’ Her own story upon oath,
1‘Depositions of Jane Tubman, nah McDowell’ MSS. 1730.

Robert Linn of Killygar, Peter Dublin Castle.
McLoghiin, John Scott, and Susan-

IRISH IDEAS. 431.

the evidence of the servants who had witnessed her CHAP.
carrying off, and the evidence of the woman who had See.
been with her in her captivity, were given before the 172°
magistrates of the county and forwarded to Dublin ;

but, as usual, there is no trace that, for the sake of a
miserable Protestant girl, the Government thought it
necessary to court a collision with Catholic public
Opinion.

Was the Irish Parliament to be blamed because
they refused to believe that the tree on which such
fruits grew had lost its old corruption ? because they
strove to uproot a system from the soil which shielded
the most atrocious of crimes ?

_ That the people approved of these accursed deeds,
that they regarded an attempt to punish them as a
tyrannical interference with their rights, appeared in
a still more remarkable instance.

Sir James Cotter, of Anngrove, in the county of
Cork, had commanded in chief for King James in>
Munster, during the wars of 1690-91. He had been
governor of Cork city, had represented it in King
James’s Parliament, and was otherwise a distinguished
adherent of the fallen dynasty. Though unprotected
by the Articles of Limerick, he appears to have
escaped attainder, and, dying in 1705, he was suc-
ceeded by his son, who, like his father, was the idol
and darling of the Southern Catholics, and is repre-
sented, by the tenderness of history, as having fallen
a victim to his devotion to the cause of the House of
Stuart.’ This brilliant cavalier possessed other claims
besides loyalty to the Stuarts, for the bad elevation
which he obtained. Being fifteen years old at his

1 Burke’s Peerage and Baronetage of Great Britain and Ireland,

432

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

Book. father’s death, he was placed, in compliance with the
“Seater Popery Act, under the guardianship of a Protestant

1720

relative, one of the Nettervilles. He was stolen
away, however, by his Catholic friends, sent to
England, educated in the orthodox faith, and after-
wards, while still a minor, married to the daughter
of George Mathews, a Catholic also.* Having dis-
tinguished himself unfavourably in the election riot
in Dublin, in 1713, he confined his public ap-
pearances thenceforward to his own county. In
1719, either for amusement, or in pursuance of the
campaign against Protestantism, he carried off and
violated the daughter of a Quaker merchant at Cork,

named Elizabeth Squibb. The details of the adven-

ture have so far not been discovered. The Quakers,
however, never deficient in determination, and, on
this occasion, perhaps, because the offender was con-
cerned in some political conspiracies as well, he was
arrested, tried, convicted, and sentenced. That jus-
tice should not be defrauded of its due through the
connivance of the city officials, the Quakers main-
tained a watch of their own upon the gaol, and pre-
vented an attempt at escape which was almost suc-
cessful. Cotter was actually hanged.? All Cork and
all the South of Ireland burst into a wail of rage,
and the Friends were marked for retribution. Pla-
cards covered the walls.’ Quaker girls were mobbed

1 Commons’ Journals, September
29, 1707.

2 That the violation, and not any
supposed conspiracy, was the offence
for which Cotter was executed, is
quite certain.

A petition of the Quakers pre-
served in Dublin Castle, dated June
11, 1720, declares—

‘That since the execution of
James Cotter for the rape he com-
mitted on the body of Elizabeth
Squibb many Quakers have been
assaulted and grossly abused,’ &c,

* Two of these were sent by the
Mayor of Cork to the Castle :—

The first is in prose. ‘The fol-
lowing lines,’ writes the mayor,

IRISH IDEAS.

in the streets of Cork, and threatened with being
‘Cottered.’ No Quaker could show in the streets.
The mayor appealed to the Catholic clergy to restrain
the people. The Catholic clergy either would not
or could not. The passion spread to Limerick, to
Tipperary, and at last over all Catholic Ireland.
Quakers’ meeting-houses were sacked and burnt.
Quakers travelling about the country were waylaid
and beaten. A gitl in Dublin, who was mistaken
for Elizabeth Squibb, was beset by a mob of several
thousand people, and would have been torn in pieces
but for the arrival of a company of soldiers.! The
rage against the Friends continued unabated till it
culminated, five years after, in an outrage for which,
happily, no parallel can be found except in a Catholic

‘were posted at the Land’s End,
going down to the house of Edward
Fenn, Quaker :—

‘“ Vengeance belongeth to me;
I will repay, saith the Lord.” Now
look to it, ye hell-born crew. Cot-
ter’s life shall be a sting to your
cursed carcases that shall be meat
for dogs, and your cursed souls to
burning Acheron, where they will
burn in flames during eternity.
Fenn, look sharp, and other bursen-
gutted dogs besides, the which were
instruments of taking Cotter’s
breath. Other blackguard dogs
look sharp.

‘God save King James the Third,
of England king, the whom will
soon pay anguish and punish in this
matter.’

The other effusion is in verse.
The patriotic muse, however, was
under eclipse when it was com-
posed :—

* Poor grey-headed Ireland, with bloody tears,
Sharp revenge will seek in her antient years,
For being robbed of her famous peers,

VOL. I.

Her drooping fabrics with grief opprest,
Her entombed heroes will take no rest,
Since Irish honour is a common jest.

Contented with loss she seemed to stand,
Erecting sweet Cotter, her head and hand,
The illustrious front of a dejected land.

But since cruel fate, in its severest course,
Did sacrifice his blood without remorse,
And not relenting, signed his full divorce.

From nature and honour grown full mad,
Their forces unto fury neefls must add,
For such revenge as ne’er before was had,

Or else old Ireland will resign her breath,
And lose her life by his too sudden death,
For seas of blood will overrun the earth.

Weep, mourn, and fight all you that can,
And die with grief for that unspotted man,
A loss to nations more than I will scan.

If dead by sword, or if in field was slain,

Although the loss was great, ’twould ease
the pain,

And to his heirs leave neither spot nor stain,’

—‘ The Mayor of Cork to Secretary
Webster, May 24, 1720.’

1 ¢¥/xamination of Rachel Carl-
ton, servant to Ebenezer Pike, of
the city of Cork, merchant, May
30, 1720. MSS. Dublin.

FF

434

BOOK
III

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

country. Human wickedness is a plant which will

—— grow in all soils and climates. The combination of

1725

fiendish malignity with pretensions to piety are the
peculiar growth of the Church of Rome. The story
is thus told by an eyewitness, Paul Lydy, who turned
informer :*

‘On or about the 22nd of February, 1725, Paul
Lydy, with ten others, eleven in all, went to the
house of Edward Johnstone, of Carroe, Quaker. Lydy,
having a sledge in his hand, broke open Johnstone’s
door, seven or eight of them then went in and took
what money and goods they could find, pulled said
Edward Johnstone out of bed, tied him neck and
heels and dragged him into the kitchen, and then and
there heated a griddle on the fire. ‘Three of them
then put said Johnstone on the griddle, stark naked,
and heaped hot coals upon him, and continued tor-
turing him after an inhuman and barbarous manner,
and burned his body, and most cruelly beat his wife.
Lydy, stood at the door, and did see Johnstone
striving to keep the fire from his body; and James
Matthias, one of the party, still kindling the fire, and
urging and saying, “ You son of a whore, you are
no Christian.” Johnstone often begged them to
consider his grey hairs, and told them he would send
for 300/. and give it them if they spared him. At
those words James Matthias tripped Johnstone and
kicked him on the back to that degree that he soon
after died.’? Their work being done, the murderers
then sate down to supper. ‘They had bread and

1 Repeated, with some additional * “Kxamination of Paul Lydy.’
circumstances, in a Proclamation King’s County Depositions, 1726.
issued by Lord Carteret, a copy of MSS. Dublin Castle.
which is in the British Museum. J

IRISH IDEAS.

cheese, and such like.’

‘Being told that there was

flesh there which they might Teg they said they
would not eat flesh in time Soe Lent. "

1 ¢Proclamation on the murder
of Johnstone the Quaker, April 10,
1725.’ The more common forms of
crime in Ireland, wherever Pro-
testants were the victims, were dis-
tinguished by a ferocity which goes
far to justify even the offer of re-
wards for the heads of proclaimed
outlaws.

In October, 1725, a party of
Rapparees ‘out on their keeping,’
broke into the house of a Protest-
ant miller in Wexford, named
Hayes. They tore the wife out of
bed in her shift; tied her to the
wall naked, by the fire; and,in order
to force her to tell where her hus-
band’s money was concealed, heated
two chisels red-hot, and seared her
limb by limb. The wretched hus-
band said she was with child to
move them to pity. One of the
party answered, that he would run
a red-hot chisel into her body to her
child if she would not give them up
her money. Next they seized the
husband himself, and were prepar-
ing to burn him in the same way,
when some neighbours who had
heard the cries, came to their help,
and the Rapparees fled.—‘ Exami-
nation of Catherine Epes ” MSS.
Dublin.

A Dublin Sainenan, a Mr.
Woodley, had purchased some pro-
perty in Muskerry, near Headfort.
He placed upon it a resident Pro-
testant steward, named Healy,
who, in a lawless neighbourhood,
had a difficulty in holding his

ground. The McCarties especially,
once owners of all that county, but
reduced to a corner of their inherit-
ance in the Glenflesk mountains,
looked with jealous eyes on the
intruder. Some of McCarties’
people, on one occasion, stole a
drove of Healy’s cattle. Healy took
out a warrant against McCarty
himself, and to prevent the warrant
being served, the tenants determined
to be beforehand with him.

On March 4, 1729, five of them,
described as Papists and yeomen of
Glenfiesk, armed with guns, clubs,
and long skenes, broke into his
house and demanded possession of
the warrant. When they had got it,
to prevent him from giving troublein
the future, they knocked him down
with their bludgeons, ‘ cut, stabbed,
and hackled him about the face and
head ;’ then, tying him hand and
foot, forced open his mouth, cut out
his tongue, shaved his ears close to
the head, laid a block of stone under
his arm, and smashed the bone
upon it, and finally drove their
skenes into his eyes and blinded
him.

Even this was not enough. Leay-
ing Healy weltering in his blood,
they then set upon his wife, who
was close on her confinement, beat
and slashed her, and cut out her
tongue also, — ‘Tixamination of
John Healy, of Coolgariff in Mus-
kerry, March 15, 1729,’ MSS.
Dublin.

FF 2

426 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IIL

Bock ABDUCTION and rape were not the only weapons with

—-—~ which the Irish carried on the war against their
1734 : :
conquerors. More vulgar ruffians bore their part in
making Ireland a dangerous abode to those who ven-
tured to interfere with the national prejudices.

In the year 1734 there resided in Kilrush, in
county Clare, an active English gentleman named
Captain Mark Newdigate. He had made himself
obnoxious by threatening the parish priest, who was
probably unregistered. The priest was called Richard
Thornton ; the priest’s brother, Henry Thornton,
was the Kilrush attorney, a pretending Protestant,
since, without conformity and taking the sacrament,
he could not have obtained his licence to practise.
Looking into the main street of the town was the
house of a Sylvester Curtin. One evening in No-
vember, a man called MacMahon, who, afterwards
turned approver and told the story, said that, as he
was going home from his work, Curtin called him
inside his door, telling him he would make his
fortune. In the kitchen he found Thornton the
attorney with seven or eight others assembled.
Curtin, in introducing him, said that he knew him
for a hardy fellow who could keep a secret. Thorn-
ton took out a book and swore the party one by cne
to silence, and then said that he had 300/. to divide
among them if they would go by night and kill
Captain Mark Newdigate. It would, as they all
knew, be ‘a great act of charity to put such a Pro-

IRISH IDEAS.

testant dog out of the world.’ But they must make

437

CHAP.

sure work, and avoid blundering about it If not, he See

would be the death of their priest. They all swore
an oath that they would do it, and dispersed for
the moment, waiting for a convenient time. Some
of them were Kerry men from across the Shannon,
which at that season was often difficult to pass.

Some days later Curtin again called MacMahon,
showed him a ‘ moidore,’' which the Attorney Thorn-
ton had sent to drink success to their undertaking,
and told him the Kerry boys were coming over, and
they must go down to the shore to meet them. They
were joined at the landing-place by several more of
the confederates. The boat arrived while they were
waiting. ‘Two of her crew remained to keep her
afloat to receive the others when the work was
finished. The rest stopped, and the whole gang,
nine or ten in number, were ready for business.
MacMahon, as the moment for action drew near,
showed signs of flinching. Darby Hackney, one of
the Kilrush party, held a pistol at his head with a
curse, and told him if he would not go he should
not live to tell their secrets. Being in dread of his
life, and, as he innocently admitted, for the sake of
his proportion of the money, he gathered up his
courage. ‘ They all three kissed each other, and said
their fortunes would be ever made by performing
such a fact, and likewise that it was a good deed to
destroy such a rogue that was so bad to their priest
and constitution.’ It was already dark, and they
started for their work. But they stopped at Curtin’s
house on the way to apply the moidore to its pur-

1 Portuguese money was in common use in Ireland at this time.

1734

438

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

BOOK pose. Supper was laid out for them, and ‘they all
——— got so drunk that they could not pursue their busi-

1734

ness that night, and had to wait till next night,
being Sunday night.’ One of the party, Darby
Hackney, availed himself ingeniously of the postpone-
ment to prove an alibi, should the murder get them
into trouble. On the Sunday morning he fell in with
two strangers in Kilrush. Having a house in the
town he invited them to sleep there.. He made up
beds for them between his own bed and the door.
He waited till they were both asleep to steal over
them and creep out. And having thus provided him-
self with witnesses who would swear he was to their
knowledge at home, he rejoined the gang, who had
been lying quiet the whole day in Curtin’s kitchen.
At length, at eleven o’clock that night, they sallied
out sober and determined. They were ingenious
villains: one of them named Gallivane, or Gaff, had
induced Captain Newdigate, a fortnight before, to
take him as a servant. He had thus learnt the dis-
position of the house, the room in which Newdigate
slept, and the place where he kept his arms ; and,
which was equally important, he had made acquaint-
ance with the dogs, which, at night, were loose about
the premises. There was no moon, and the stars
were behind clouds. With Gaff for a guide they
scrambled across the bogs, eight or nine in all, to
the house, Gaff instructing them the while as to
the position in which they would find the captain,
and how to secure a large back sword which hung at
his bed’s head. It was eleven o’clock when they
arrived. All was still. The dogs came out, but
Gaff spoke to them and they licked his hand. Curtin,
Darby Hackney, and three others, then each took a

IRISH IDEAS.

large stone ; they flung them together at the house
door, which flew open before the blow, and all rushed
through the hall into the room where Gaff said the
captain slept, meaning to stab him as he lay. Being
without a light they stumbled in the darkness. The
captain sprung from his bed in his nightgown, flew
to the door, driving two of them before him back
into the hall, and across the hall into the chimney
corner. lrightened now for their own lives, these
two cried out that they were being murdered. The
captain shouted for his servants, calling them by
their names, and bade them bring his hatchet that
he might cut off the villains’ heads. The servants,
dared not show themselves. The rest of the gang
blundered back, thrusting with their swords where
they believed Newdigate to be, but afraid to strike for
fear of wounding one another. The captain easily
eluded them, and slipped again into his bed-room for
his gun. ‘The assassins, groping about and stabbing
right and left, at length collected in the faint light
at the front door. Each thought the rest had done
the work; none however could give any distinct
assurance of having killed their man. Gaff and the
boys from Kerry plunged back determined to find
him, and ‘ crying out to shoot him or cut his throat.’
A. voice from the darkness answered, ‘ I can shoot as
well as you.’ A flash followed. Newdigate’s pow-
der was damp, and missed fire. Being a powerful
and extremely resolute person, he clubbed his gun,
dashed at them where the dusky figures were visible
coming in through the gloom, laid one dying on the
floor with his skull broken, and attacked the rest so
fiercely that they fled out dragging their. wounded
comrade. Outside they found a shivering servant

440

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book girl, who begged them, if they meant to kill her, to

Il.
ey eee

1734

leave so much breath in her ‘that the clergyman
might overtake the life’ before she died. ‘ That much
pardon she should have,’ they said; but they had
other work to think of. They were hurrying off,
when they found that in the confusion one had left
his pistols, another his wig, another half his coat in
the hall; proof enough to identify and hang them.
Ashamed to be baffled thus by one man, they again
went in and blew the ashes on the hearth into a flame.
But by this time the house was roused. Newdi-
gate’s brother, who slept in an adjoining building,
was heard approaching with the farm servants. Curtin
said he had run the captain through the body, and
he could not live till day; and, with this comfort,
they made off, dragging the dead body with them.
The sequel was highly characteristic. Captain
Newdigate, if wounded at all, was but hurt slightly
and recovered. ‘The priest and the attorney and the
lads of Kilrush and Kerry never dared again to attack
so dangerous an antagonist. A wild affair had taken
place, meanwhile, a few miles down the coast, to be
related in the next chapter, in which a Danish ship
had been plundered of some chests of silver. The
notable device of the conspirators was to swear that
they were themselves the thieves, but that Newdigate
had shared the booty with them. He, as an English
officer, would be hanged, while they would be par-
doned as approvers. This plot too failed ; perhaps, as
too perilous, it was planned only and never tried. The
attempted murder, as usual, remained a mystery ; no
evidence could be found, or none that sufficed for a
conviction. ‘Two years later the story was told by
MacMahon, when a prisoner in the gaol at Ennis,

IRISH IDEAS.

SECTION IV.

IrtsH crime, where the victim was a Protestant,
assumed the character of legitimate war. Ravishers
and murderers were avengers of the wrongs of their
country, and, as such, were protected by the sympa-
thies of the Catholic population. Under all condi-
tions, even where no religion or political passion was
concerned, violence was the first remedy which sug-
gested itself. ‘The extraordinary ferocity, which ap-
peared occasionally in the better classes of Irish so-
ciety as late as the middle of the last century, shows
how inveterate by long indulgence national habits
may become, and how slowly an inherited tempera-
ment can be brought to yield to the restraints of law
and civilization. Symptoms however were beginning
to show themselves of a better state of feeling, where
the juries were not misled by national prejudice.
The Bodkins of Galway were descended from an
Archbishop of Tuam, who, in the beginning of the
sixteenth century, so far disregarded the laws of the
Church as to beget and establish a family. There were,
by this time, several branches of them. They had
preserved their estates under the Articles, and among
them held considerable property. Among the rest
was a certain Oliver Bodkin, of Carnbane, a gentle-
man with an estate worth nine hundred a year—a
large fortune for Ireland in the first half of the last
century. He had a brother called blind Dominick,
blind of one eye; a son by a first marriage, named
John; and, by his second wife, Margery, who was
still living, another boy, a young Oliver, named after

44]

442.

BOOK
dit:
sd

1741

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

himself. The head of the family was a cousin, Mr.
Bodkin of Carnbegg, a place at no great distance
from Carnbane. All these Bodkins were Catholics.
The birth of the son by the second marriage,
created jealousy and ill-feeling. Alterations were
made in the settlements which the elder brother
thought himself entitled to resent. He quarrelled
with his stepmother. His uncle Dominick took his
side, and probably his kinsman at Carnbegge, for
young John had left his father’s house with the
expectation of being appointed steward of the Carn-
begg estate, where he had taken up his residence.
He was a loose vagabond, given chiefly to idleness
and horse-racing. Possibly he was found unfit for
the office, or, from other causes, his prospects were
unpromising. He preferred a nearer road to inde-
pendence, which he could combine with the gratifica-
tion of his revenge. ‘ Blind Dominick,’ ‘a man of
huge bulk and horrid aspect,’ had perhaps, also, some
private grudges of his own. Shan Reagh—Red
Shan—one of Oliver Bodkin’s servants, was devoted
to the elder son’s interests, and resented the disfavour
into which he had fallen. With the help of these two,
and a friend named Edmund Burke, young John de-
termined to ‘revenge the villany and roguery of his
father and stepmother,’ and remove out of the way
the little brother which had stood between him and
his fortune. It was the race week at Tuam, in Sep-
tember, 1741. Believing, or pretending to believe,
that suspicion would at once fall upon him, he pro-
posed, at first, that he should himself attend the
races ; that his uncle and the others should do the
work in his absence, and that the spoils should be
divided afterwards. This arrangement was not ap-

proved, The youth himself being the person chiefly

IRISH IDEAS.

443

interested, the other confederates insisted that he cHap.
must bear his part, and he agreed to remain. Their ele

number being still too small for so dangerous an
enterprise, one more confederate was wanted. <A
certain Roger Kelly was pitched upon as a likely
person; and, as a preliminary, Kelly, young John,
Uncle Dominick, and Edmund Burke dined together
at Carnbegg House, and discussed their plans over
tumblers of whiskey punch. Steel was preferred to
firearms as making surer work. Kelly was asked if
he had a knife fit for the purpose. He produced
a heavy clasp knife. Dominick, who was a judge
of weapons, objected that it would not answer,
and brought out two long keen Irish skenes, which
he said he would retouch upon a grindstone.
Kelly was a sufficiently hardened villain, but his
blood ran cold at these deliberate preparations. He
went home, feigned illness, and shut himself up in
his house ; and the others, not caring to betray their
secret further, concluded to act alone. A Galway
merchant was staying at Carnbane, as Oliver Bodkin’s
guest, who was reported to be a fearless, resolute
man. They would have preferred to wait for his de-
parture. But delay was dangerous. They met the
following midnight outside the yard, Blind Dominick
leading a large mastiff, ‘to worry the house-dog
should he fly at them ;’ and they four—young John,
his uncle, Edmund Burke, and Red Shan—stole
through the gate together. The farm servants, two
men and two boys, slept in the barn. Young John
opened the barn-door, and asked whether Mr. Bodkin,
of Carnbegg was in his father’s house that night. The
men knew the voice, and answered drowsily that he
was not, and turned over to sleep. It was a sleep
from which they never woke. A few minutes later

1741

444

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book the skenes were across their throats. Each murderer
III: heer
——-— secured his victim, and the four men and boys were

1741

quietly despatched. Safe from alarm from without,
they then went on to the dwelling house. The dogs,
who knew them, let them pass in silence. They en-
tered without noise. The situation of every bed
being familiar to them, they had no need of lights.
Two servants, a man and his wife, slept in the hall,
on the left of the door where they glided in. Blind
Dominick and Edmund Burke stabbed them both to
the heart. No witness was to be left alive to convict
the murderers. Young John disposed of the mer-
chant in the stranger’s room with equal swiftness and
decision. Red Shan undertook the master of the
house, and went direct to the room where old Oliver
was sleeping, with his wife and the little boy. The
wife, who had been roused by an unusual sound,
darted from the bed as he entered, and ran to the
door. Shan, ‘ having a mind,’ as he said, ‘ that she
should escape,’ allowed her to pass; but he cut the
old man’s throat where he lay, and afterwards killed
the child. The mother reached the kitchen, only to
fall into the hands of blind Dominick, her brother-
in-law. She screamed for pity; he answered with a
stab of his skene, and she too fell dead on the floor.
The completeness of the work—for every human
creature in the house was destroyed—did not save
the murderers. Public feeling, slowly as it changed,
was roused to horror at so enormous acrime. Sus-
picion fell instinctively on those in whom alone a mo-
tive could be imagined to prompt such a deed. Kelly,
anticipating discovery, told what he knew. Red Shan,
to save his own life, turned approver, and described
the horrid scene in all its particulars. All the parties
were taken and brought to the bar immediately

IRISH IDEAS.

at the Galway Assizes. So profound was the excite-
ment, that every detail was dwelt on with prolonged
intensity. ‘The hearing of the evidence lasted fourteen
hours. The jury, with a promptitude which showed
that here at least there was no misleading sympathy
with crime, returned their verdict in ten minutes ;
and Burke, and young John Fitz Oliver, as he was
called, and the huge one-eyed Dominick were in-
stantly hanged.

The whole county was shaken with the horror of
a story the memory of which still vaguely clings
about the neighbourhood. Wild rumours filled the
air. Dominick’s ghost, it was said, had drawn the
curtains of a friend sleeping sixty miles away, at the
hour when the murders were being done, and mut-
tered threats of savage revenge. [or once even the
Galway mob were on the side of justice, and the
assassins went to their doom amidst a chorus of exe-
crations, unbroken with the faintest note of sympathy.

Yet Ireland was but reaping the fruit of her own
leniency for patriotic criminals, whose deeds were in
no degree less infamous. Her tenderness for rape and
murder, where the victims were her imagined enemies,
familiarized the minds of men with violence; and
when it is remembered, that all the parties concerned
were gentlemen, members of one of the best families
in the county of Galway, the Bodkin murder must
be regarded as characteristic of a condition of society
in which alone the passions could have been generated
which prompted such elaborate ferocity.’

1 For the history of the Bodkin tember 26, 1741.’ MSS. Dublin
‘murder, see ‘Confession and Exa- Castle.

mination of John Hogan, otherwise ‘The Bishop of Clonfert to the
Reagh, of Carnbegg, Co. Galway, Bishop of Dromore, March 27,
September 23, 1741.’ 1742.’ MSS. Record Office,

‘ Confession of Roger Kelly, Sep-

445

CHAP,
Af

——_,_—__
1741

446

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER II.
THE SMUGGLERS.

SECTION I.

es WuHeEN England, in defence of her monopolies, thought
———— proper to lay restrictions on the Irish woollen trade,

1

a f

d

30

it was foretold that the inevitable result would be an
enormous development of smuggling.

The price of fleece wool in Ireland in 1730 was
fivepence a pound; of combed wool twelve pence
a pound. In France Irish fleece wool was sold for
two shillings and sixpence a pound; combed wool
from four shillings and sixpence to six shillings.’
The profits of the contraband trade were thus so
enormous, that the temptations to embark in it were
irresistible. Out of the thirty-two counties of Ire-
land nineteen were maritime. The coast round three-
quarters of the island was indented and pierced by
deep bays and intricate creeks, which from the sea it
was impossible effectively to watch. On land, with the
whole population combined to embarrass and defeat
them, an army of revenue officers would have been in-
sufficient to prevent the running of cargoes. Enor-
mous wages would have been necessary if they were
to be proof against the corruption to which the gain
of the trade would ensure their being exposed; while,
in the eyes of the Irish themselves, the evasion of the
iniquitous law which had destroyed their lawful com-
merce was exalted into a virtue.

1¢Proposals to prevent the ex- Mr. Knox, 1730. MSS. Dublin
portation of wool to France:’ by Castle.

THE SMUGGLERS.

Thus, in spite of English Acts of Parliament, and
the fleet of armed cruisers which hung about the
southern and western shores, four-fifths of the Irish
fleeces were carried annually to France. The rivalry
which the English clothiers so much dreaded became a
fact inspite of them. In 1779, when the Government
condescended at last to listen to the remonstrances
of the Irish Parliament, Mr. Hely Hutchinson laid
privately before Lord Harcourt a fair statement of
the system and of its consequences.

‘ As the law stands,’ he said, ‘ we can sell our wool
and ‘woollen goods only to Great Britain. We can
buy woollen cloths there only. If such a law related
to two private men instead of two kingdoms, and
enjoined that in buying and selling the same goods
one individual should deal with one man only in ex-
clusion of others, it would in effect ordain that both
as buyer and seller, that man should fix his own price
and profit, and would refer to his discretion the loss
and profit of the other dealer. You have defeated
your own object. The exclusion of Ireland from
the woollen trade has been more injurious to you
than to us. One pack of Irish wool works up two
packs of French wool. The French undersell the
English, and, as far as they are supplied with Irish
wool, the loss to England is double what it would be
if the Irish exported their wool manufactured.

As to the practice of running wool, Ireland has paid
to Great Britain for eleven years past’ double the sum

1He might have said 50 years. in rents to absentees 600,000/. The
In 1729 the total exports of Ireland absentee rents rather increased

were - - - £1,053,782 than diminished with the progress
The total imports’ - 819,761 of the century. Heavy pensions
— were paid by the Irish Establish-

Balance - £234,021 ment to persons residing in Eng-

Out of which balance Ireland paid land. There were no gold or silver

447

CHAP.
TT.
—_——_

1730

448

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

she collects from the whole world in all the trade

i which Great Britain allows her; a fact not to be

1730

paralleled in the history of mankind. Whence did
all this money come? Our very existence is depen-
dent on our illicit commerce.’!

Ingenuity could not have invented a commercial
policy less beneficial to the country in whose interests
it was adopted, or better contrived to demoralize the
people at whose expense it was pursued. A large and
fast-spreading branch of manufacture was destroyed,
which was tempting capital and enterprise and an
industrious Protestant population into Ireland,—a
form of industry was swept away which would have
furnished employment to the native Irish, and brought
them under settled habits, which would have made
four Ulsters instead of one, and raised each of the
four to double the prosperity which the province
which preserved the linen trade has in fact obtained.
But even these consequences were not the worst
fruits of these preposterous restrictions. The entire
nation, high and low, was enlisted in an organized con-
federacy against the law. Distinctions of creed were
obliterated, and resistance to law became a bond of
union between Catholic and Protestant—Irish Celt
and English colonist,—from the great landlord whose
sheep roamed in thousands over the Cork mountains
to the guager who, with conveniently blinded eyes,
passed the wool packs through the custom house
as butter barrels; from the magistrate whose cellars
were filled with claret on the return voyage of the
smuggling craft, to the judge on the bench who dis-

mines in Ireland. The money that the only conceivable explanation.
went out must have come in from 1¢Mr. Hely Hutchinson to Lord
some quarter or other; and the MHarcourt, July 1, 1779.’ MSS,
profits of the smuggling trade give Record Office.

THE SMUGGLERS.

missed as frivolous and vexatious the various cases
which came before the courts tobe tried. All persons
of all ranks in Ireland were principals or accomplices
in a pursuit which, however pardonable in itself, could
be carried on only by evasion, perjury, and violence.
The very industry of the country was organized upon
a system which made it a school of anarchy; and good
servants of the state, who believed that laws were
made to be obeyed, lay under the ban of opinion as
public enemies.

At the beginning there was neither attempt at
nor need of concealment. Cargoes of spirits were
landed at Dublin Quay. If notice was given to the
Commissioners they turned the other gway.' Packs
of wool lay in open daylight in the warehouses at
Cork, and were shipped in vessels lying along the
quay. ‘The officers of the customs looked on with
undisturbed composure. The few who might have
wished to interfere knew that it would be useless,
and did not care to make themselves hated gra-
tuitously.” Finding themselves defied in this way,
the Government tried stricter methods, substituted
English officers for Irish at the chief ports like

1*One of the smugglers came
lately into Dublin harbour itself, and
was running her cargo at midnight,

Guyon to Lord Carteret, Jan. 20,
1725.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.
2 All officers that attempt to ob-

when accidentally discovered by an
acquaintance of mine, who seized
the goods, and was tempted by a
good round sum to make up the
matter; but being proof against
temptation would not, being per-
suaded the goods would be for-
feited. ‘To his loss and my great
surprise they were acquitted, as I
hear, by the Commissioners of Cus-
toms, to the great discouragement
of all honest merchants.’—‘ Hugh

VOL. I.

struct the exportation are discoun-
tenanced, nor will a jury find a
seizure, orajudgecondemnit. Wool
goes out by shiploads, and ware-
housesat the water side are crammed
with it, and no notice taken except
by accident now and then. Greater
quantities are sent to France than
are consumed in this country, or
sent to England.’—‘ Charles King
to Lord Stanhope, February 15,
1716.” MSS. Record Office.

GG

450

BOOK
pit.

—— =

1730

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Waterford and Cork, and stationed cruisers along
the coast to seal the mouths of the smaller harbours.
But the trade only took refuge in bays and creeks
where cruisers dared not run in. If encountered
at sea the contraband vessels were sometimes armed
so heavily that the Government cutters and schooners
hesitated to meddle with them. If unarmed and
overhauled, they were found apparently laden with
some innocent cargo of salt provisions. The wool was
pressed with screws into barrels, which were washed
with brine, that they might pass for butter, herrings,
or salt pork casks. The more determined the author-
ities showed themselves the more resolute were the
Trish, the lawlessness and wildness of the trade giving
it fresh zest. Driven from the Cork warehouses the
packs were stored in caves about the islands, and cliffs,
and crags, where small vessels took them off at leisure ;
or French traders, on signal from shore, sent in their
boats for them. Chests of bullion were kept by the
merchants at Rochelle and Brest to pay for them as
they were landed. When the French Government
forbade the export of so much specie, claret, brandy,
and silks were shipped for Ireland in exchange on
board the vessels which had brought the wool.}
Thus, by a curious combination, the system worked
the extremity of mischief, commercially, socially, and
politically. It fostered and absolutely bred and
necessitated habits of lawlessness. It promoted a
close and pernicious connexion between Ireland and
France. In times of war French privateers found
shelter all along the Irish coast in positions most
convenient to them, and most dangerous to English
commerce. In times both of war and peace, it

1¢ Proposals to prevent the exportation of wool to France,’ by Mr.
Knox, 1730. MSS. Dublin.

THE SMUGGLERS.

inundated Ireland with wine and brandy cheap and
excellent, and produced the hard drinking which
gave social life there so ill a fame. Singularly too,
while the smuggling provided an open road for the
going and coming of the priesthood, it linked itself to
the service of the Pretender. Irish ‘ Wild Geese’ in
thousands were drafted down to Kenmare or Dingle,
Galway or Roundstone, and were shipped to France.
If the Pretender was meditating a descent, Irish
regiments were collected for him at a few weeks’
notice. If the Pretender himself wus lying quiet,
there was always the Irish brigade, earning pay and
glory under the flag of England’s enemies. Wherever
along the southern and western coasts English au-
thority and English civilization had taken root, means
were found to clear away the intruders, or make them
conform to the customs of the country. An active
officer like Captain Newdigate could be shot or knocked
on the head. The Protestant settlements on the
Kenmare river, which had been established by Sir
William Petty, dwindled slowly away. Most of the
families melted into the Irish population. The few
who retained ther English creed and habits, and
were thus inconvenient neighbours to the smugglers,
were at last carried away as prisoners by French pri-
vateers. The gentry entered heartily into the game.
‘Though there are several Protestant gentlemen in
the county of Kerry,’ wrote the Duke of Devonshire
in 1740, ‘ yet for one odd reason or other there is
little prospect of doing good by their means.’ ‘The
Knight of Kerry, who was the occasion of the Duke’s
observation, had his cellar regularly supplied from
Bordeaux, and in return was blind to everything
which it was not desirable that he should see.

@@ 2

452

BOOK
III.
SS ee

1719

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

SINGULAR pictures survive of some of these Kerry
potentates who, ‘ for one odd reason or another,’ were

found unserviceable for keeping order. The enor-

mous, but at the time when it was granted entirely
unprofitable, property there which fell into the hands
of Sir William Petty, had lapsed gradually under
long leases to middle-men, who, though compelled by
law to profess conformity with the Establishment,
earned absolution by the steadiness with which they
entertained and protected the priests. Petty had be-
queathed to his descendants along with his fortune a
considerable political genius, and had the Shelburne
family consented to reside on their estates, these gen-
tlemen would either have had no existence, or would
have found the sphere of their activity altogether
curtailed. But the Shelburnes became habitual ab-
sentees. The small beginnings of civilized life, which
had been introduced there, disappeared ; and, so long
as their rents were regularly paid, they asked no
questions, and troubled themselves with no responsi-
bilities.

The great baronies of Dunkerron and Iverach,
which form the north shore of the Kenmare Bay, ex-
tending from Kenmare itself forty miles to Waterville,
and thence inland to the watershed where the streams
divide which run into the bays of Kenmare or Dingle,
were held along with other properties, in the early
part of the last century, under a lease renewable for
ever by Mr. Daniel (or Donell) Mahony, of Dunloe.

THE SMUGGLERS.

In Dunkerron there yet lingered a dozen Protestant
families, the last remnant of Petty’s colony, quiet
people, who had come to make a living by indusiry,
and were unsuited to their present master. These
families had occasion, in 1719, to represent their
situation to the Viceroy. Mr. Mahony, they said,
‘had for some years continued to make himself great
and dreadful in the county.’ He had four thousand
people under him, under-tenants and their labourers,
all Catholics, whose business was to prevent the col-
lectors of the revenue from troubling honest fellows
with their importunities; to keep at a distance the
whole race of bailiffs and process servers; in short,
to make what are called law and order impossible in
Kerry. Going about by day disguised as women, at
night in large gangs, with blacked faces and white
shirts, they were called Mr. Daniel Mahony’s fairies,
and never had wizard familiar spirits better disposed
to do his bidding. ‘So mighty was Mr. Mahony’s
power, that no Papist in Ireland had the like.’ There
were still some few forests on the mountain sides
which Lord Shelburne retained ; but his rangers ex-
isted on sufferance, and, if they gave trouble, were
immediately ‘ mortified.’ ‘ Hearth-money collectors
and civil officers went about in peril of their lives.’
Daniel himself was described as ‘a wilful man,
without remorse or conscience.’ Sheltered by Lord
Shelburne’s name, and affecting to be his representa-
tive, ‘if he sent the least word, he was obeyed upon
all unlawful occasions;’ and he had counsellors and
attorneys in his pay at the Four Courts, who carried
him through when a poor creature sought protection
against him from the law. Once and once only the

1 Murdered ?

454

BOOK
JII.

—------—"

‘A ee

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Government had meddled with him. On all the
lands held under the Act of Settlement there was a
quit rent reserved to the crown, which was paid by
the tenant. It was surmised, with excellent reason,
that Mahony had made an imperfect return of the
lands held by him under his lease from Lord Shel-
burne; and a surveyor, named Maurice Kennedy,
was sent down to Killarney to make enquiries. The
Viceroy might be supreme in Dublin Castle, but
Donell Mahony was sovereign at Killarney. The
ill-advised Maurice had made his notes; had dis-
covered, as he conceived, distinct delinquency, and
had collected evidence to prove it. The Fairies one
night burst rudely into his lodging, dragged him from
his bed, beat him with most unghostlike efficiency,
plundered him of the papers which were to bring
Mahony to justice, and left him to find his way out
of the country a sadder and a wiser man. ‘The
Dunkerron memorialists could but pray the Viceroy
to quarter a company of soldiers at Dunloe to ‘ civilize
Mr. Mahony and his spirits,’ if Kerry was to remain
a home for loyal subjects and peaceful industry.’

It is hardly necessary to say that a Dublin Lord
Lieutenant was no match for Daniel and his four
thousand Fairies. The memorialists either submitted
to fate and to the ruler which the genius of Ireland
had set over them, or betook themselves to some more
quiet home. The singular figure of Daniel Mahony
is a specimen of the class of middlemen to whom the
wild districts, now frequented by tourists and sports-
men, were surrendered for the greater part of the
last century. Absenteeism was bearing its legiti-

*“Humble Address of His Majesty’s loyal subjects of Macquinihy,
1719.’ MSS. Dublin Castie.

THE SMUGGLERS.

mate fruit. The escheated lands of the chiefs had
been allotted to Englishmen to reclaim and civilize,
and to settle with Protestant colonies; and the Eng-
lish owners, reducing their duties to the receiving
of rents and spending them, left the lands to those
who have created modern Ireland and the modern
Irish race.

At times the type assumed a form yet wilder and
more picturesque. ‘Sir William Petty’s domains ex-
tended to the south as well as to the north side of the
Kenmare river. The long peninsula which divides
the bays of Bantry and Kenmare, had been the domi-
nion of the O’Sullivans of Berehaven, and Sullivan
still remains the name of half the families in the
barony. There, too, in the midst of the mountains,
the descendants of the old chief’s family continued as
the vicegerents on the soil of their fathers, amidst
the wrecked remains of the once thriving Protestant
colony. The Wild Geese and the privateers swept
off the handful that remained, and had now the
bay to themselves ; and the O'Sullivan of Dirreen
ruled without a rival, a great smuggling chief, and
a trusted agent of the Pretender, through whose
hands the enthusiasts for his cause were shipped for
Nantes and the brigade.

Morty Oge O'Sullivan, O'Sullivan Bere as he was
called—as much loved and honoured as his kinsman
of Dirreen—had made his home ten miles nearer to
the Atlantic beyond the Shelburne boundary, on the
wild bay of Bally Quoilach, at a place called Clein-
derry. Morty, in his youth, had been a distinguished
officer in the Austrian army, where, had he chosen to
remain, he might have risen to rank and favour at
the court of Maria Theresa. His country and his

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

King—his country rather, and the adventurous life
which opened to him there, had charms too strong
for him to resist. He went home, and undertook
the convoying of the Wild Geese; and at Cleinderry,
an outlaw with a price on his head, yet secured
on the land side by the idolatry of the O’Sullivan
clan, and at sea strong enough to be his own pro-
tector, Captain Morty for a score of years lived
and throve; and defied the Government and _ its
myrmidons to meddle with him. His brigantine,
which lay moored before his door, carried eight heavy
swivel guns. She was so strong that no cruiser
ventured to engage her single-handed. The anchor-
age was so dangerous, so intricate, and well guarded,
that no combined force could venture in to assail
her. In peace time she wasasmuggler. In war she
carried the French flag under letters of marque, and
was the pest and plague of English commerce; and
Paul Jones and ‘Le Bon Homme Richard’ were
scarcely more terrible thirty years later in the two
channels than Morty Sullivan and his Irish clipper.

At length, in the middle of the century, a brave
and honourable revenue officer named Puxley, in-
herited from his brother an estate at Berehaven on
Bantry Bay, from which there was a near pass
through the mountains to Morty’s den.

Revenue officers were usually rendered harmless
by quiet methods. Their pay was small. The Go-
vernment was lax. ‘They had only to accept a
percentage on the cargoes run out or in, and to be
conveniently absent when anything was to happen
of which they were to be kept in ignorance. Pux-
ley, who is said to have come from Galway, yet
was English in character, and had brought with him

THE SMUGGLERS.

English notions of duty. In 1751, soon after his
arrival, he sent an account of Morty to Dublin Castle,
and suggested means by which both he and his bri-
gantine could be captured.'

As usual, no notice was taken. There being no formal
coastguard in those days, each officer was obliged to
rely upon his own resources, and, if he intended to be
active, had to gather men about him on whom he
could depend. Puxley added to his lands about
Berehaven, either buying or taking leases for lives.
He inherited from his brother, among other places,
the famous Dunboy Castle, which was stormed by Sir
George Carew in the Earl of Tyrone’s rebellion, after
a splendid defence by Morty’s ancestors, in which the
whole garrison perished. He had thus an important
position, but one which at the same time strengthened
the smugegler’s hatred of him. Here, in their midst,
was one of the tyrants of Ireland of the true old
ruling stamp; and either they must make short work
with Puxley, or Puxley would make an end of them.

He knew his danger, but, dangerous or not, he
had undertaken a work which he meant to go
through with. The brigantine went to and fro be-
tween France and the Kenmare river. In the summer
of 1752 Puxley reported her as lying at her moorings,
having just come in from the sea. She had brought
a cargo of arms, which had been landed, and were
being distributed among the people. Some French
officers had arrived in her, who were sent to recruit
for the brigade. She was taking in wool with which
she was about to sail for Rochelle, and on her next
voyage she was to carry back the officers and men.

1 “Extract of Letter from John Puxley, September 14,1751.’ MSS,
Dublin Castle.

458

BOOK
III

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

If Morty’s doings were known to Puxley, Morty’s

"own eye was fixed no less keenly on the English

1751

officer. He had already disposed of one at least of
Puxley’s predecessors who had been too officious.
Puxley himself was doubly hateful as the possessor
of Dunboy. He could stir nowhere without a guard.
‘If these Raps could put him out of the way,’ he
said, ‘they would govern as they pleased, and carry
on free trade with France and Spain.’ He begged
for a frigate, with a company of soldiers from King-
sale. With this assistance he undertook to make
a clearance of the two bays; search all the hiding-
places, discover the arms and the French officers, and,
perhaps, take even Morty himself.

If it was worth while to paralyse Irish trade with
prohibitory laws, it might have been expected that
means so simple and obvious would not have been
neglected to make those laws effectual. But the
smugeling interest was potent even in Dublin Castle
itself. No frigate came from Kingsale. Not a ship of
war of any kind, Puxley said, had been seen at Bere-
haven since he became an officer. Single-handed, he
was no match for Morty; so, till help came, he kept to
his own side of the mountains, and made war with
his own armed boats on the petty smugglers of
Bantry and Glengariff. Through the autumn and
winter of 1752 he worked bravely on. By the fol-
lowing summer he had seized half a dozen cargoes;
and had sunk as many sloops, or driven them ashore
on Whiddy Island. Morty, busy with his own con-
cerns, or not caring to meddle so long as he was
himself let alone, left Bantry to deal with him, and

‘John Puxley to the Revenue Cora ene June 9.’ MSS.
Dublin Castle.

THE SMUGGLERS.

the Bantry men having no stomach for a fight tried
safer means.

All the country side was by this time furious; the
wool packs lay rotting in the caves; the stores of claret
and brandy ran low, and no full cargoes could be run
in Glengariff harbour to refil thé empty bins. Who was
this miserable Puxley that he should spoil the trade
by which the gentry were making their fortunes,
which the Castle winked at, and which the connivance
of halfa century had legitimatized? In the twilight
of the South of Ireland civilization, it had been dis-
covered that the forms of self-government which Eng-
land had introduced, could become in skilful hands
as good a weapon as the sword. Law administered
by Irish juries and magistrates did the work of an-
archy, and violence ceased to be necessary, save in
the rare cases where law had been tried and failed.

‘Necessity,’ wrote the unfortunate officer to his
employers after four years’ work at his post, ‘ obliges
me to give your honours the trouble hereof, and to let
you know the unhappy situation I am in at Berehaven,
ready to be devoured by my enemies the smugglers,
who have all concerted my banishment out of that un-
happy country—as well Protestants as Papists. They
are joined by some of the landlords of the Berehaven
estate to execute their design. ‘l’o which intent they
keep me constantly going at assize and sessions by
laying themselves out in every respect to provoke
and abuse me both publicly and privately; all which
malice arises from no other provocation given them
more than my activity in serving the crown, and
being a check to the trade formerly carried on in this
country, which I have destroyed. . . . I have
been so unfortunate as to have six or seven landlords

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to every denomination of land in that country. I
have better than half of what farms I hold in lease.
The other parts which I have not in lease I could not
get by any means, which lays me under the greatest
difficulty, for the owners thereof have put Papist
tenants In common with me throughout the whole,
and also in my dwelling-house they have put a
tenant. I assure you his majesty has not a subject
in the kingdom so much oppressed as I have been;
and, though my forefathers fought for liberty, I am
made a sacrifice to Papists supported by Protestants,
who will, if they can, deprive me of liberty and
property. ’*

The ingenious persecution either failed, or was too
slow in effecting its purpose. Or it may have been
that the captain of the Cleinderry brigantine was
stirred to action by some fresh grudge of his own.
At any rate a revenue officer determined to do his
duty was a public nuisance of whom it was necessary
to rid the country; and, as Puxley stood to his work
in spite of legal annoyances, there remained the good
old method which could be better depended on. One
Sunday in March, two months after his last letter to
the Commissioners, as he was on his way to church
at Glengariff, he was waylaid ‘at a smith’s forge’ by
Morty and two companions, and there killed.”

The murder of an active public servant by so
notorious a person as Morty was too serious a thing
to be passed over. The brigantine was busy as ever,
and at that moment there was a special cause of
irritation with Morty, for a party of soldiers had

1¢John Puxley to the Revenue 2 ‘Samuel Morris to the Commis-
Commissioners, January 27, 1754.’ _ sioners of Revenue, March 14, 1754,’
MSS. Dublin Castle. Ibid,

THE SMUGGLERS.

been tempted by his agents to desert from a regi-
ment at Cork, and were hiding in the mountains,
waiting for Morty to carry them to France. The
Garland frigate lay at Kingsale. Orders were sent
to the captain to go round into Kenmare Bay, dis-
cover, and sink her. The difficulties, whatever they
were, which invariably attended active measures,
against the Irish smugglers, if overcome at the Castle
remained formidable at Kingsale. The captain of the
Garland wrote that he was detained at his anchorage
by a gale of wind. ‘The same cause, he pretended,
must prevent the brigantine from sailing, and when
the storm lulled he promised to go in search of her.
Either the brigantine was a better sea boat than the
‘Garland, or Morty a better seaman than her com-
mander, for before the Garland left her anchorage the
brigantine was away on the coast of France. Morty,
however, was not to escape so easily. The half-
awakened justice would probably have sunk to sleep
again, but for Puxley’s two nephews, Henry and
Walter Fitsimon, who shamed, or spurred, the Go-
vernor of Cork into real exertion. Walter had a small
vessel of his own; another belonging to the crown
lay at Cove. Two months later, when Morty was
known to have returned to Cleinderry, Henry Fitz-
simon with these two boats and a company of soldiers
went round to Berehaven. They came in from the
sea after dark. ‘T’he troops were silently landed, and
a rapid march of an hour in heavy rain, through the
pass in the hills, brought them about midnight to
Morty’s dwelling-place.

It was a strange wild place, close to the sea, amidst
rocks and bogs and utter desolation. Near it stood
the wreck of a roofless church, and the yet older ruin

462

BOOK
ait.

—~-— re

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of some Danish pirates’ nest. The shadowy form of
the brigantine was visible through the grey sheet of
falling ram at anchor in the harbour, and from the
rocks at the entrance came the moaning of the At-
lantic swell. Morty, looking for no visitors on such
a night, had neglected to post sentinels. The house
was surrounded, and the wolf was trapped. The
dogs inside were the first to take alarm. A violent
barking was heard, and then suddenly the door was
thrown open. Morty appeared in his shirt, fired a
blunderbuss at the men who were nearest him and
retired. A volley of small arms followed from the
windows and slits in the wall. One soldier was killed
and three others wounded. ‘The strictest orders had
been given to take Morty if possible alive, and the
fire was not at first returned. The house was evi-
dently full of men; eighteen of them bolted, one
after the other, in the hopes of drawing off the
troops into pursuit. Each, however, was caught and
examined, and, when found not to be the man whom
the party came in search of, waslet go. At last there
were but five left in the house. Morty saw that his
time was come. He did not choose to be taken, and
determined to die like a man. He sent out his wife
and child, who were with him, with a request that
their lives might be saved. ‘The officer in command
received them kindly, and gave them such protection
as he could. Morty himself refused to surrender; it
was determined to set fire to the thatch, and wild fire
was thrust under the eaves. The straw was soaked
with the wet, and long refused to catch. At last it
blazed up; the flames seized the dry rafters; the roof
fell in; and, amidst the burning ruins, Morty and his
four remaining companions were seen standing at bay,

THE SMUGGLERS.

blunderbuss in hand. He was evidently desperate,
and to save life it was necessary to shoot him. The
soldiers fired; Morty fell with a ball through his
heart. Two of his comrades fell at his side; the other
two were taken ; the same two, it so happened, who
had been Morty’s companions at the murder of
Puxley.* One of them, Little John Sullivan he was
called, was perhaps Morty’s kinsman; the name of
the other was Daniel Connell. The barony of Iveragh
and Darrynane Abbey, where the Connells, or O’Con-
nells, of later celebrity had already established them-
selves, was but seven miles distant across the water;
and it is thus possible, and even probable, that Daniel
Connell who had assisted at Puxley’s murder, and
escaped the bullets at Cleinderry, was a scion of the
same family which, in the next generation, produced
the Liberator.

The weather making it impossible to carry off the
brigantine, she was sunk, when daylight came, at her
anchorage. ‘The fire was extinguished ; the ruins of
the house were searched; and Morty’s account books,
(he was punctual as Dirk Hatteraick himself in his
money transactions ), his bills, notes, and papers were
found uninjured. Among them were found letters
from many persons of consequence in the county,
showing that they were accomplices in the assas-
sination of the revenue officers. ‘Twenty ankers of
brandy and some chests of tea had been destroyed by
the fire.

1 Fitzsimon even says that they Daniel Connell and little John Sulli-
had taken an active share in the van prisoners, who were the principal
murder. murderers.’ —‘ Henry Fitzsimon to

‘We had the pleasure,’ he writes, | the Commissioners of the Revenue,
‘of shooting him dead, and two of May 7, 1754.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.
his accomplices, and likewise took

463

CHAP.
he

ae cel

Ii

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Morty’s body was carried to Cork. His head

——.— mouldered upon a spike over the gate of the south

1754

gaol. The rest of him was buried in the Battery.
The prisoners can be traced to the gaol; there is no
mention that either of them were hanged, but of their
further fate the records are silent.

So ended one of the last heroes of Irish imagination,
on whose character the historian, who considers that he
and such as he were the natural outgrowth of the
legislation to which it was thought wise and just to sub-
mit his country, will not comment uncharitably. He
had qualities which, had Ireland been nobly governed,
might perhaps have reconciled him to its rulers, and
opened for him an honourable and illustrious career.
At worst he might have continued to serve with his
sword a Catholic sovereign, and might have carved his
way with it to rank and distinction. He was tempted
home by the opportunities of anarchy and the hopes
of revenge. In his own adventurous way he levied
war to the last against the men and the system under
which Ireland was oppressed. When he fell, he fell
with a courage which made his crimes forgotten, and
the ghost of his name still hovers about the wild
shores of the Kenmare river, of which he was so long
the terror and the pride.*

1 For the account of the death of Ireland; ‘a Letter of the Captain
Morty Oge O’Sullivan see an ex- of H.M.S. Garland, March, 1754 ;’
tract from the Cork Remembrancer, and the‘ Letter of Henry Fitzsimon
May 9, 1754, quoted by Crofton to the Revenue Commissioners,
Croker in the Keen of the South of May 7, 1754.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

THE SMUGGLERS.

SECTION III.

I nAvE told the story of one distinguished Sullivan.
I have now to tell the story of a second, himself also a
representative Irishman though of a less worthy type.

Sylvester O'Sullivan, a near kinsman of Morty,
perhaps his uncle, for he was of the highest blood of
the clan, bred like him on Kilmakilloge harbour, but
given rather to books than to the adventurous habits
of his relations, had, about the year 1718, been the
master of a Catholic school in Dublin. He might
have taught Virgil and Ovid to lads of his own creed,
even under the shadow of the Parliament, without
danger of the law interfering with him; but he had
the misfortune, or the rashness, to pervert two
scholars of Trinity College, whom the High Church
fellows had already led to the edge of the Catholic
faith. For this exploit he was tried under the penal
statute, and required to transport himself abroad.
He went to Paris: but the Continent disagreed with
him; he began to pine for home, and, after a few
years, presented himself to Horace Walpole, who was
then English ambassador at the French Court, ex-
pressed contrition for his sins, and professed a desire
to do some service to the English Crown which might
entitle him to pardon. Horace Walpole enquiring
what the service was to be, O'Sullivan produced
a sketch in writing of the enterprise which he
contemplated. It was nothing less than to take
advantage of the connexion of his family with the
Cork and Kerry smugglers, and of his own reputation

VOL. I. HH

CHAP.
Ti
ELSES

1727

466

BOOK
#0 F

—-—"

1727

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

as having been persecuted for his religion, to wind
himself into their secrets, spy out their hiding-places,
discover and report on the persons of rank and position
whom he could find to be in correspondence with
them, procure, in fact, such information as would
enable the Government to break up the traffic.

If a man volunteered a disgraceful but useful oc-
cupation it was not Walpole’s business to discourage
him. He gave O’Sullivan a letter of credit should he
be arrested on returning to Ireland. Thus provided
he went down to Nantes, fell in there with the master
of a Kingsale brig, which was taking in her contraband
cargo—brandy, linen, and tea; and giving his name,
which seemed a guarantee for his honesty, was ad-
mitted as passenger to Valencia, for which the brig
was bound. It was midwinter, when the cruisers were
off their stations, and the coast was clear. The main
channel into the roadstead of Valencia opens to the
north, with a passage practicable in all weathers.
Immediately within is a large, roomy, and perfectly
safe harbour, where at this time a king’s ship was
usually stationed. From the main harbour to the
south-western entrance, where the telegraph wire
now plunges into the Atlantic, runs a strip of quiet
water ten miles long, which divides the island from
the main land. Here, sheltered behind the mountains,
through a rift in which the channel opens to the
ocean, lies the small basin of Port Maghee.

The approach on this side is supremely dangerous;
the enormous seas which have broken on the Irish
shore for hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, —
of years, have eaten their way through the rocks,
destroying the more yielding portions, and leaving the
harder nodules rising from the bottom in treacherous

THE SMUGGLERS.

ridges or invisible needle points, over which the
rollers pour in roaring cataracts of foam. A sailing
vessel attempting to enter with anything but a lead-
ing breeze, if caught in the narrow outlet in heavy
weather by an eddy of wind among the hills, would
be broken against the crags like an egg. A stranger
shuns the place as the ancient mariners shunned the
fatal cliffs of Scylla; and, for the same reason, it was
the chosen resort of the local smuggler. Here, three
days after Christmas, in the year 1727, the Nantes
brig made the Irish coast, and passing boldly in with
a west wind between the breakers, was soon at anchor
in the quiet cove, which was called after the family
of the Maghees, to whom the land belonged.

At this time the ruling potentate was a widow, the
widow Maghee she was called, once Bridget Crosby,
sister or cousin of Sir Maurice Crosby, of Ardfert,
the member for the county. The new comer had a
warm welcome. Smuggler was to smugeler a friend
-that sate closer than a brother. No informer as yet
had ventured into Kerry. The widow’s own sloop
was lying at the pier taking in a cargo of wool.
Boats and lighters came off in the daylight to carry
in and dispose of the Nantes brandy kegs. In the
middle of their operations a man-of-war’s gig came
down from the guardship at Valencia, with an order
for the brig to move up to the main harbour: not,
however, for any vexatious inquiries into her contents,
which were perfectly notorious, but only because the
captain and officers expected a percentage of the spoil.
The watch-dog was to share the carcase with the
wolf, and preferred to keep his eyes on the division.
The brig ran up as she was ordered, anchored within
a cable’s length of the ship, and went on with her

H H 2

468

BOOK
Lit.
——,——_’
1728

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

business. The country people came on board in
hundreds. A brandy auction was held on deck, and
a hundred and twenty ankers were disposed of as fast
as the boats could take them away, besides what the
captain, and officers, and crew of the man-of-war
received for their own perquisites.

All this pretty scene Sylvester O’Suilivan was
noting down at his leisure, when by accident, in
drawing out his handkerchief, he dropped Horace
Walpole’s letter on the brig’s deck. Some one picked
it up, opened and read its contents. It was merely a
pass or protection, but it proved that the pretended
sufferer for conscience had closer relations with the
British Government than he had allowed to appear.
Fierce faces scowled at him. It was proposed to
send him on shore among the Rapparees of the Reeks,
where his shrift would be a short oné. He was
attacked at last, and would have been killed, had he
not snatched a brace of pistols and kept his assailants
at bay, till a party of Sullivans, his own clansmen,
who knew him, and stood by him for his birth’s
sake, interposed and carried him away. The Sulli-
vans, he says, would not allow him to be hurt; but
in their eyes, as well as in every man’s, his coming to
Kerry under false colours was painfully questionable.
They put him on the road to Dublin, to which he
professed to be going, restored to him his doubtful
credentials, and left him to find his own way.

At Killarney he informs us that he injured a leg,
and was unable to proceed. ‘To lose no time, and to
keep his word with Walpole, he wrote an account of
what he had seen at Valencia and Port Maghee,
addressed it to the Castle Secretary, and not liking
to trust a packet. of such dangerous import to the

THE SMUGGLERS.

ordinary ‘carriers,’ he gave it to a gentleman going
to T'ralee to post in the general office there.

Superfluous caution often creates the mischief
which it seeks to avoid. The gentleman, whose name
was Wall, suspecting that the letter contained some-
thing unusual, took the liberty of reading it. He too,
like every one else in the county, was interested in
keeping the smugglers undisturbed. Instead of taking
it to Tralee, he carried it to the smugglers’ agents in
the town, and Sullivan was in a worse scrape than
before. Copies of the letter were circulated about
Killarney. The women howled at him as an in-
former. The boys threw stones at him if he showed
in the street. One day a certain ‘Pat Kelly’ the
schoolmaster, who was one of Donell Mahony’s
Fairies, fell upon him with a club, and meant to kill
him. Providence, however, and his sacred blood
once more stood his friend. Some ladies passing by,
‘moved with compassion for one who was of antient
and valuable extraction in the county,’ begged the
Fairy to spare him, and again he escaped with a
beating.’

1 Other accounts confirm Sulli-
van’s account of the state of [al-
larney.

The O’Donoghue was Donell
Mahony’s son-in-law. Richard
Hedges, writing in 1714 to Secre-
tary Dawson, says, ‘The Protest-
ants in Killarney (besides those
linked to the O’Donoghue) don’t
exceed adozen. Four of them are in
the county adjacent. The justices
of the peace in these parts are Doc-
tor Bland, Francis Brewster, and
Wm. Griffin, Esq. Dr. Bland
lives in a thatched house (a security
for his good behaviour); Mr.
Brewster in Glenflesk is neighbour

to the O’Donoghue and their clan ;
Mr. Griffin is almost a single man,
and often from home. These jus-
tices, as well as the other Protest-
ants, are in terror of their persons.
I'll give you two instances. Old
O’Donoghue told Mr. Griffin to his
face, that he hoped soon to see the
time that he and his would pull
out his throat, and often brags that
he has 500 men at his command.
George Eager, having committed
an affray in Killarney, was sent for
by Dr. Bland and another justice,
who, admonishing him for his breach
of the law, he replied to the other
justice that if ’twere not for the

469

CHAP.
TT.
Te

1728

470

BOOK
III

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Unable to leave Killarney from his lameness, Sul-

—— livan now applied for protection to the magistrates.

1728

He found the magistrates either unable to help him,
or too much implicated with the smugglers them-
selves to be willing to interfere. So making the best
of a bad matter, he pretended repentance, addressed
himself to Pat Kelly, whom he offered to assist in his
school, and being a Sullivan he was at last forgiven,
and taken into partnership.

Killarney at this time was the Catholic University
of Ireland. The law which forbade the Catholics to
open schools was observed as little as the law for the
expulsion of the regular clergy; but it was most
conveniently defied in counties like Kerry, where
law was in abeyance altogether, and Protestants and
Catholics were combined, from reasons of their own,,to
manage the administration on independent principles.

There was a person holding an important office at
this time in the neighbourhood of Killarney, who
will be heard of again, a character who deserves the
particular attention of the student of Irish history.

The Rev. Francis Lawder was Vicar General of

respect he had to some of the com-

substance shall betaken away in one
pany, he would beat him with a

night by persons that carry skenes

great cudgel he brandished in his
hand as long as his stick would last,
and called him many opprobrious
names.’ Mr. Eager was soon after
made high constable.—‘ R. Hedges
to Secretary Dawson, August 14,
1714.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

In 1729, the year after Sullivan
was in the town, Lord Fitzmaurice
writes from Ross Castle :—

‘The robberies that. are daily
committed in the neighbourhood of
this place on persons of all ranks are
so extravagant, that a man’s entire

and pocket pistols always about
them. These personsare continually
in riots, and frequently fire numbers
of pistols in the night time in Kil-
larney. But though I have heard
this myself, yet I could not find a
man that would help me to bring
these lawless people to justice, they
being all Papists that carry these
weapons of offence, as well as those
whose assistance Lasked. All these
persons are protected by different
clans here.’—Jbzd.

THE SMUGGLERS.

A771

the diocese of Limerick, and chief judge in the cnap.

II.

Bishop’s Consistory Court. This gentleman had —~—_~

given the smuggling transactions his most careful
attention. He was himself deeply concerned in the
trade. He had studied the conditions under which
it could be made to thrive in greatest security. Ac-
cording to Sullivan’s story, he had not only winked
at, but encouraged, the establishment of the Killarney
Catholic schools, to prevent the intrusion of English
ideas, and to strengthen the system under which the
affairs of the county were carried on. The educa-
tion being his peculiar province, his eye was soon
drawn on Sullivan. He recognized him as a dan-
gerous person of whom it was desirable to rid the
neighbourhood, and was already casting about for
means to dispose of him. Finding himself in the very
hotbed of the contraband trade which he had come
to Ireland to expose, Sullivan, notwithstanding his
danger, seems to have determined to stick to Kil-
larney, and to gain favour at the Castle by real service.
It is hardly conceivable, notwithstanding the sore leg,
that he could not have left it if he had wished. But
his game was an extremely dangerous one. He was
safe on one side by connecting himself with the Fairies;
but the Vicar General was an antagonist of another
creed. The Vicar General, who saw through him,
could order his arrest as a teacher in a Catholic school.
To meet attack on this side he presented himself in the
parish church of Killarney as a convert from Popery,
and was formally received into the Establishment.
He was unaware as yet that the Vicar General and
the Fairies were such close allies as he found them.
Donell Mahony himself had become a nominal Pro-
testant to qualify himself to hold the Shelburne lease.

1728

472

BOOK
Ii.

————’
1728

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND,

Protestantism of this kind was understood and laughed
at. But Sullivan was mistaken in supposing that his
own conformity would be endured as easily. No sooner
was it announced that he had changed his religion,
than the rage of the town burst out again. Pat
Kelly, his partner, waylaid him in the street with
‘an unmerciful cutlass,’ and threatened to run him
through the body. He pretended that he dared not
leave the town for fear he should be followed and
killed. If he stayed he was like to fare no better.
He did not venture a second appeal to the magis-
trates, for the magistrates, he had learnt already,
were in league with the wool runners. To complete
the absurdity of the picture, in the midst of all this
lawlessness there was a garrison of soldiers at Ross
Castle, not a mile distant from the town, under the
command of Lord Fitzmaurice, the eldest son of the
Earl of Kerry. To Lord Fitzmaurice, as his last

chance, Sullivan now applied, and declared that he

was in danger of his life from Pat Kelly and his cut-
lass. Fitzmaurice was one of the Protestants who,
for ‘ the odd reasons’ alluded to by the Castle Secre-
tary, were not much ‘to be relied on. He looked his
visitor sternly in the face, and told him that ‘ Kerry
did not love informers.’ At last, with much difficulty,
he issued a warrant for Kelly’s arrest. The High
Constable, Mr. George Eager (who had recommended
himself for his office by threatening to break his cudgel
on a magistrate’s back in his own court) insisted
that the warrant could not be executed. Mr. Donell
Mahony appeared on the scene immediately after,
with all Killarney howling at his back, and offered
bail for Kelly, which Fitzmaurice at once accepted.
The unfortunate Sullivan was turned out of Ross

THE SMUGGLERS.

A735

Castle among the mob, who received him with yells seus
of spy and eivnier: ranted him to his house, and rack,

serenaded him from valor his window ‘with execra-
tions and blasphemies against the Church of England
and its ministers.’ The blood of the O’Sullivans had
so far saved him from the worst extremity. Now,
however, he says it was decided that he must die.
The execution of a descendant of a noble Irish house
was only to be performed by a Milesian of equal rank;
and MacCartymore, the landless chief of the Mac
Carties, an outlaw given in his bankrupt condition to
drink, already liable to hanging for other crimes, and
to whom an extra sin would be of no consequence,
was pitched upon to put him out of the world.

Hither MacCarty could not be brought to the
point, or Fitzmaurice gave the smugglers to under-
stand that Sullivan, being an emissary of Government,
they must stop short of extremities, and the idea of
murder was postponed till other methods had first been
tried. One night, when he was in his bed, Pat Kelly
and the Fairies broke in, seized him, tied him hand
and foot, and bore him off to a lonely house outside
the town. His pocket book, with Walpole’s pass in
it, was taken from him; and the next morning he was
carried before a bench of magistrates, consisting of the
Rev. Francis Lawder, Sir Maurice Crosby of Ardfert,
Lord Fitzmaurice’s brother-in-law, and David Barry,
seneschal of the Ross ‘Manor Court.’ Mr. Lawder
took the charge of the case, and addressed the prisoner
with meritorious frankness.

‘You rogue,’ he said; ‘do you think to get justice
against the county of Kerry gentlemen who are all
of a knot, and baffle the very judges on the circuit ?
You are mistaken. Our words are taken by the

1728

474

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book Government before the depositions of a thousand wit-
Ree nesses who have no friends to back them. I wonder

1728

you would be so mad as to enterprise the like affair!
Were you not afraid to be knocked on the head? My
friend, this is not France; this is Kerry, where we do
as we please. We'll teach you some Kerry law, which
is to give no right, and take no wrong.’

The offence alleged was that Sullivan was a returned
convict. His identity with the transported school-
master was not denied, and the passport being safe
in Pat Kelly’s keeping, Lawder ironically asked him
whether he had received permission to come back to
Ireland. He pleaded that his papers had been stolen.
The magistrates threatened to have him flung outof the
window for insolence. The creature was not deficient
in courage. Being in extremity, as he afterwards
declared, and expecting no mercy, he turned on the
Vicar General and asked him ‘how it would be taken
by the Government, if a clergyman and a magistrate
was found to have employed a Rapparee to assault
and kidnap a new convert who had just read his pub-
lic recantation before the Rev. Mr. Bland, and the
congregation.’

The Vicar General seemingly paid no attention, but
wrote out his committal as a returned Papist, and
passed him over to the constable to take to Tralee
gaol. The magistrates, however, hesitated before
completing so glaring a piece of impertinence.
Sullivan was confined for a few days at a private
house in Killarney, and was then turned out of doors,
with the advice to leave Ireland as fast as he could,
and a promise that, if he betrayed what had befallen
him to the Government, he should be promptly
killed.

THE SMUGGLERS.

Being, as he said, ‘invincibly persuaded’ that this
was true, he lay quiet in his lodging for two or three
months. He was closely watched, but the evident
tenderness for the Sullivan name and extraction again
befriended him. He ventured gradually to show him-
self in the streets again, and at last reopened his
school, where, having a reputation for learning, he
gathered a knot of students about him ; among others
another young Connell of Iveragh, named Maurice.

Among these lads he contrived to ingratiate him-
self. Some of them were strangers from other parts
of the country, unconnected with the Kerry faction,
and valued Sullivan for the learning which he was
really able to give them His classes were well
filled, and the informer was forgotten in the professor;
when the unlucky arrival in the town of a heavy
cargo of smuggled brandy rekindled the smouldering
exasperation. Once more he was waylaid, knocked
down, and beaten. He escaped into his school-room,
where the boys took his side, barricaded the door and
windows, and beat off the mob who continued howling
outside; when Fitzmaurice, resolved, once for all, to
be rid of a nuisance which had grown intolerable,
sent a warrant for his instant appearance at Ross
Castle.

Sullivan says, that Fitzmaurice desired that he
should be torn to pieces in the riot, under circum-
stances which could be represented as accidental.
The suspicion was so far justified that no escort of

1A young McLaughlin, for in- teachers, and hearing a famous
stance, from Ardagh, co. Long- character of the teachers of Kerry,
ford, who was examined afterwards he had repaired to Killarney to the
at the Castle in connexion with school of Sylvester O’Sullivan, pro-
Sullivan’s story, said that, ‘living fessor of various sciences,’—MSS,
in a place inconvenient to good Dublin Castle, 1728.

476

BOOK
Tit.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

soldiers was sent to conduct him down. Fitzmaurice

——-— was disappointed however, if this was his object, by

1728

the fidelity of the students who attended their master
as a bodyguard.

To expose the alleged occasion of a disturbance in
the stocks, in the middle of the mob, would not have
been considered, out of Ireland, a hopeful method of
appeasing it. This, however, was the remedy which
suggested itself to the Governor of Ross Castle. He
sentenced Sullivan to sit in that position for two
hours, in Killarney Market Place. ‘Sullivan made his
humble demonstration, that he was known to be de-
scended from a noble, antient, and valuable family in
the county.’ The better the blood, in the opinion of
Lord Fitzmaurice, the deeper the disgrace. The pri-
soner was taken back for the sentence to be executed
—the stocks were prepared— evil persons’ were fill-
ing their pockets with stones, to make an end of him
as soon as he was secured. Once more the faithful
students came to the rescue. ‘The stocks were upset
and broken in pieces; Sullivan was hurried away in
the dusk to some temporary hiding-place; and that
night young Maurice Connell, a young Mc Laughlin
of Ardagh, in Longford, and two other lads, con-
ducted him, by byeways and paths, over the moun-
tains out of Kerry; never leaving him till they had
seen him safe in Dublin, when he told his singular
story at the Castle.’

1 ¢Axamination of Sylvester as O’Sullivan, and, so far as their
O’Sullivan, 1728’ MSS. Dublin knowledge went, his account is
Castle. Maurice Connell and _ confirmed by theirs.

McLaughlin were examined as well

THE SMUGGLERS.

SECTION IV.

ATT

On the most superficial insight into the condition of cHap.
three out of the four provinces of Ireland, the contrast aa

between the laws on the statute book and the living
reality is more than grotesque. The Ireland of theory
was law-ridden beyond any country in Europe. The
Ireland of fact was without any law at all, save what
was recognized by the habits of each district and
county. ‘The forms of English jurisdiction were ad-
mitted only when the chicanery of local attorneys
could abuse them for Irish purposes. The Protestant
magistrates, who were the nominal rulers over the
Catholics, were as powerless as if they were dead,
when they set themselves in opposition to Catholic
prejudices. The Protestant gentry, clergymen as
well as laymen, were rather driven to purchase tole-
ration for themselves by adopting the manners of
those among whom their lot was cast, than to stir
sleeping dogs by struggling against the stream. The
Castle government was best pleased when there was
the least disturbance, and assumed that all was well
when its composure was unruffled by complaints.
Donell Mahony might rule in Kerry, or Martin of
Ballinahinch in Connemara. The O’Donoghue might
threaten one magistrate on the bench with a visit from
five hundred Rapparees; the high-constable of Kil-
larney might tell another, that he would have broken
his staff on his head ‘ save out. of respect for the rest
of the company.’ Such things might be, but the
Government desired to hear as little as they might

1728

478

BOOK
ET,
——

1728

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of evidences of administrative weakness. Soldiers
might be quartered a few roods off; but the soldiers
were so ostentatiously indifferent, that they must have
been ordered at all hazards to avoid unpleasant col-
lisions. What could magistrates do so circumstanced,
but, since they were forbidden to force the people to
submit to the law, submit the law and ultimately
their own manners, and sympathies, and characters to
the ways of the people. A story, told by an informer
like Sylvester O'Sullivan, would, by itself, have been
an insufficient witness to the habits of the gentlemen
of the south of Ireland. Another incident, almost
exactly contemporary, a matter which became at last
of international consequence, and was made the sub-
ject of judicial investigation, exhibits the country in
the same aspect of lawlessness ; and, one at least of
the same parties—the Vicar General of the diocese—
in a position which singularly confirms O’Sullivan’s
account of him.

Ballyhige House, or Castle, the seat of a younger
branch of the family of Crosby, stands at the northern
extremity of the Bay of Tralee. The sand and pow-
dered shells, which form the bed of the Atlantic, are
swept in by the eddying tides behind Kerry Head,
and lie for miles as a fringe upon the shore. The
shoals reach far to the sea, and the rollers with a
north-west wind break over it in sheets of yellow
foam. Blown sand heaps, covered with long pale
grass, and burrowed by rabbits, divide the beach from
the brown morass which stretches inland over the
level plain. At the north end of the sands where
the ground rises out of the bog is the castle, which
was the scene of the following story :—

The Crosbies of Kerry were descended from John

THE SMUGGLERS.

Crosbie, who in 1600 was made Bishop of Ardfert by
Queen Elizabeth. The Bishop bought estates in the
country, which his son increased by good manage-
ment and a judicious alliance. Sir Thomas, his grand-
son, a staunch loyalist, was knighted by Ormond. He
was twice married, and left behind him eight sons
and one daughter. Daniel Crosbie, the eldest, inhe-
rited the family property at Ardfert. From him it
passed to Sir Maurice, who married a Fitzmaurice, a
daughter of Lord Kerry, and, at the time to which
our story relates, was member for the county in the
Trish Parliament. Sir Maurice, it will be remem-
bered, was one of the magistrates before whom Syl-
vester O’Sullivan was brought at Killarney. Thomas
Crosbie, Sir Maurice’s uncle, the eldest son of Sir
Thomas by his second marriage, succeeded to the
estates at Ballyhige, which had belonged to his
mother. Like the rest of the family he was a fierce
High Churchman,’ and sate with the Knight of Kerry
for the borough of Dingle. He too had married into
the peerage, his wife, Lady Margaret, being sister of
the Earl of Barrymore.

Another Crosbie, a cousin William, was member
for Ardfert. Arthur, a cousin also, was Commis-
sioner of the Customs, and had a son who married a
daughter of Lord Mornington, the Honorable Fanny
Wesley or Wellesley.

The family, which was thus highly connected,
became the actors in one of the most remarkable

1 «Those of the Old Church, which
they call the High one, are in ex-
pectation that either Mr. Meredith,
a very honest English gentleman,
or Mr. Crosbie, of Ballyhige, are
pricked as sheriffs by my Lord Chief
Justice, because they were never yet

sheriffs, and that they are High
Churchmen to their hilts, and great
champions for that cause in this
county.’—‘ Maurice Hussey to Sec-
retary Dawson, 1710.’ MSS, Dub-
lin Castle.

480)

BOOK
IIl.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

episodes of Irish history in the last century; and the

—-— story of it illustrates how much could be ventured

1729

with impunity in that country by persons who com-
manded so many votes in the Parliament.

Ballyhige was at this time a long straggling house,
built low to avoid the storms, and thatched, which
was a proof of confidence in the people, and a sign
that the owner had no reason to fear incendiaries.
On the east side was a large fruit and kitchen garden;
on the west, attached by a wall to the main building,
was a square stone fire-proof tower of unknown anti-
quity. Between the house and the sea there had
been run up a set of cabins forming a court or qua-
drangle, and occupied by workmen; for Mr. Crosbie,
being a man of enterprise, had erected a linen factory
there, and was doing a thriving business, with a
Scotchman named Dalrymple for a foreman. Behind
the factory the ground sloped away to the sandhills,
and thence to the shore.

It so happened that, in the autumn of the year
1728, a Danish East Indiaman, the Golden Lion,
having on board twelve chests of silver bullion, which
she was bringing home from the East, was driven by
foul weather into the Bay of Tralee." The wind fall-
ing round to the north-west, and blowing dead on the
land, she was unable to extricate herself, and at five
in the morning of the 28th of October she grounded,
in the shallow water, half a mile from shore. She had
eighty-eight men on board, and she carried twenty-two
guns. When first seen the evening before the wreck,
she had been taken for a privateer. Her character and

1 Local tradition says that she certainly unjust. In the contem-
was tempted in by falselights. The porary depositions there is not a
charge rose probably from the hint of anything of the kind.
habits of a later generation, and is

THE SMUGGLERS.

the value of her cargo, however, were very soon
known. As the tide went back a mob of wreckers
and smugglers assembled, who, under pretence of
giving help, would have soon disabled and over-
whelmed the confined and half-drowning crew. But
Mr. Crosbie turned out with his servants and work-

| “men, drove away the people, assisted the captain and

sailors to land with their bullion chests, and carried
them into the shelter of Ballyhige. The ship was
lost. All her company and everything of value which
she had on board were saved.

The silver coined and in bars was worth nineteen
or twenty thousand pounds.’ Mr. Crosbie showed
only the most honourable desire to preserve the pro-
perty which had been recovered for its lawful owners.
He deposited the chests in a cellar, gave the com-
mander, Captain Heitmann, an acknowledgment for
their delivery into his charge, and allowed the Danes
themselves to keep guard on the place where the
treasure was deposited.

The exposure on the morning of the wreck was
unfortunately fatal to him. He caught a severe cold
from standing in the water, and being an old man he
died in a few weeks. A claim was put in for salvage
by his executors, seemingly exaggerated, for in De-
cember an order was sent from Dublin Castle to the
Tralee Custom House to protect the Danes from
extortion; but, until the question was settled, they
were not permitted to remove the treasure, and
Captain Heitmann was made uneasy at the tone in
which the subject was talked of in the county. Mr.
Crosbie’s funeral drew together a crowd from all

1 The purchasing power of money being more than double what it is
at present.

VOL. I. II

481

CHAP.
Ang

_—_---_

1429

AS2

BOOK
TIt.

_——-—

ene

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

parts of the neighbourhood. The Irish were present
there in overwhelming numbers, and their general
tone was reckless and menacing. ‘The rejection of
the salvage claims had been resented in the house-
hold, and the servants’ ideas on rights of property
were evidently loose. The Captain at last asked Lady
Margaret to make over to him the detached stone
tower, in which he could lodge his seamen, and
have the treasure with him under the same roof.
Lady Margaret refused. She wanted one at least,
she said, of the rooms in the tower for her own pur-
poses. She permitted the chests, however, to be
buried in the tower cellar in a position unknown to
any one except her butler. The hole was filled in
with broken glass and crockery, and earth was thrown
over it. The greater number of the crew went away.
Ten or twelve who remained were lodged in the tower
garret, a sentinel was stationed at the door at the
foot of the staircase, while Captain Heitmann himself
continued Lady Margaret’s guest in the castle itself.

The months passed on; spring followed winter. The
salvage difficulty could not be settled, and the un-
usual presence in Kerry of so large a quantity of
money, over the ownership of which meanwhile some
uncertainty was supposed to hang, set the whole
county in agitation.

The name of the Vicar-General of the diocese now
re-appears. The Rev. Francis Lawder resided but a
few miles from Ballyhige. Towards the middle of
April, Mr. Lawder’s steward was superintending a
party of labourers, who were thrashing out corn, when
a stranger entered the barn and whispered something
to the steward, who went away with him. The same
evening the steward told the labourers that there was

THE SMUGGLERS.

48

a plan on foot to carry off the Danes’ treasure, and cap.

If.

>
co)

asked if they cared to take a part in it. The ex- —“~—

ploit was tempting; but whether it might be safely
ventured depended on the opinion of the county. If
all ranks were implicated, none would be punished;
a small party would be discovered and hanged. They
asked whether the gentry approved. The steward
answered that all the gentry had consented, except
the Earl of Kerry, who had not been consulted.
They had promised either to be present themselves,
or else to send their servants.

To men to whom smuggling had become a second
nature, chests of bullion recovered out of the sea had
lost the character of private property; and the hesita-
tion in paying the Crosbies’ salvage claims removed
the scruples of the waverers. What, however, did
Lady Margaret think about it? Lady Margaret was
the great person of the neighbourhood. Lady Mar-
garet’s supposed rights were the legal groundwork
of the proceeding, and, without her leave, the lowest
Rapparee would not stir. The Ballyhige butler, Mr.
Banner, was taken into council. Banner was in-
structed to inform his mistress that, 1f she would give
the word, the thing should be done, and a third or
half the spoil should be her ladyship’s share. Lady
Margaret was neither better nor worse than other
ladies and gentlemen in the county ; she could not live
in an atmosphere of lawlessness without contracting
something of the same temperament. Had _ she
spoken her real thoughts she would have answered
like young Pompey—

This thou shouldst have done,
And not have spoke on’t. Being done unknown,

I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now.

Tei

1729

484

BOOK
ith

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

When the butler delivered his message, she affected

—— great displeasure. She would not hear of it, she said.

1729

She would rather lose her own life than allow the
Danes to be robbed under her roof. She spoke
decisively, yet something in her manner indicated a
less fixed resolution. The butler inferred that, so
long as she was not herself compromised, she would
not be unforgiving. The report which he carried back
was sufficient. The plot gathered shape, stole into
the general air, and was whispered in hall and cabin.
The steward, who was a practised hand, and knew
that in such matters there was:nothing more dan-
gerous than delay, collected, as he considered, a suffi-
cient force on the spot, and one midnight, with forty
men with blacked faces, and armed with guns and
pickaxes, he stole up through the candhilie and sent
a boy into the house to tell the butler that the
people were come.

It happened that Mr. Arthur Crosbie, Lady Mar-
garet’s nephew, was that night a guest at Ballyhige.
Mr. Arthur was clerk of the Crown for the county,
and might be held exceptionally responsible. He
must, of course, have been taken generally into con-
fidence, and have given a general approval, but he
was unprepared for such sudden action. The butler
ran to his room and woke him. He said, ‘ he would
not for any consideration the thing should be done
while he was in the house; as soon as he was gone
he did not care what they did.’ The butler with
much difficulty persuaded the gang to withdraw for
that night and to wait for another opportunity.
Arthur Crosbie departed, but it seemed now as if
Lady Margaret’s own mind misgave her. Eager con-
spirators continued to flit about the house and gossip

THE SMUGGLERS.

485 °

with the servants. The Vicar-General’s men were in CHAE.
haste to be at work. The Ballyhige house SUE We Tiehn one

assured Lady Margaret from him that she should
have her part secured, and it would be more than
she would get from the Danes. He told her that
the attempt would certainly be made, indeed had
all but been made already.

Lady Margaret still wavered. ‘She seemed to
abhor the thought of it,’ or it might be that she only
abhorred the officiousness which thrust an unwelcome
privity upon her. She desired and did not desire ;
approved and disapproved. She, perhaps, wished to
escape the temptation, and, by an effort of honesty. to
place the prize out of her reach. A day or two after
the first attempt she sent for one of the Danish
officers, called him into a private room, and told him
that the treasure was in danger. She bade him ask
Captain Heitmann if he was satisfied with the place
in which it was bestowed, and she offered, if he pre.
ferred it, to keep the chests in her own bedroom.
Captain Heitmann said that the dwelling-house being
thatched, and therefore liable to be fired, he thought
they were safer inthe tower. The officer carried back
the answer. Lady Margaret gave so odd a smile that
he was led to ask, how she knew that there were ill
designs on foot. In his own country, he said, persons
revealing intended crimes were brought before a
magistrate, and examined upon oath. If she had
serious grounds for suspicion there ought to be a
similar enquiry.

Lady Margaret said that this was not the custom
in Ireland. Information might be given privately,
but gentlemen did not like their names to be made
public. In fact, she could say no more,, but she

1729

486

BOOK
IT.

1729

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

desired to let him understand generally that mis-
chief was in the wind.

The Danes knew not what to make of information
so ambiguously given. They were strangers ; most
of them understood no language but their own:
one or two spoke English imperfectly, and Irish not
at all.’ But they naturally assumed, that in the
English dominions, and under the English Flag, they
were in a country which respected the first principles
of law. Similar warnings continued to reach them:
the butler’s wife told them one day they ought to be
much obliged to her husband; half a hundred villains
had come to the house one night, to make away with
them, and, but for Mr. Banner, they would have been
all murdered, and the treasure taken away. She
too perhaps, like her mistress, wished them to take
precautions which should make the robbery impos-
sible; but they only laughed at her. In the house of
the sister of a peer and the widow of a member of
Parliament, they refused to believe that they could
be really in danger. She left them, they said after-
wards, ‘very angry.’

The affair was by this time whispered over the
whole country side, and, among others, reached the
ears of Mr. Collis, the vicar of Tralee. Mr. Collis
had not perhaps been long enough in Kerry to out-
grow his prejudices. He was stopped on a Sunday
afternoon in the middle of May, by one of his
parishioners, who said that he desired to consult
him. ‘The twelve chests of silver at Ballyhige were
about to be carried off and divided: Lady Margaret
was to have four of them; four were for the gentle-
men of the county; the four remaining were to be

1 The captain’s deposition is in Latin.

THE SMUGGLERS.

shared among the party who were to execute the
robbery. He had himself, he said, been invited to
join, and he wished to know whether it was robbery
in the real sense of the word, and whether it was an
act which the vicar would approve. Collis, astonished
and shocked, told him that it was a monstrous piece
of wickedness, and that, at all hazards, it must be
prevented. He was unable to conceive that a per-
son in Lady Margaret’s position could herself be an
accomplice; and not being himself acquainted with
her, he desired a gentleman of Tralee, whom he knew
to visit at Ballyhige, to let her know what was going
on. he gentleman promised to tell her, but he
understood Kerry better than the vicar of Tralee,
and put it off from day to day. Collis himself at
last rode over to Ballyhige, had an interview with
Lady Margaret, and told her frankly that officious
friends of her own, under pretence of doing her the
justice which the Danes refused, were about to com-
mit a frightful crime in her supposed interest.

Lady Margaret was polite but unsatisfactory. She
expressed ‘a great dislike’ to the idea, but had evi-
dently not realized the criminality of it. She said
that she would speak to Captain Heitmann, and that
the chests should be removed to her own room. It
would have been more to the purpose if she had pro-
posed to send them to the gaol or barracks at Tralee.
Collis left Ballyhige with more misgivings than he
had brought with him. He endeavoured to impress
upon her before he went, that, besides robbing, there
would be bloodshed and probably murder; and he
seriously entreated her to forbid an act, which a word
from her, spoken decidedly, would certainly prevent.
Lady Margaret’s conscience was again moved. She

CHAP.

48

Il.

ry

(

488

BOOK
oth

————
1729

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sent once more for the officer to whom she had spoken
before. Her present informant she was able to name.
Mr. Collis of Tralee, she said, had told her that a
robbery would certainly be attempted. A second time
she suggested that the chests should be removed to
the dwelling-house and placed under her personal
charge.

Her object probably was less to prevent the robbery
than to prevent a collision between the Danes and the
Vicar-General’s gang. The officer was still incredu-
lous, that an act of open violence would be ventured
upon strangers in the house of a gentleman of fortune,
full of servants, with a linen factory swarming with
workmen not a hundred yards distant. He was per-
haps less satisfied that, if the chests were transferred
from their present position, they might not myste-
riously disappear. He declined to let them be re-
moved. He took the precautions of placing a second
sentinel at the turret door during the night. He
again begged Lady Margaret to let the Danes have
the turret to themselves, and asked that some of his
own ship’s muskets, which were in the castle, with
ball and powder, might be served out to his men.
The first request Lady Margaret declined; it would
be inconvenient, she said, and she could not allow it.
After some delay, eight or ten muskets were sent
over and some balls, but, under one pretext or an-
other, no powder was sent with them.

Even yet the unfortunate Danes were not seriously
alarmed. ‘The officers and seven sailors slept in the
upper rooms in the turret. One of the servants
occupied the apartment on the ground-floor, so that
they were unable to barricade the door. * They kept
careful watch, however; and Captain Heitmann had

THE SMUGGLERS.

‘so far seen no reason to move his quarters from the
dwelling-house and remain with his men.

Lady Margaret meanwhile had given her definite
consent, and in keeping back the powder, she trusted
that she had taken sufficient precautions to prevent
bloodshed. Everybody in the house was now in the
secret. Mr. Thomas Hassett’ came to stay at Bally-
hige with a number of servants. They were all taken
into confidence. Several other gentlemen’s servants
were in attendance ; their presence was the price they
were made to pay for their share of the booty. The
preparations were made with the utmost deliberation.
A sloop was brought round into the bay to be at
hand in case of sudden danger. The house steward
sent the wheel-barrows and truckles, which were in
the yard, to be repaired, that they might be in con-
dition to bear a heavy load. Mr. Lawder’s servants
put in readiness his horses and carts. The night of
the fourth of June was fixed on for the attack. The
gang were to come up as before from the sea, through
the sand-hills. ‘The servants undertook that they
should find all gates and doors unlocked.

No fresh warning was allowed to the Danes.
The officer in the turret had gone to bed, and was
asleep. He was awoke at midnight by a sound
of shots. A moment after one of his men was at
his bedside, wounded and bleeding. ‘The two sen-
tries had been suddenly fired on, and had both been
killed. Peterson, the wounded man, who had been
with them, had dragged himself up the stairs, secur-
ing behind him the door which divided the upper and
lower stories. The officer sprung up and flew with
the rest to the leads. He saw the court below swarm-

1 Perhaps Benner or Blennerhassett.

489

CHAP.
iY:

———

1729

490

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

ing with armed men, with guns and torches. By the

Nt _ flaming light he recognized one of the Crosbie family,

729

and more than one of the household. The Danes
had but a pair of pistols and one gun with them, and
no aramunition for a second charge. To fire would be
to throw away their lives uselessly, so they remained
behind the parapets, watching the robbers’ proceed-
ings.

Captain Heitmann, in the dwelling-house, had in a
like manner been roused by the uproar. He too had
darted out of bed, and had run down to the hall,
where he found the family assembled. He went to
the door to open it. Lady Margaret threw herself in
his way, and implored him not to stir as he would be
killed. He asked if she would not send some one
down to rouse the factory hands. She said it was
impossible. In fact they were already roused, and
were at work in the court with the rest. He ap-
pealed tothe servants. Noone stirred. He appealed
to Mr. Hassett. Mr. Hassett sate still and made no
reply. If he went out alone, he feared they would
lock the door behind him, and leave him to be mur-
dered. He flung himself, in despair, upon a bench,
and sate helplessly listening to the yells and cries in
the court.

The turret door meanwhile was wide open; the
cellar floor was torn up; the earth and broken
bottles were cleared away, and the twelve chests
were lifted out to be distributed, according to the
arrangement. Beforehand the division had appeared
easy. Lady Margaret was to have a third, the gen-
tlemen a third, and the robbers a third; but the
question now rose, who were the gentlemen, and
who were the robbers ? Were the Ballyhige servants

THE SMUGGLERS. AQ]

to be paid out of their mistress’s share, or out of cHAP.
the share of the Vicar-General’s gang? The butler, Aare
the footman, the coachman, a young David Crosbie, 1729
the Scotch factory foreman, and six or seven others,
all imsisted that they had borne their part in the
robbery, and were entitled to their part of the robbers’
portion; at last they laid hold on six of the chests,
and tried to carry them off. A fight began, which, had
there been time to finish it, would have diminished
the number of the claimants; but the grey June
morning was already breaking, and for Lady Mar-
garet’s sake it was essential to prevent daylight from
overtaking them before they had finished their work.
Half by force, a rough partition was effected: the
Ballyhige party secured what they had seized ; Lady
Margaret’s four chests were buried in the garden ;
two were broken up and the contents rudely di-
vided; and the Dolphin sloop sailed in the morn-
ing, with young David Crosbie and several others,
who had staggered down to the shore loaded with
money bags. ‘The six remaining chests were taken
off in carts to the Vicar-General’s barn. One cart
broke down on the way. ‘There was no time to
repair it: the chest was opened by the roadside,
and ‘the scum,’ as the rank and file of the gang
were called, received their wages in handfuls of
silver. Mr. Lawder’s proctor had marked three,
which he intended to secrete; perhaps for private
and careful distribution at leisure; but the other par-
ties interested were impatient or suspicious. Mr.
Arthur Crosbie’s steward came over a day or two
after to enquire after the gentlemen’s shares, and inti-
mated ‘that it would be worse for those concerned,
if they were not sent.’ Servants came on horseback,

492

BOOK
AWB

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

who filled their hats and their pockets; and thus, in

_— a short time, the whole disappeared.

1729

The strangest part of the story has now to be told.
Kiven in Kerry it was not expected that an exploit |
of this kind could be passed over without a show of
enquiry. The day after the robbery, Lady Margaret
sent word to Mr. Chester, chief collector of the
revenue, that her house had been broken into and
the Danish silver stolen. Her son and her servants,
she said, had attempted to trace the perpetrators, but
had failed in discovering them.

The son, who was a mere lad, was not likely to
discover them. Lady Margaret, perhaps, hoped that
the excuse would be accepted, but the affair had been
on too large a scale. The leading magistrates in the
county were, Sir Maurice Crosbie, county member
and high sheriff; William Crosbie, member for Ard-
fert; Mr. Blennerhassett, Edmund Denny, and the
Knight of Kerry. Mr. Blennerhassett, if not related to
the Hassett who was an accomplice, certainly assisted
afterwards in suppressing investigation. The Cros-
bies’ first duty was to their own family. The Knight
had too many transactions of his own with the smug-
glers to be able to exert himself if he had wished.
Mr. Denny could not act alone in a matter which
might bring him in deadly feud with his neighbours.
The robbery was on the night of the 4th of June. A
week passed. No arrests had been made, and no
steps taken. On the 15th there came a sharp re-
primand from Dublin from Mr. Lingen, the first
commissioner of the Customs. The Government,
Mr. Lingen said, were at a loss to understand such
extraordinary remissness in an affair of so much
consequence. The magistrates were commanded to

THE SMUGGLERS.

exert themselves instantly to recover the money, and
‘prevent the damage which would otherwise fall on
the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.’

For decency’s sake it was necessary to do some-
thing, but something which should furnish no clue
to the real perpetrators. A notorious smuggler
named Anderson, who had not been concerned, was
taken up, and sent to Dublin to be examined. An-
derson pleaded his own innocence, and of course there
was no evidence against him. He could not call
himself wholly ignorant of what everyone knew; but
when pressed by Sir Edward Southwell, the principal
secretary, for the names of the parties guilty, he said,
that he could mention no one in particular ‘ unless
he named the whole commonalty on that side of the
county of Kerry.’

If the commonalty were all implicated there was,
at least, the Earl of Kerry, the lord lieutenant ot
the county. Carteret, the then viceroy, was in Eng-
land. ‘The Lords Justices, Archbishop Boulter, and
the Speaker, Conolly, wrote in real indignation to
require the Earl to bring the offenders to justice, and
compel them to restore their plunder. Lord Kerry
himself promised to do his best. His own hands were
clean, and, for himself, he had nothing to conceal; but
he acknowledged, frankly, that there would be great
difficulty. He could expect no help from the magis-
trates. The money, he feared, was beyond recovery.

His son, Lord Fitzmaurice, if his behaviour at Kil-
larney was a specimen of his general conduct, was
probably less scrupulous than his father. On Lord
Fitzmaurice and the Earl, however, the responsibility
was now thrown so seriously that they could not evade
it. The steward and the butler at Ballyhige were

494

BOOK
ure
———_--—_—

1729

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

arrested, threatened with the gallows, and frightened
into full confessions; but, the more they confessed,
the more perplexing the situation became. The first
families in the county ; high officials in Church and
state: members of Parliament who had votes, and who
required to be conciliated; the Earl of Kerry’s own
kindred, for Sir Maurice Crosbie was his son-in-law;
the whole county side, as Anderson truly said, were
implicated. There was no longer a difficulty in get-
ting at the truth. Captain Heitmann and his officers
gave their evidence. The Ballyhige servants made a
clean breast of it. The Vicar-General’s servants see-
ing concealment useless, were as plainspoken as the
rest. Mr. Collis, of Tralee, deposed to his conversa-
tion with Lady Margaret. The depositions were sent
to the Castle, and Lingen returned Lord Kerry his
hearty thanks ‘for having unravelled such an en-
ormous piece of villany, which was now set in the
truest light.’

But the difficulty now was the truth itself. There
had not been robbery only, but murder, and murder
of a dastardly kind—murder of two shipwrecked
foreign seamen—in violation of the sacred rights of
hospitality. Yet no one, high or low, seemed aware
of its wickedness. The origin of the crime was
the utter demoralization of the gentry of an entire
Irish county. Those who, by the constitution, were
the natural governors of the people, were their leaders
in depravity. They, if any, ought to have been
selected for punishment.

The public trial and execution of an earl’s sister,
a vicar-general of the Irish Establishment, and a
member or two of the Irish Legislature, would have
been an.example that would have lifted forward the
civilization of Kerry by three-quarters of a century.

THE SMUGGLERS.

But the days of George the Second and Sir Robert
Walpole were not the days of Cromwell. The judges
came to Tralee on their summer circuit, and the
assizes were opened at Tralee. One or two of the
gang were tried and sentenced ; but the Earl of Kerry
pleaded justly, ‘ that it would be small service to the
county to let the poor rogues be hanged, while the
principals escaped.’ ‘The judges shared Lord Kerry’s
opinion, or, when they came into the county, they
assumed the habits of thought which prevailed there.
If no one was to be punished, an effort might at least
be made to recover the plunder. Here the apathetic
magistrates affected a real zeal, and gave the conclud-
ing touch of the grotesqueness of the picture. Since
they were not wanted for the gallows, there could be
no longer a reason for detaining the prisoners. The
Knight of Kerry had written generally to Mr. Lingen,
that he knew of persons who, if assured of pardon,
would assist in discovering the money. Lingen re-
plied with general encouragement ; and under the
shelter of Lingen’s letter, and pretending to be acting
by order of the Government—the Knight, Sir Maurice
Crosbie, Mr. Blennerhassett, and two other magis-
trates—signed an order to the governor of Tralee
gaol to release the Vicar-General’s servants, the most
prominent of the actual perpetrators of the crime;
and to two of these persons—one of them the steward
who had planned the robbery and divided the
plunder, they committed the recovery of it from the
hands of those among whom it had been distributed.
- No choice could have been better if there had
been a real desire to find the money, but the object
was merely to turn ridicule on the whole affair. ‘The
released prisoners strutted about the county show-
ing their commissions amidst universal amusement,

496

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK saying openly, that if the thing had been still to do
LIL.
——— they would do it again, and parading the protections
1729 which they professed to have received from the Castle.

If the most notorious villains were selected for
special favour, those who had promoted the investiga-
tion became naturally alarmed for themselves. The
Earl of Kerry wrote to the Castle, that he expected
nightly to have his house burnt over his head. On his
own authority he re-arrested the two scoundrels who
had been thus ridiculously pardoned. Lingen wrote
in towering indignation to the Knight. The Kerry
gentry should not be allowed to carry matters with so
insolent a hand. For decency’s sake they were forced
to undertake an appearance of a real search for the
money, and hopes were held out from time to time
that the greater part would soon be collected.

Unfortunately for the Irish Administration there
was a party in the case which declined to be satisfied
with mere restitution. Two Danish subjects had
been killed, and a third wounded. The Copenhagen
Government, when Captain Heitmann’s report reached
them, insisted not only that the stolen silver should
be restored, but that the guilty persons should be
brought to justice. Walpole felt or affected a proper
displeasure. He admitted that England’s honour
was concerned in punishing crime, and gave Carteret
orders to prosecute. He discovered that a mode of
administering justice, which may answer well among
a people who have a natural love for right and abhor-
rence of wrong, 1s the worst gift which can be be-
stowed on those who do not know what justice means.
Carteret set in motion the usual machinery. A hun-
dred obstructions were at once flung in the way.
Arthur Crosbie, the clerk of the Crown, was at last
actually tried in Dublin. The Danes remained in Ire-

THE SMUGGLERS.

land to give evidence. The confessions of the Bally-
hige servants proved as plainly as possible that he knew
what was about to be done, and that neither by word
nor deed had he attempted to prevent it. Yet the
judge summed up in favour of the prisoner, and the
jury acquitted him. Captain Heitmann complained
indignantly ‘that the judges were in a conspiracy to
suppress the enquiry ;’ that ‘they showed partiality
to shield the Crosbies.’ The judges answered, ‘ that
Mr. Arthur Crosbie was acquitted for want of such
proof as was according to law,’ and affected to feel
injured and insulted by the suspicion of favouritism.

The robbery had been committed in 1729. In
1731 Carteret retired from the viceroyalty, and as
yet there had been noredress. The Kerry magistrates
pretended that 9,000 pounds worth of bullion had
been found, and that they were ready to account for
it; but three more years went by; the Danes had
lingered on, besieging the Castle with their complaints,
yet the Irish disliked ‘paying back’ as heartily as
Falstaff. They had so far not received an ounce of
it. ‘ During all this time,’ wrote the Duke of New-
castle in 1734 to Carteret’s successor (the Duke of
Dorset), ‘the master and sailors of the Golden Lion
have not been able to obtain satisfaction for their loss,
nor restitution of the money and plate which were
recovered from the persons concerned.’!

Dorset was as powerless as Carteret had been. He
could but act by forms of law, and law in Ireland
was organized iniquity. Again there was a delay of
two years, and in January, 1736, the Danish minister
in London laid his last remonstrance before New-
castle and the English Cabinet.

1 “Newcastle to the Duke of Dorset, July 17,1734.’ MSS. Record Office.
VOL. I. K K

498 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

‘In an affair so odious,’ he said, ‘every trick and

BOOK
_ i _ stratagem has been employed to screen parties who
1736 are notoriously guilty from the punishment which

they have deserved. ‘The chief authors and accom-
plices of this infamous conspiracy are as well known
to your Grace and to the Lords of the Council as to
the whole of Ireland. Your Grace has many times
expressed to me your indignation at the manner in
which the Danish Company has been dealt with
in that country throughout the whole affair. His
Majesty, my sovereign, instructs me now to say to
you, that if justice is longer refused, the Danish
consul will be recalled from Dublin; and if any
British vessels are so unfortunate as to be cast away
hereafter on the coast of Denmark, the Irish Admin-
istration will be responsible for any misfortune which
may overtake them.’’ 3

With this letter the curtain drops on the scene.
Whether the Danes went back empty-handed to their
own country, forming their own reflections on the
English method of civilizing Ireland, or whether the
Kerry gentlemen at length unwillingly relaxed their
clutch upon their prey, no evidence has as yet been
discovered to show.’?”

1¢The Danish Minister to the Danish officers and seamen, the

Duke of Newcastle, January 3,
1786. MSS. Ireland. Record
Office.

2 For the story of the Danish
treasure see the Irish MSS. in the
Record Office, from November 23,
1730, to January 3, 1786, and the
depositions of the prisoners, the
correspondence between the Castle
and the Earl of Kerry, the evidence
of Mr. Collis of Tralee, and of the

letters of the judges and of the
Duke of Newcastle, among the
MSS. in the tower at Dublin. It
is to be observed that the story is
not mentioned in Smith’s Antéquities
of Kerry, although that book was
written almost immediately after,
and contains a minute and compli-
mentary account of the Crosbie
family.

ee rue Ve

Oe

CHAPTER I.
EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.
SECTION I.

Atv that still far distant period when religious and
political passion will allow a hearing to historical
truth, the merits of the small section of resident Anglo-
Irish gentlemen who, under their heavy disadvan-
tages, refused to despair of their country, will not
fail of honourable recognition. Wherever the tra-
veller through Ireland discovers, in the midst of the
wilderness, the exceptional signs of cultivation long
continued—where the fields are cleared of rocks and
drained and fenced, where green meadows contrast
with the usual brown, where the hill-sides are clothed
with thriving plantations, and the farm-buildings are
of stone, and the clothes of the human inhabitants
show signs of being washed and mended—there, he
may assure himself, are the hoof-prints of some Eng-
lish family which has stood to its post through many
generations. An English colonist has resided there,
and his sons, and his sons’ sons, after him ; and, to the
best of their ability, they have done their duty to the
land and the people. Even among the colonists how-
ever the immense majority fell off into recklessness and
KK 2

500

BOOK
Lvs

te ,

1720

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

waste. The peasantry took to whiskey-drinking and
Whiteboyism. The squire and the squireen raced,
betted, smuggled, fought, ravished, drowned them-
selves and their fortunes in claret, debt, and prodigal-
ity. Ofthose who lacked backbone to swim against the
stream, but who were unable, in such an atmosphere,
to find satisfaction for their ambition or their con-
science, the larger number deserted their posts, and
disowned all connexion with Ireland, save in the due
exaction of their rents. A few fought bravely on,
striving still, under hard conditions, to lift their
country out of the slough, and imitate, so far as Eng-
land would allow them, the forethought and industry
which gave her strength to their jealous mistress.

In the first rank of this honourable body stood
Swift, the Dean of St. Patrick’s. It could hardly be
said of Swift that he had chosen to remain in Ireland,
for he too, had the chance been allowed him, would
have preferred an English rectory to the metropolitan
cathedral of the miserable land of his birth. But, as
fate had cast him there, and disdaining the tricks by
which he might have flattered his way, even under
Walpole and the House of Hanover, into the high
places in the Church, he became, in the best and
noblest sense, an Irish patriot.

Perverse as Swift was, and worse than perverse in
his hatred of the Presbyterians, it was the single
crack in the clear granite of his intellect. Fettered
with restrictions, robbed of her markets, blockaded
round with prohibitions, he saw that, if her people
were worthy of her, Ireland might still be sufficient
for herself, and, out of her own resources, might de-
velop her own industry. England might lay a veto
on every healthy effort of Parliamentary legislation ;

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

501

but England could not touch the self-made laws which CHAP.
the conscience and spirit of the nation might impose ———_—

upon themselves. By their own energy the Irish
might still, if they chose, rise superior to their
miseries, and, by their success, inflict the bitterest
humiliation on their tyrant. England might close
their ports, reject their tillage bills, discourage the
legislative efforts for the better management of their
lands; but she could not prevent them from plough-
ing their own fields, wearing their own frieze jerking,
and buying and selling among themselves. Excluded
through his Tory connexions from all share of public
business, after years of silence and personal study of
the country,’ the Dean, on the second rejection of
the Tillage Bill, broke from his retirement, and
shook the Council and the Castle secretaries with a
pamphlet which no hand but his could have written.

‘Agriculture,’ he said, ‘the principal care of all
wise nations, and for the encouragement of which
there were so many statute laws in England, was in
Ireland so well countenanced, that the landlords
prohibited their tenants from ploughing by penal
clauses.’? ‘The wealth of a country was in the people
whom it could raise.’ ‘The politic gentlemen of Ire-
land’ ‘depopulated’ their estates ‘for the feeding of
sheep.’ By England the Irish were looked on ‘as if
they were one of their colonies of outcasts in
America.’ ‘ Pallas, defeated in spinning by Arachne,
had turned her rival into a spider. Ireland had been

1 Tt is sometimes said that Swift
had little knowledge of Ireland,
and never travelled there save be-
tween Laracor and Dublin. A mo-
derately careful examination of his
writings shows that, at least with

Leinster and Munster, he was inti-
mately acquainted.

2 It will be remembered that the
object of the bill which England
so long refused to sanction was to
make these clauses illegal.

1720

502

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

dealt with yet more hardly, ‘for her bowels and

IV. ;
—.-— vitals were extracted, without allowing her even to

1720

spin and weave them.’ ‘Oppression,’ it was said, ‘made
a wise man mad. ‘The reason,’ he supposed, ‘ why
Irishmen were not mad, was because they were not
wise.’ ‘It was to be wished, then, that oppression
might teach wisdom to fools.’ If Irishmen would
resolve that bare Irish backs should be clothed only
with Irish broadcloth, frieze, or linen; that Irish
houses should be furnished with Irish stuffs and car-
pets, and Irish stomachs fed with home-grown corn,
and ale, and milk, the money that went abroad for
silks and velvets, and claret and brandy, and the
other idle luxuries of ladies and gentlemen, would set
the Irish looms at work again, and supply work yet for
every idle hand. The late Archbishop of Tuam, Dr.
Vesey, had remarked that Ireland would never be
happy till a law was made for burning everything that
came from England except the people and the coals.
Swift acknowledged a strong sympathy with the Arch-
bishop’s sentiment. He urged the Irish Lords and
Commons, though they could pass no Act of Parlia-
ment to such effect, yet to vote a unanimous resolu-
tion that no cloth or stuff should be used in any of
their families which was not of Irish manufacture,
and, setting the example themselves, stigmatize every
Irishman as an enemy of his country who refused to
follow it. The clergy, he said, must preach it from
their pulpits. ‘The entire nation must act upon it.
One and all, ‘they must agree never to appear in
public wearing any single thread that came from Eng-
land, till even an English staylace was thought scan-
dalous, and a common topic for censure at tea tables.’*

1 “Proposal for the Univ ‘sal Use of Irish Manufactures,’ Svvift's
Works, vol. vii.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

The pamphlet was anonymous, but, containing genu-
ine fire, and the combustible matter lying thick and
ready to kindle, it produced a sensation so consider-
able, that the Government was rash enough to order a
prosecution. The author being unknown, the printer
was tried for propagating sedition ; and Chief Justice
Whitshed, in charging the jury, laid his hand upon his
breast, and swore that the object of the publication
was to bring in the Pretender. This time Irish pro-
clivities were on the side of equity and good sense.
Nine times the jury returned a verdict of ‘ Not Guilty ;’
nine times they were sent back to reconsider them-
selves. Worn out at length, they gave a neutral
verdict, leaving the printer to the judge. But the
judge, on such a doubtful answer, did not venture to
pass a sentence. A second trial was intended; but
wiser counsels prevailed in time to prevent another
defeat, and the prosecution was dropped.

Swift meanwhile, having drawn the sword, did not
mean again to sheathe it while strength and mind re-
remained. The Drapier letters and the Copper swindle
will have a section to themselves. Besides these,
before and after them, he poured out tract on tract
denouncing Jrish misgovernment, each one of which
was composed with supreme literary power, a just and
burning indignation shining through the most finished
irony, and played like a flash of forked lightning round
the exasperated Castle politicians. In these tracts, in
colours which will never fade, lies the picture of Ire-
land, as England, half in ignorance, half in wilful de-
spair of her amendment, had willed that she should be.
Three parts in four of the land were owned by absen-
tees whose tenants had once been kindly dealt with,
but were then ground by agents who were as hard as

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the most brutal resident squireen; the manufactures
were destroyed; the plough was driven from the fal-
lows; the splendid timber, which a century previously
had clothed plain and mountain, was swept away, was
rotting in the bogs, or built into ships for strangers ;
without liberty, without trade, half the profits of such
wretched culture as remained were sent out of the
country and spent in England ; industry was paralyzed
by a million discouragements, and the population was
starving in unwilling wretchedness on a soil which,
fairly treated, would support twice the number in com-
fort and abundance. Such was Ireland, as Swift traced
it on his canvas. If she flourished, she must flourish,
he said, like the Glastonbury thorn, which bloomed in
midwinter. The landlords’ rents were squeezed out of
the blood, vitals, clothes, and dwellings of the peasants,
who lived worse than English beggars; and their
rulers, like Pharaoh, called them idle, and set them to
make bricks without straw. In one singular paper,
the most bitterly sarcastic perhaps ever written by
man, he proposed, as a means of saving the children of
the poor from being a burden on their parents, and
of utilizing them for the public good, that at a year
old they should be cooked and eaten, dwelling with
prolonged refinement on the care which would then
be taken to feed and fatten them, and the variety of
dishes which could be composed out of their car-
cases. There were few solvents which would bring
Swift into the melting mood. But overcome, for once,
by the piteousness of his own conception, he said he
could pursue his irony no longer; and, falling back
into seriousness, he again insisted on the only remedy
which was left within Ireland’s reach. Flanders
laces, English cloth, Lyons silks, teas, coffees, choco-

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

505

lates, profusion of wines—these were no fit things for CHAP.
a country which was steeped in desolation. SC WAR warts

undone first by England, but next by her own pride
and folly. If the landlord would plough, drain,
plant, build schools, encourage home production and
home consumption, discard every imported article
not necessary for health, and live as if the island had
a wall of brass about it, Ireland might defy her
enemies still, and rise out of her ashes.’

Swift wrote as if he thought, like Elijah, that there
was none left in Ireland but himself to speak the
truth; but, as with the Hebrew prophet, more of his
countrymen than he knew of were thinking the same
thoughts, and, so far as their power extended, were
doing the things which he bade them do. England
closed the door against legislative remedies; but, soon
after the Dean’s tracts were published, there appeared
a series of ‘ Resolutions proper for the Gentlemen of
Ireland,’ which expressed rather the united purpose
of many than the personal conviction of a single
thinker. ‘We will live at home,’ the Irish gentry
were invited to say, ‘we will build houses, drain,
plough, and plant, and sow our estates with inhabit-
ants. We will watch over our people—[ wonderful
that it should be necessary to avow such a determina-
tion, yet it is as much forgotten now as it was then]
—we will watch over our people ‘as much as over
our horses, bullocks, and sheep.’ ‘So shall we keep at
home the swarms that now go to the West Indies,
valued, like negroes, at thirty shillings a head.’ We
will no more rack our fields and waste our substance.

1 ‘Miscellaneous Tracts on the 2 Reflexrions and Resolutions

State of Ireland,’ Swz/t’s Works, proper for the Gentlemen of LIre-
vol. vil. land, Dublin, 1738.

1720

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

We will be thrifty and prudent. ‘ We will,’ adopt-
ing Swift’s proposal, ‘use no sort of clothes or fur-
niture not of Irish manufacture; and whereas several
hundred thousand of our fellow-creatures in this
island get their bread—or would, if we would let
them—by spinning, weaving, and dyeing, we will
come into no iniquitous fashions to beggar or starve
them. Every sixpence spent in foreign goods is
robbed from our people, and is bread taken from their
hungry mouths.? We will set ourselves against the
smugeling. ‘This infamous trade is a nursery for
idlers, thieves, rebels, and vagabonds. It ruins the
fair trader, and breaks the natural compact between
the merchant and the nation.’ We will educate our
children, laying up in their minds the great princi-
ples of truth and honour, virtue and wisdom, love of
country, and love of God and of our holy religion.
We will put away these great stocks of cattle. We
will cultivate our soil, and employ our people, and
raise ourselves above the hazard which for ever hangs

1 The male portion of the upper
classes had resolution enough for a
time really to wear nothing but
Irish manufacture. ‘The gentle-
men of Ireland,’ says this writer,
in another part of his book, ‘except
some very fine gentlemen indeed,
have shown their humanity and
good sense in this particular. Our
broadcloths have not the beauty
and fineness with which they are
made up in England, but we think
ourselves sufficiently fine in our own
feathers. If anything could lessen
the charm of our Ivish ladies ’tis to
see them dressed out in the spoils
and pillage of their country, and
riding, like barbarous conquerors,
great by the murder of half a
nation.’ !

2 Bad political economy, but true
nevertheless; the foreign goods, it
may be urged, unless paid for in
gold, of which there was none in
Ireland, must have been exchanged
for something else, either grown or
manufactured there. But, in fact,
the French silks and clarets were
paid for by the smuggled wool,
which, being raised on sheep's
backs, gave no employment to the
poor, and brought a profit only to
the rich.

* The writer mentions a curious
fact as to the profits of smuggling.
‘In England,’ he says, ‘ the common
wages for a smuggler is a guinea
a day, by which means the farmers
on the coast can hardly get in their
harvests.’

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

over us of famine.’ Finally, in spite of all that we
have suffered, we will be English; we will stand by
England and the English interest; and we will hope
that England will at last look favourably on us, and
in time admit us to a union.’?

In the same strain followed Berkeley, raised, in due
time, to his natural place on the Irish bench as
Bishop of Cloyne. Berkeley, who, while his promo-
tion lingered, had been in the West Indies, and had
visited France and Italy with Lord Peterborough,
brought with him a more instructed insight than was
possible to his untravelled countrymen. He could
believe that there were ills in the world which arose
from other roots than Popery. He insisted—no one
insisted more emphatically—that Romish priests, if
they remained in Ireland, must give securities for
their allegiance, and abjure the temporal authority of
the Pope ; but he was not afraid to acknowledge that
they had won their influence fairly, by zeal and in-
dustry, nor to invite them to use it to rouse their
flocks out of their sloth and filthiness. He had seen
Flanders, and Piedmont, and Lombardy, all Popish
countries, cultivated like gardens. In Turin idleness
was a crime, and ‘to give charity to a strolling
beggar was penal.’ Berkeley urged the priests—
the words sound like mockery, but they represented
a real fact—‘in return for the lenity and indul-
gence of the Government,’ to make themselves really
useful to their countrymen, and endeavour to

1 The writer justly insisted on increased fourfold,’ he said; ‘and
the enormously improvable charac- the exports and imports seven-
ter which Ireland showed that she fold.’
possessed whenever the chances * Reflexions and Resolutions for
were allowed her. ‘ Between 1652 the People of Ireland. Abridged,
and 1673 the value of land had

508

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK extirpate their habits of idleness, which were worse
ees Yban infidelity. The trade restrictions might account

1735

in part for the misery of Ireland, but did not account
for all of it. They might ruin the middle classes,
and perhaps demoralise them; but they did not di-
rectly injure the poor. The peasants, Berkeley said,
might at least clean their houses, dress their potato
gardens, and till their fields, however scanty. Their
ereatest crime, after all, was idleness. Irishmen were
already the world’s byeword. ‘The Negroes on the
plantations had a proverb, that if Negro was not Negro,
Irishman would be Negro.’ But they were so proud
of their filth, that one of his own kitchen maids had
refused to carry out cinders, ‘ because she came of an
old Irish stock. A hut, a pot, a bundle of straw, a
garden overgrown with nettles, and a heap of children
tumbling on a dunghill—this was the picture of an
Irish family in the richest county of Munster; and a
cynical content in beggary among them, beyond what
was to be seen in any people onearth. Granted that
the woollen manufactures were taken unjustly from
them, there was still room, and to spare, for productive
labour. Ireland, for one thing, could grow hemp and
flax enough to supply the British navy. She could
manufacture paper. ‘She, if she had the spirit for it,
could thrive on the home consumption of her own
produce. The plough and the spade would supply
the place of foreign commerce, except in feeding
vanity and luxury. It might be better for Ireland if
all the fine folk of both sexes were shipped off to
foreign countries, instead of spending their rents at
home in foreign luxuries, and spreading moral conta-

1 A Word to the Wise. Address by the Bishop of Cloyne to the
Roman Catholics of Ireland.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

gion among the people. In the ancient English
spirit, the Bishop of Cloyne called on the Government
to re-affirm its old authority, restrain the licentious-
ness of the gentry, compel them to educate them-
selves, and educate the poor under their charge.
When the industry of the country was once more in
healthy activity, the incorrigibly idle, the sturdy and
valiant mendicant, the rogue that preferred to live on
other men’s earnings by theft or beggary, might then
be lawfully enslaved by the state, and set to labour
whether he wouldorno. The public had a right over
those who could or would not find employment; and
temporary servitude was the best cure for idleness.
Vagrants might be made slaves for a term of years.
The sight of them, chained in pairs and compelled to
work, would be a wholesome lesson to the rest of
the community ; and the rogue himself, who was
thus-earning, however unwillingly, his own food and
clothes and lodging, so far from being degraded, was
lifted on the first step of the ladder by which he
could rise to manhood.’

So wrote the gentle Berkeley in days when liberty
and human right retained their original meanings;
when slavery was still conceived to consist in bond-
age to evil habits, and it was not yet understood
that the first privilege of a free man was to do wrong,
if he happened to prefer it to doing right.

But when a country is to be governed, there
must first be found men to govern, and England
could not govern Ireland, nor would she allow
the Irish Protestants to govern it for her. And

1 ‘Several Queries proposed to Works, vol. iii. p. 149, &c. The
the Consideration of the Public, by Querist was first published in 1735,
George Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyne.’

510

BOOK
ay.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

indeed, handled as they had been, they were fast

——— unfitting themselves for the office. The Puritan

1735

spirit of the seventeenth century settlers was dying
out. The industrial spirit which should have taken
its place had been forbidden to grow. A moiety of
the landowners were lounging in England or abroad.
Of those who remained, a select few of the highest in
the land had formed themselves into a society of
Blasters, men whose religious service was a liturgy of
execrations, and whose aim in life was to invent —
untried forms of impiety and profligacy. The choice
spirits set the tone. Those less gifted, either in for-
tune or genius, imitated, at a distance, the more
splendid vices of their leaders. The better sort,
weary of the hopeless struggle, dropped off one by
one, as the century waned, from the narrow road to
the broad ; till the English policy completed its
work, and the ruling race so painfully planted, to
hold and civilize Ireland into a Protestant country,
degenerated into the politicians of 1782, and the
heroes of the memoirs of Sir Jonah Barrington.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

SECTION II.

By the statute law of Ireland neither Papist nor
Presbyterian was permitted to open or teach in any
school or college in the four provinces. The Parlia-
ment had provided for the education of the Irish
nation by an act requiring the clergy to provide
schools in each separate parish; and in this condition
the Government had been content to leave the matter,
satisfied with having prescribed an impossibility.
The Catholics, with the same steady courage and
unremitting zeal with which they had maintained
and multiplied the number of their priests, had
established open schools in places like Willarney,
where the law was a dead letter. Jn the more acces-
sible counties, where open defiance was dangerous,
they extemporised class teachers under ruined walls,
or in the dry ditches by the road side, where ragged
urchins, in the midst of their poverty, learnt English
and the elements of arithmetic, and even to read and
construe Ovid and Virgil. With institutions which
showed a vitality so singular and so spontaneous,
repressive acts of Parliament contended in vain. A
Government which undertook to coerce a Catholic
country with penal statutes was bound in justice and
prudence to provide a better substitute for the system
which it proscribed. After waiting in vain for
Popery to die of itself, intelligent Protestant gentle-
men discovered, that if conversions were to make pro-
gress they must take some active measures with the
education of the children, and provide schools which

511

CHAP.
i

A

5a'y:

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN JRELAND.

should offer greater temptations than those of their

0 ae
—--,— rivals. Wealth, power, superior enlightenment, all

1730

were in their favour. It was the boast of Protes-
tantism that it was the religion of intelligence. The
hold’ of the priests, Protestant writers were never
weary of repeating, was on the ignorance and supersti-
tion of their flocks. Yet the priests were caring more
for knowledge than they, beating them on their own
ground, and fighting them with their own weapons,
of which they were neglecting the use. Shamed and
alarmed into exertion, the clergy and gentry took the
matter into their own hands. From the beginning
of the eighteenth century, and perhaps earlier, charity
day schools had been scattered about by the exertions
of individuals, where the children of the peasantry
had been taught the catechism, and had received some
kind of industrial trainmg. In 1710 there were
30 of these schools, where 700 boys and girls, who
would consent to be made Protestants, were being
taught to read and write, to cultivate the ground, to
grow hemp and flax, and spin, and knit, and sew.
In 1719 an educational association had been formed:
130 of these day schools had been established, and
the number of children receiving education was 3,000.
In 1730, in the viceroyalty of Lord Carteret, and
in connexion with the general effort described in
the last section, to arrest the country in its down-
ward progress, many peers, archbishops and bishops,
the chancellor, the judges, and the justices of the
peace, united in a joint representation of the necessity
for larger exertion ; and, without demanding the inter-
vention of the state, professed themselves ready, if
permitted, to establish a system of education which
in time might become as extensive and as effectual as

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

the admirable institutions which had been founded by
the Reformers in Scotland.

The voluntary efforts hitherto had been confined
chiefly, if not wholly, to Ulster. In the Southern
provinces the colonies of Protestant peasants, which
had been sown in so many parts by the Common-
wealth leaders, had wasted away. Scanty handfuls
only survived anywhere, unless under the protection
of some resident powerful family. There was but
one means left to recover the lost ground, ‘ That a
sufficient number of English Protestant schools should
be established where the children of the Irish nation
might be instructed in the English tongue and in the
principles of true religion.’ ‘ The clergy,’ it was said,
‘had done their best, but they were powerless to cope
with so great a difficulty.’ ‘To the intent, therefore,
that the youth of Ireland might be brought up in the
true faith and loyalty in all succeeding generations,
the Crown was requested to grant a charter for a
corporation which might be empowered to hold lands
and receive donations and bequests for the supporting
of such schools as might be erected in the most
necessary places, where the children of the poor might
be taught gratis.’ ?

Some subtle assault upon English interests, or the
English purse, was usually assumed to lurk under
Irish petitions. ‘Too much education, if there were

no other objection, might become an element of

strength to the country, and to keep Ireland weak
was the first principle of English policy. Wal-
pole took three years to consider whether the gen-

t ¢Humble Petition of the Pri- and Clergy of Ireland, May 7, 1730.’
mate, the Chancellor, Archbishops, MSS. Record Office.
Noblemen, Bishops, Judges, Gentry,

VOL. I. LILI

514

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book tlemen of Ireland should or should not be encou-

TV.

—— raged to educate the peasantry. At length, in

1733

1733, he came to a conclusion that the experiment
might be ventured on a small scale. He wrote to
the Duke of Dorset, who had succeeded Carteret
as Viceroy, for a list of the persons who were to
form the corporation; and he fixed a margin within
which their funds were to be limited. The Viceroy
satisfied his anxieties. The trustees were the first men
in the kingdom. The endowment, since the Lnglish
Government required a limit, they were willing to
restrict to 2,000/. a year.' On these terms consent
was graciously given. Estates were purchased, large
donations were contributed, and, on the 24th of
October, the long-celebrated Charter Schools, so
fiercely condemned by the Catholic priests, whose
worst enemies in fact they were, became part of the
institutions of Ireland.

The schools were of two kinds—day schools, and
schools where the children were separated from their
parents, the trustees undertaking their complete
maintenance. At both the general system was the
same. The object was briefly described in 1738 by
the Bishop of Elphin in a sermon before the Society.
‘English Protestant working schools were established
for English and national interests, from whence
little colonies, instructed in religion and enured to
labour from their tender years, might be sent out to
cultivate the barren and neglected parts of the king-
dom, and raise a spirit of industry and activity in the
nation.’ ?

Book learning, on the model of the schools already

1¢The Duke of Dorset to the * Charter Society's Tracts, vol. i.
Duke of Newcastle, June 14, 1788,’

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

existing, was made introductory and subsidiary to real
work. The catechism was taught, and reading, and
writing, and arithmetic were taught, but for two hours
a day only out of the seven or eight of which the
school day consisted. The motto of the corporation,
‘ Religione et labore,’ implied a sound and wholesome
conception of the meaning of the word religion. The
arms were the plough, the spade, the spinning wheel,
and a Bible, opened at the text that the poor have the
Gospel preached to them. The children were col-
lected in the school-houses at seven in the summer
and at eight in the winter. The business of the day
opened with prayers. Lessons in grammar and wri-
ting followed, as has been said, for two hours. The
rest of each day was given up to labour. Spaces of
ground were attached to each school-house, extending
to ten or more acres, which the boys were taught to
cultivate. They trenched and drained. They ploughed
and dug. They raised corn, potatoes, flax, hemp. They
fed cattle on their meadows, and grew and _ stored
hay for the winter food. The girls learnt spinning,
reeling, sewing, washing, brewing, and the business
of a dairy: ‘all such work as might prepare them
for being put out apprentices, or going into service.’
Each boy and each girl was provided with a suit of
clothes annually. The materials were raised, the linen
and woollens were woven, and the clothes themselves
were cut out and made up at the schoolhouse.

The children remained at school for five years ; at
the end of which time they were bound out as
apprentices to tradesmen, farmers, or artisans at the
expense of the society. The cost at which these
results were obtainable was not the least remarkable
part of the system. It shows that there was a degree

LL2

516

BOOK
Lis

——

17338

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of practical intelligence in some heads at least in

- Ireland, as good as could be found in the most

favoured parts of Europe. ‘To establish a school, to
give clothing and instruction gratis, and to provide
the apprenticing, was found, in most instances, tempta-
tion sufficient to induce Catholic parents to send their
children to the day schools. In that case they were
fed and lodged at home, and the annual cost for
20 boys, including all expenses, was but 35/. a year.
The schoolmaster had a house and garden. His
salary was 8/. in the country, and in town 10/. The
20 suits of clothes cost 17/., and 4 of the 20 children
were annually apprenticed to a trade for 101. ‘The
whole charge, therefore, for rescuing each poor child
from the utmost misery that could spring from
poverty, ignorance, and wickedness, educating him
for five years, and putting him in the way of being
good and happy, was but 9/.?

At the charity schools proper, the schools in which
complete possession was taken of the children, the
expense was greater, and the number which the
society could maintain was proportionately smaller.
At the outset, from the smallness of the funds, one
only was established in each of the four provinces.
The first which was opened was founded by the Earl
of Kildare, at Castledermot, for ten boys and ten girls,
and formed a model to others, which increased gra-
dually till, by the middle of the century, fifty schools
were at work in different parts of the country. In
all of them the education was of the same admirable
kind as that which was provided in the day schools;
with this difference only, that the society, when a

1 ¢ Report on Schools in Ireland.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

517

child was once entrusted to it, took entire charge of cHap.

I.

such child’s welfare, material and moral. Boys and —~-~

girls alike were fed, lodged, educated, apprenticed; at
the end of their apprenticeships, they were settled in
life with a marriage portion. Where so much was done
for them, care was taken that the cost and labour
should not be thrown away. Admission into a charity
or school was, to a poor man’s son or daughter, equi-
valent to ensuring their fortunes. In return, to avoid
the danger of their relapsing into Popery, they were
usually removed to schools remote from their friends
and relations.

The priests were furious. The temporal advan-
tages offered were so considerable, that the strongest
admonitions failed to keep the children away. ‘The
refusal of the sacraments was even tried with imper-
fect effect. The education itself was probably the
very best which has ever been devised in modern
times, eclipsing in its conception the Scotch system,
which it was intended to emulate. For the first and
last time the Irish gentry were really and thoroughly
discharging their duties to the people committed
to them; and, wherever the Charter Schools were
fairly tried, they carried all before them. Pity only
that for so large a harvest there were but few reapers,
and that the work that could be done was limited by
restrictions of finance. As Ireland then was, and in
the existing humour of its inhabitants, a tax of 25
per cent. on the rents of absentee proprietors ap-
plied to multiplying schools, would have ended
the Irish difficulty. Nay, the sums charged an-
nually on the Irish hereditary revenue for royal
mistresses, royal bastards, and court favourites
generally scandalous, would have more than sufficed

17338

518

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK for the same purpose. Although the hereditary
—— revenue did not cover much more than half the ordi-

1733

nary expenditure, and was, therefore, supplemented
always by an additional vote, the King regarded it as
his private property, with the appropriation of which
Parliament had nothing to do. Out of this revenue
2,000/. a year was now granted annually to the Pres-
byterian clergy, and it was accounted a mighty mat-
ter. In addition to the 2,000/. a year, secured by
private endowments to the Charter Schools, the King
was pleased, from the same source, to grant an addi-
tional 1,000. The munificence ceases to be striking
when compared with the objects which were the usual
occasions of the bounty of the Hanover princes.
In the latter half of the century Irish pensions were
used for Parliamentary corruption. The unhappy
country was then made to supply, out of its taxes,
the material for its own demoralization. Under the
first and second George, such grants, if less politically
mischievous, were more disgraceful to the administra-
tions who consented to enter them’ in the public
accounts. In 1723 the charge for pensions on the
Trish Establishment was no more than 30,000/. In
1738, the year in which the charter was granted, it
had risen in a total annual expenditure of half a
million to 69,0000.

Among the distinguished persons in whose favour
this annual burden upon the Irish establishment had
been more than doubled, are to be found the Duchess
of Kendal, Duchess of Munster in the Irish peerage,
with a pension of 3,000/. a year; Sophia Kielman-
secke, another mistress of George the Second, created
Countess of Leinster, with 2,000/. a year; Lady
Walsingham, daughter of the King and the Duchess

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

of Kendal, with 1,500. Besides these, Lady Stan-
hope had 2,600/. a year, Lady Darlington 2,000/., and
old Baron Bernstorff, who, whatever his claims may
have been on George the Second, had certainly none
on Ireland, received 2,500/. a year;—almost a sixth
of the Irish revenue thus scandalously squandered,
and an annual thousand pounds all that could be
spared to a fund which was a very fountain of the
waters of life! ‘So it was; and, still more strangely,
complaints from Ireland on the abuse of the Pension
fund were received in London with exclamations
of indignant astonishment. Among the remark-
able qualities of English statesmen during the two
last centuries, the most striking, perhaps, has been
their inability to recognize a political iniquity till it
has become so flagrant as to be intolerable, and an
inability equally great, when the iniquity has been
redressed, to understand how it could ever have been
tolerated. |

The Irish gentlemen, meanwhile, were not deterred
by the coldness of the English Government. The
hereditary revenue continued to be squandered. The
Dublin Parliament raised funds out of fresh taxa-
tion, and raised their own grants to the society to
four, five, and six thousand a year. Peers and
gentlemen established schools on their own estates,
which were affiliated to the central corporation.
Archbishop Boulter came forward in practical liberal-
ity, and built and endowed a school in Dublin almost
at his own expense. More than 30,0002. was col-
lected in England by private subscription. Other
sums were sent from the American colonies. The
bishops of the Church began, in a few years, to con-
gratulate themselves that the talisman which was to

519

CHAP.
i
~~ —_—

1733

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

dissolve the spell of Papal dominion had been at last
discovered.’ So vigorous, so effective, had become the
society by the middle of the century, that Parlia-
ment appropriated a special branch of the revenue,
the annual proceeds of hawkers’ and pedlars’ licences,
to the support of the schools, and grafted on them an
effective statute for the repression of Irish beggary.
‘In every part of the kingdom,’ said the eleventh
of the 23rd of George II., ‘mendicant children were
seen wandering about the country; the Charter Schools
had furnished means of educating and providing for
them, so that they might become useful members
of society.’ The ministers and churchwardens had
already powers to bind such children as apprentices,
with the parents’ consent; but this remedy had proved
inefficient, and the numbers had still increased. It
was enacted, therefore, that, after Michaelmas, 1750,
the Charter Society might appoint officers in every
province, with powers to take up children between the
ages of five and twelve years who might be found
begging, and convey them to the nearest Charter
School, there to be taken charge of, bred up in in-
dustry, and bound out, when at sufficient age, as
servants or apprentices to Protestants: and whereas
children taken into the schools with their fathers’ and
mothers’ consent had been afterwards demanded back
on various pretences, for the defeat of the purposes
for which the schools had been erected, the Parlia-
ment decided also that a child once received into a
charter school was thenceforward a child of the

1 See the three volumes of the See also a series of ‘ Letters from
Charter Society’s tracts, with the Henry Maule, Bishop of Dromore,
annual reports and the sermons of 1741-1744.’ MSS, Record Office.
the Bishops at the annual meetings.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

public ; and that, unless the parents could prove that
it had been admitted against their will, it was not to
be given back to them.’

How the very best system of education ever set
on foct in Ireland, came at last to nothing, will be told
in its place. ‘The fierce and bitter opposition of the
priests would have itself been inoperative. Irregu-
larities in the management created occasional scan-
_dals; but these were promptly punished. School-
masters who allowed girls, under their charge, to be
seduced, were three times publicly whipped in the
nearest county town.? The Charter Society failed
partly from the disorganized condition of general
Irish society, which spoilt the healthy working of the
apprentice system, partly from the spirit of the age,
with which, as the century waned, it found itself
in too harsh hostility. The catechism and indus-
trial training were too unspiritual to suit the sen-
timent of revived emotional Christianity ; and when
the schools, instead of turning out hardworking
labourers and artisans, were turned to purposes of
soul-saving and propagandist enthusiasm, they came
in conflict with modern liberal ideas, and were held
to violate the sacred rights of conscience to choose its
own religion, and, in its own wisdom, to believe what-
ever theories about divine things it happens to prefer.

1 23 George II. cap. xi. Lresh Statutes. 2 Ihd.

521
CHAP.
1
—

1733

522

BOOK

.

—--—"/

1723

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION III.

Tue Duchess of Kendal was not contented with her
pensions, and her name is connected with another
Trish scandal which obtained an unenviable notoriety.
The rapacity of this lady was on the scale of her
person. Wherever the curtain can be lifted which
screened the secrets of the Court and Cabinet of the
first Georges, the hand of Erengard Schulenberg
can be generally detected, raking together ill-gotten
plunder. It was alleged with truth—for when the
storm was over a real deficiency was left to be sup-
plied—that Ireland required an addition to her copper
coinage. The Duchess of Kendal, in return for a
share of the anticipated spoil, procured a patent for
a rich ironmaster named Wood, to coin and circu-
late in that country 108,000. worth of halfpennies
and farthings. The metal, by the terms of his
patent, was to be identical in purity with the metal
coined for England. The weight of the coins was to
be something less. The market price of copper in
England was thirteen pence the pound avoirdupois:
wrought into bars and prepared for the mint, it
was reckoned to be worth eighteen pence the pound.
The pound was coined into twenty-three pence, and
allowing twopence for waste and for the cost of
cutting and stamping, the gain to the mint on each
pound of copper coined in England was threepence.
By Mr. Wood’s patent the pound of copper was con-
fessedly to be made into sixty halfpence or thirty
pence, and the gain on his grant, when carried out, if

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT. 523

‘the letter of it had been strictly adhered to, that cHap.
remained to be divided between himself and his —y—
patroness, would have amounted to something like 1728
40,000. The copper coin already in use in Ireland
was inferior in sterling value to that which was now
to be introduced. But the quantity was to be con-
sidered as well as the quality. The entire specie
currency of Ireland, gold, silver, and copper, in 1724,
was estimated only at 400,000/. In England the
copper coinage in circulation was but a hundredth
part of the whole. In Ireland, when the patent
was executed, it would become a fifth of the whole.
Copper would enter necessarily into all payments.
It would displace and drive out gradually the gold
and silver, it would confuse prices, offer an irre-
sistible temptation to coiners, and create all the evils
which invariably accrue when an inferior coin, In-
tended only for small purchases, becomes the ordi-
nary standard of exchange.*

The patent was Bertie in March 1723. The
stream of halfpence commenced at once to flow; yet,
though to some extent confessedly needed, thee were
received with dislike and suspicion, and the Duke of
Grafton came over as Viceroy in August, furnished
by Walpole with arguments which, as he hoped, would
remove the objections.

The Duke found Dublin in an unpropitious humour.
The city was fermenting under a pamphlet recently
issued, entitled ‘Ireland’s Consternation.’ Every
person was open-mouthed about the new halfpence,
and the very servants of the Crown were afraid to
defend what was so universally and indignantly exe-

1 “Archbishop Boulter to the Duke of Newcastle, January 19, 1725.’
MSS. Record Office.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

crated. Parliament met immediately after. Hawkers
were screaming the pamphlet about the streets, as the
Viceroy went from the Castle to the opening. His
instructions being unsuited to the condition of feeling,
he evaded the subject in the speech from the throne ;
but the first act of the Commons was to appoint a
committee to go into it, and, after ‘three weeks’
reasoning and enquiry,’ the Duke declared himself
unable to find a single member who would support
the Government. Alan Brodrick, the son of the
Chancellor, hinted at an impeachment of Walpole in
England.t A series of resolutions were passed, con-
demning the patent, and an address to the Crown was
drawn up, insisting that it had been obtained by
notorious misrepresentations ; that if the terms were
complied with there would be a loss to Ireland of
150/. on every 100/. worth of copper issued ;* and
that to grant patents of coining to private individuals
was ‘highly injurious.’ The terms themselves, how-
ever, it was said, were not observed, bad as they were.
Chemists appointed to analyse specimen pieces re-
ported that the metal used was below the standard
which the patent required. The corporation of
Dublin sent in a petition that Wood should be re-
quired to exchange his halfpence on demand for gold
and silver at the market price of copper. Lord Midle-
ton wrote privately to Walpole, that in the humour
of Ireland the project could not be carried out, and

1 ‘Brodrick, after some very odd
expressions in a debate, said yes-
terday that nobody was too great
in another kingdom for what he
had done in prejudice to this; for
a first minister in England had
been impeached for grievances
complained of by this nation,’—

‘Grafton to Walpole, September
14, 1723. MSS. Record Office.

* “The value of the copper coined
into sixty halfpence cannot be
reckoned above a shilling ; thus the
kingdom will lose eighteenpence
in every half-crown.’-—‘ Objection
to the Coinage.’ Ibid.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

that the readiest way out of the difficulty would be
to grant the corporation’s request ;' while the Duke
reported that young Brodrick had sworn to expose
the mystery before the Parliament of England, ‘and
did not doubt but that he should there discover other
guise persons than this villanous projector Wood, who
had been obscure but for this infamy.’?

The first emotion of the two men who at this time
governed England was of passionate surprise. Lord
Townshend * wrote a letter to the Duke of Grafton so
violent that Walpole threw it in the fire, and com-
posed another, making the question a personal one
between himself and the Viceroy. Conscious of a
bad cause, and exasperated at an opposition which he
knew not in what way honourably to meet, he flung
himself on the first object on which he could safely
vent his indignation.

‘I will not enter into the merits of the question,’
he said; ‘I write merely as a friend. Parliament,
under your administration, is attacking a patent
already passed in favour of whom and for whose sake
you know very well. Will it be for the service to
suffer an indignity in this vein? The patent was
passed by those that you have hitherto looked upon
as pretty nearly engaged with you in your public
capacity. Are they no longer worth your care or
trouble? It was passed under the particular care
and direction of one upon whom the first reflection
must fall, that never yet was indifferent when you
were concerned. ‘That consideration, I daresay you

1¢QLord Midleton to Walpole, 3 Charles, second Viscount
September 15.’ MSS. Record Office. Townshend, President of the
3<Grafton to Walpole, Septem- Council.
ber 24.’ Lbed.

526

BOOK
LY.
—o——

1723

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

will be told, is not worth the hazarding the quiet of
the session ; for all attempts of this kind have always
secret springs and supports; as this, I believe, has
from both sides of the water. Do you think the prin-
cipal actors on that side aim at your friends here
only, and have no eye to the Lord Lieutenant? or do
you think those on this side, who chiefly point at your
humble servant, are incapable in a proper place to
turn it upon you, and impute the whole either to
your want of credit and capacity, or to indifference,
when you think yourself not immediately concerned ?
And do you think it impossible that such representa-
tions should have any effect in a certain place? In
short, does your Grace think you will be thought
to make a glorious campaign if, by compounding
for this, you should be able to carry all the other
businesses through without difficulty ? |
‘The objections to the patent now come over, I venture
to pronounce, are frivolous, and such as a very common
understanding with a willing mind may easily refute.
I never knew more care taken than in passing this
patent. Iam still satisfied it is very well to be sup-
ported. What remedy the wisdom of Ireland will
find out for this supposed grievance I am at a loss to
guess, and upon whom the consequence of this Irish
storm will fall most heavily, I will not say. I shall
have my share, but, if I am not mistaken, there are
others that will not escape. I hope your Grace is not
mistaken when you are persuaded thus to be indif-
ferent. There are some people that think they are
ever to fatten on the expense of other men’s labours
and character, and be themselves the most righteous
fine gentlemen. It is a species of mankind I own
I detest. But Pll say no more; and if your Grace

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

thinks I have said too much I am sorry for it; but
mark the end. I[ am, &c.

‘R. WaALpPote.’?

This singular letter must have crossed on its road
the despatch, which informed Walpole of the threat-
ened impeachment and the violent proceedings of the
Irish Parliament. The news was not calculated to
improve the humour of the imperious minister. He
was specially irritated at the Duke’s taking credit to
himself for having prevented the Irish Houses from
passing a direct censure on the advisers of the Crown.

‘What is all this?’ He wrote again on the 3rd
of October: ‘I know what these things mean in
an English Parliament. I suppose you talk another
language in Ireland. I have weathered great storms
before now, and I hope I shall not be lost now in an
Trish hurricane. If I am capable of thinking at all
right upon this subject, I would willingly consider
what is now to be done. You seem to think we
must give in. Where then is Mr. Brodrick’s crime
if we, by withdrawing the grant, acknowledge that we
were wrong? Consider what answer we are to make,
and pray don’t do in this as you have done in every
other step, stay till all is over and then speak.’’

Lord ‘Townshend followed ten days later in the
same strain; and from the letter which he was allowed
to send may be inferred the character of that which
Walpole burnt.

‘The Irish, Townshend said,‘ are so absurdly
wrong that I can only laugh at them. Can any one in
his right judgment think the King will part with his

1¢ Walpole to the Duke of Graf- * ¢ Walpole to the Duke of Graf-

ton, September 24, 1723.’ MSS. ton, October 3.’ bid,
Record Office.

528

BOOK
Ty.

1723

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

unquestionable prerogative for such weak objections ?
It is so tender a point, that it is the highest folly in
any one to attack it, unless there is manifest evidence
of misapplication. Nor is the prerogative all. The
King is touched more epee) and feels his honour
highly concerned in the affair.'

The honour of kings, it seemed, was composed of
material unlike that of common men. Unsoiled by
the doing of wrong things, it was only tarnished by
the exposure of them. Grafton had an ordinary
conscience. He saw that the patent was iniquitous.
He disliked being made the instrument by which it
was forced down the Irish throats, and he resented
the reproaches which had been flung on himself.

‘’T was impossible to stop the torrent,’ he replied
calmly to Walpole. ‘ You ask what is to be done?
Let the grant be declared void, as having been ob-
tained on a misrepresentation. Do not irritate a
country where there is such a visible coolness of
affection, and so much ill blood stirring as may prove
very hurtful to his majesty’s interest. I must not
conceal from you, that the article of pensions has a
great share in keeping on foot these murmurings.’?

Unable to resolve what to do, perhaps secretly en-
deavouring to compromise the matter with Wood,
or induce the Duchess to forego her expected plunder,
Walpole wrote no more letters. The Irish Parlia-
ment had forwarded their petition. Weeks passed,
and it remained unanswered. They supposed that
the English minister was waiting for the Money Bill,
and, when it was passed, meant to close the session.

1¢QLord Townshend to the Duke 2 ‘Grafton to Walpole, October
of Grafton, October 14, 1723.’ 19. Ibid.
MSS. Record Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

There was a call of the House of Commons. Members
came up from the farthest parts of Ireland. All other
business was suspended. Lords and Commons passed
a vote, that they would sit till some answer came, and
that no power should adjourn them but their own
consent. ‘They intimated plainly that the supplies
should not be voted till the patent was withdrawn.

Finding the Parliament thus obstinate, and not
being on the spot to apply his usual methods of dis-
solving hostile Parliamentary majorities, Walpole had
recourse to cunning. ‘he money was indispensable
to him and at the same time he, or those whom he
dared not offend, were resolute not to give way. The
King, after three months’ delay, wrote to express his
regret that the patent had given offence, to promise
an enquiry, and to promise also, that if Wood had
been found to have broken his engagements, he should
be severely punished.

The words were vague, but thrown, as they were,
into the form of an apology, the Irish leaders per-
suaded themselves that they amounted to a confession
of defeat; that their expostulation had taken effect ;
and that they could now afford to be generous. The
two Houses replied, that they were grateful for his
majesty’s kindness; they trusted that means would be
taken immediately to prevent the coin from being put
in circulation; and, as a proof of confidence, they voted
the supplies for the usual two years. They assumed
that the dispute was at an end; and with an under-
standing that 1t was not to meet again for business
till the autumn of 1725, and, with mutual compliments
and expressions of good will, the Parliament broke
up, and the Duke of Grafton sailed for England.

1 ‘Grafton to Walpole, November 2.’ MSS. Record Office.

VOL. I. MM

530

BOOK
i hig
ee?
1728

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Rid of his immediate difficulty, and choosing to
believe that the opposition had been a mere explo-
sion of unmeaning Parliamentary faction, Walpole
now imagined that the course was clear before him,
and that he could do as he pleased. The King’s
promise was observed to the letter. A committee of
the Privy Council was appointed to examine a matter
which was already determined on. A few bags of
the halfpence were made over to Sir Isaac Newton to
be analysed; and when it was found that, so far as
these specimens were concerned, the terms of the
patent had been observed, Sir Isaac’s name was pa-
raded to shield a transaction which, whether they
were observed or not, was still an abominable fraud.
The Committee reported that the new coin was purer
than that already in circulation; that there had been
no misrepresentation; that Ireland needed an addition
to its copper currency; that the King was acting
within his undoubted prerogative; that the patent was
granted, and that it could not be legally recalled.*

The report was sent to Dublin, with the results of
Sir Isaac Newton’s investigation. A hope was ex-
pressed that the Irish would perceive that they had
been unnecessarily alarmed. ‘The issue of halfpence
recommenced; and Wood, in an evil hour for himself,
was heard to swear that he would force the Irish
people to swallow them, whether they liked it or
not.

It was now that the champion of Irish rights ap-
peared on the scene, whose genius has condemned
a transaction to an infamous immortality which, but
for him, might have been forgotten among the thou-
sand scandals of those anxious days. Since the pro
1¢ Report of the Privy Council, July 24,1724.’ MSS. Record Office

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

secution of the printers of his ‘ Address to the People
of Ireland,’ Swift had published nothing which could
bring him into collision with the Government; not,
however, out of any love for Walpole or the Whigs.
The Whig policy was hateful to him. Against Wal-
pole he had an unrequited grudge. He had been
watching, doubtless, for an opportunity to quit scores
with him, and the time was come. Perfectly well
acquainted with the secrets of the English Court, and
possessed in consequence with a scorn which gave
him threefold strength, the Dean of St. Patrick’s
stepped down into the arena, in the disguise of a
Dublin drapier or haberdasher. He laid bare, in a
series of letters, the scheme of which Ireland was
being made the victim, and covered all the actors in
it with a cataract of infamy which no ablution could
cleanse. Dealing with unscrupulous men, he was
himself far from careful of the exact truth. He
wrote like a man in the hands of swindlers, and not
particular by what name he called them. In a good
cause there was no need to stand on trifles. He could
not of course directly attack the Government. The
miserable Wood was made the scapegoat, and Walpole
was struck at through his side. He advised his country-
men, at all hazards, and at all inconvenience to them-
selves, not to admit the halfpence among them. He
represented Wood, who was a wealthy Wolverhampton
iron founder, as a ‘ vile fellow,’ ‘a base mechanic,’
a speculating wretch, ‘who had bought up the old
copper in Ireland. to make an artificial scarcity.’
Wood had undertaken, as a compromise, to limit his
first issue to less than half the original quantity: the
rest he had promised to keep back till it should be
wanted. What security could Ireland find, enquired

MM 2

Do2

BOOK
LV

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the Drapier, so long as Wood was to be his own judge

—... of her necessities? ‘Let Wood and his crew of

1724

founders and tinkers,’ he said, ‘coin on till there is
not an old kettle left in the kingdom ; coin old leather,
tobacco pipes, clay, street dirt, and call it what he will,
we will not take it. By his own computation we are
to pay three shillings for what is worth but one. . . .
A whole kingdom is in dismay at the threats of one
single diminutive, insignificant mechanic. We are to
be eaten alive by this little arbitrary mock monarch ;
devoured alive by a rat. If Mr. Hampden chose
rather to go to prison than pay a few shillings to
Charles the First, I will rather choose to be hanged
than have all my substance taxed at the arbitrary will
and pleasure of the venerable Mr. Wood.’

Three letters of the terrible Drapier, all in the
same strain, appeared in rapid succession. Already
indignant at the trick which had been played upon
the Parliament, the people were like fuel ready dried
for the fire. The author was recognized notwith-
standing the disguise of the name, and Swift became
the idol of the Dublin populace. Mobs walked in pro-
cession through the streets, carrying Wood’s effigy,
a rope to hang him, and a coffin, and a winding sheet.
The Government, alternately bewildered and furious,
knew not which way to turn. ‘What would you
have?’ wrote the Duke of Newcastle to Lord Midle-
ton; ‘the patentee has a right of property in his pa-
tent, of which nothing but force can deprive him.
The King cannot revoke it. The patentee has com-
plied with his terms, and the copper money is the best
that ever was coined for Ireland.’! Unreasonable Ire-

1 «The Duke of Newcastle to the Lords’ Justices, October 3, 1724.’
MSS. Record Office. ,

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

land, that refused to be pacified with smooth words: CHAP.
The situation was one of a kind to which the Duke ~—~—
of Gratton was evidently unequal: a stronger hand 174
and a stronger head were required to cope with it.

Lord Carteret, then about thirty-seven years old, one

of the ablest, if not the very ablest, statesman that
Walpole had at his command, was selected, in Graf-

ton’s place, to dissolve the Opposition, and to use all

means which experience in England had proved suc-
cessful in such cases: corruption and _ resolution,
adroitness and good dinners, ‘ Burgundy,’ ‘ closeting,’

and ‘ palaver.’

Carteret went to his work with commendable mis-
eivings. ‘I will do my best,’ he said; ‘I have had
difficult things to do before. The pitcher goes often
to the well, and is broken at last; but the proverb
frightens me not. If I have the fate of the pitcher,
people shall say, I deserved better luck.’* He landed
on the 23rd of October, a day which was still ob-
served with anniversary solemnities commemorative
of the massacre. The Drapier was on the watch for
his coming. At the moment of his arrival, the
famous fourth letter, just newly issued, was being
hawked through the streets. So far Swift had kept
clear of politics. He might have been indicted for a
libel upon Wood, but he had written nothing on
which the state could found a prosecution. He had
now deliberately touched a more dangerous chord.
The sore point in the connexion between the two
kingdoms had been the alleged dependence of Ire-
land upon England. Ireland with her own Parlia-
ment, and her own laws, had claimed to be a free

" “Carteret to the Duke of Newcastle, September 10, 1724.’ MSS
Record Office.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

country ; under the same sovereign with England,
it might be; but still free. If England, for her
own purposes, chose to alter her succession; to expel
one King and choose another; Ireland, unless with
her own consent, held herself entitled to hold her old
allegiance. She was vain of her supposed loyalty to
Charles the First. She had rejected William and ad-
hered to James, and had insisted that she was within
her rights in doing so. By the 9th of the Ist of
William and Mary, the English Parliament had re-
plied by a statutory declaration that the kingdom of
Ireland was annexed and united to the imperial crown
of England, and was subject to the English sovereign
whoever he might be. The connecting link between
them was not the person of the king or queen. The
smaller country was attached to the larger as an
inseparable appendage; and it was in virtue of this
statute that the war of 1691 was regarded and
treated as rebellion. ‘The resistance of Ireland to
the halfpence had been described as unbecoming in
a dependent kingdom. ‘The Drapier, so choosing his
words as to combine affected loyalty to the House
of Hanover with loyalty to Irish liberty, and mak-
ing it peculiarly difficult to construe his language
into treason, yet gave voice to the inmost thoughts
of Irish nationality, im denouncing the alleged de-
pendence. ‘Next under God,’ he said in this fourth
letter, ‘I depend only on the King and on the laws
of my country. Iam so far from depending on the
people of England, that, if ever they rebelled against
their sovereign, I would take arms against them at
my sovereign’s command: and if such a rebellion
should prove successful, so as to fix the Pretender on
the throne of England, I would venture to transgress

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

that statute so far as to lose every drop of my blood
to hinder him from being King of Ireland.’

With these words, street and square were ringing
when Carteret arrived in Dublin. Boys were stand-
ing at every corner, bawling out the last letter of the
Drapier. The ‘fly sheets’ were being sold to eager
buyers ‘ within the gates of Dublin Castle.’ Without
so much as an hour to collect himself after his voyage,
the new Viceroy had at once to address himself to
the battle. There was no time for dinners and Bur-
gundy. ‘To try,’ as he said, ‘the tempers of. the
leading people,’ he summoned the late Lords Jus-
tices, the Privy Council, and the judges. He in-
sisted on the lawfulness of the patent, the folly of
the objections, and the determination of the Govern-
ment not to allow itself to be insulted. ‘The meaning
of the movement,’ he said, ‘was now explained. It
was not to escape the miserable halfpence. The Irish
people intended to shake off their allegiance, and their
dependence upon England. ‘They would find them-
selves mistaken. He should immediately offer a re-
ward for the discovery of the writer of the letter, and
instruct the law officers to prosecute the printer.’

Many years had passed since words like these had
been heard in Dublin Castle. Pity only that, when
spoken, they were spoken on the wrong occasion. A
violent debate followed. The Lords Justices, Midle-
ton, and Speaker Conolly supported the Viceroy.
The Archbishop of Dublin,’ Swift’s constant friend,
and the Bishop of Elphin,’ said coldly that such high-
handed measures would fail of their object. A prose-
cution would add to the discontent, and endanger the

1 King, now a very old man.
2 Godwin, an Englishman, who had been Archdeacon of Oxford.

535
CHAP.
if
——
1724.

536

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book peace of the realm. Under the existing circumstances
T
—— no jury would find a bill.

1724

Carteret fiercely replied, that ‘the peace of the
kingdom should be kept.’ The Chief Baron’ said
that ‘things were in a bad way, if the board were to
be intimidated, and the laws suspended, from a fear
that sedition should be justified by a jury.’ After
a stormy discussion of six hours, a majority were
brought to consent that a reward of 300/. should be
offered for the detection of the Drapier. But the con-
sent was unwillingly wrung from them. ‘The entire
Council agreed in condemning the halfpence. ‘They
required, and the Viceroy found himself unable to re-
fuse, that the Proclamation should be directed solely
against ‘seditious and scandalous paragraphs’ in the
letter, and should contain nothing which could be con-
strued into an approval of Wood. Even with these
precautions, Archbishop King declared, on leaving the
room, that ‘the Viceroy would have reason to repent
so precipitate a resolution.’?

Carteret was receiving an Irish welcome to his
uneasy office. Like so many other statesmen before
and after him, he had brought with him a convic-
tion that Ireland required only a firm government;
that authority had only to assert itseif, in order to be
obeyed. Had he remembered that a government must
be just as well as firm, he would have brought the
key to unlock the riddle with him; but with this re-
membrance he would scarcely have come to Ireland
at all on his present errand. Unjust violence, alter-
nating with affected repentance for past oppression,

1 Bernard Hale, rewarded after- 2 “Carteret to Newcastle, October
wards by a seat on the English 28.’ MSS. Record Office.
bench.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

537

and childish prate about /rish ideas: this has been CHAP.
. > | . . e ° ni
the eternal seesaw in the English administrations Che

the unlucky country. Who but Cromwell has ever
tried to rule her by true ideas ?

The Archbishop, with forty years’ experience of
public life in Dublin, understood the situation better
than Carteret. Two days after he came privately to
the Castle, and, after talking in what the Viceroy
called ‘a very extraordinary manner,’ told him that
‘the Drapier had some thoughts of declaring himself,
and might safely put himself on the country and
stand his trial.’ Carteret knew who the Drapier was
as well as the Archbishop, and was aware that he
had a dangerous person to deal with. But he had not
yet dreamt of yielding. ‘No one,’ he said, ‘ however
considerable, was of weight enough to stand a mat-
ter of such a nature. If the author desired the glory
of a prosecution, he might apply to the Chief Justice
of the King’s Bench; the libel contained treason, and
his duty was to bring the writer of it to justice.’

‘ You will tell the King,’ Carteret wrote in sending
information of what had passed to the Duke of New-
castle, ‘that if the author’s boldness should be so
great as the Archbishop says, I am determined to
summon him before the Council; and, though I should
not be supported by them, to order him to be taken
into custody, to refuse his bail, and keep him till I
know his majesty’s pleasure. The Chief Baron thinks
that if we do act it must be with the utmost rigour.
Lord Shannon tells me the chief citizens of Dublin
are ina strange humour. Dr. Swift is said to be the
author, but it will be hard to prove, though many
think he may be spirited up to own it.’?

1 “Carteret to Newcastle, October 31.’ MSS. Record Office,

1

24

538

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The haughtier Carteret’s attitude the fuller became

es thie cup of humiliation which in the end he was com-

1724

pelled to drink. All Dublin, from highest to lowest,
was openly defiant. The Proclamation was issued,
but the criers dared not carry it into the streets. <A
declaration against the halfpence, signed by several
of the Council, was printed on large sheets, and hung
up framed in the most public parts of the town. A
hackney coachman had an altercation with an officer
about a fare. A mob collected; the coachman
declared ‘that the gentleman had offered to pay
him in Wood’s money,’ and the officer was hustled
and beaten. ‘The Corporation presented Swift with
the freedom of the city in a gold box. The story of
the deliverance of Jonathan was made into a recita-
tive and chanted about the streets :

‘Then Saul said to Jonathan, What hast thou done.
God do so, and more also, for thou shalt surely die,
Jonathan. And the people said to Saul, Shall
Jonathan die who hath wrought this great salvation
in Israel? God forbid; as the Lord liveth there
shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for
he hath wrought with God this day. So the people
rescued Jonathan that he died not.”!

In England the Lord Lieutenant’s vigour gave
supreme satisfaction. The King said, that even ‘if
Swift came forward his acknowledgment would make
no difference either in the crime, or in the manner in
which it should be punished. The Lord Lieutenant
should proceed according to law.’? The law itself,
justice itself, which the sentiment of Ireland was de-

1 ¢Thomas Tickell to Secretary 2 “Newcastle to Carteret, No-
Delafaye, November 1.’ MSS. vember 5.’ Ibid.
Record Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

fending against English authority, proved too strong
both for King and Viceroy. The Drapier having
reconsidered his intention of declaring himself, the
threatened prosecution was undertaken against the
printer, a person named Harding. With character-
istic audacity the Dean published an anonymous
address to the grand jury, inviting them to throw out
the bill. The worst that could be alleged against the
Drapier, he said, had been but an unwary expression ;
otherwise he had deserved well of Ireland, and ought
to be supported; the grand jury, being merchants
and shopkeepers, had nothing to gain by returning
the bill, and nothing to fear by rejecting it; ‘they
expected no employment in the state to make up in
their own advantage for the destruction of their

country.’

This sarcastic stroke of insolence was re-

ceived also with applauding clamour,' and the aspect

1 Swift at one time undoubtedly
contemplated, if not avowing the
authorship of the letters, yet taking
up the Drapier’s quarrel in his own
name. At the height of the storm
he addressed a letter to Lord
Midleton from the deanery, which
he evidently intended to publish.
He assumed that the Chancellor
agreed with him, and the Drapier
having been silenced, he said that
he must himself take up the pen.
The English, he declared, knew no
more of Ireland than of Mexico.
They regarded it as a country sub-
ject to the King of England, full of
bogs, inhabited by wild Irish Pa-
pists, and keptin awe by mercenary
troops. They thought it would be
better for them if Ireland were
sunk in the sea; and if an Irish-
man came among them they
crowded about him as if he were a
wild beast. In reality, The Papists
of Ireland were as inconsiderable

as the women and children. Mr.
Wood’s victims were Englishmen
and Protestants.

He explained in detail, as he had
done before, under the name of
the Drapier, the nefarious character
of the patent; still, however, throw-
ing the blame on Wood, and sug-
gesting that the bellman of each
parish, as he went his midnight
round, should cry, ‘Past twelve
o’clock. Beware of Wood’s half-
pence!’ He himself, he said, if
forbidden to speak, would go when
he was in danger of bursting, and
whisper among the reeds, ‘ Beware
of Wood’s halfpence !’

Midleton, as Chancellor, ob-
jected probably to the appearance
of a letter of such a character ad-
dressed to himself. It was kept
back at the time, but appeared
afterwards as No. 6 in the Drapier
Series.— Swift's Works, vol. vil.

540

BOOK
IV

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

of things was so unfavourable, that even Carteret’s

—-— own mind began to misgive him. Grafton perhaps

1724

had been less to blame after all than he and Walpole
had imagined. ‘The rage,’ he admitted, ‘was uni-
versal.’ A general hope was expressed, he said, ‘ that
his majesty would recede and withdraw the patent ;’
and he confessed that he hesitated what to advise.
‘The Protestants having universally taken so unac-
countable a turn, the Papists naturally followed suit
to keep up the ferment. Commerce and credit suffered,
and imaginary fears had become real evils. The
troops were in good condition, and showed the best
spirit, but they were weak in numbers.’’

English soldiers were spared the disgrace of forcing
light halfpence upon Ireland to fill the pockets of a
King’s mistress. The prosecution of the printer was
pressed. The grand jury took Swift’s advice, and
threw out the bill. They were sent back with a
reprimand. ‘They divided, twenty-seven to eleven in
favour of persisting. The judges sent for them, man
by man, to expostulate. ‘They had but one answer,
that the presentment of the paper would bring in the
halfpence. ‘Even treason,’ Carteret said, ‘ would
not be found by an Irish jury if coloured over with
popular invectives.’ La Touche. the banker, who had
voted with the minority, was all but ruined by his
temerity. ‘There was so violent a run upon him, that
it was feared he would be obliged to stop payment.”

Amidst universal execrations, contrary to precedent,
and contrary, it was alleged, to law, the first grand
jury was discharged, and another summoned. Four-
teen of the new jurymen were notorious Jacobites.

1 ‘Carteret to Newcastle, No- vember 22 and November 24,1724.’
vember 14.’ MSS. Record Office. bid.
* “Carteret to Newcastle, No-

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

Their humour was so confessed that the Chief Justice
dared not press them to a decision. But being
assembled, they refused to be passive. Instead of
presenting the printer of the Drapier Letters, ‘ the
grand jury of the county and city of Dublin pre-
sented all persons who had attempted, or should
endeavour to impose, Wood’s halfpence upon Ireland
as enemies to his majesty’s government and the welfare
of the kingdom.’!

Two alternatives only now lay before the Govern-
ment. ither they must suspend the constitution,
declare Ireland in a state of siege, and govern by the
army, or they must accept their defeat. Walpole,
already fearing that he might have gone too far, had
sent an order to Carteret, not to exceed the law, what-
ever the provocation.’ He had bidden him ‘ consult
such persons as retained their reason,’ and let him
know their opinions.” Carteret, with evident relief,
replied that the matter must be ended; and that if
the Kine could make up his mind to let the patent
drop, a way of retreat would be opened to him. Men
whose estates were in Ireland were shy of giving
advice when public feeling was so violently agitated.
Every one with whom he spoke, however, was of
opinion, that something must be done before the
Government could encounter the Parliament. So long
as the patent was maintained, the public business
could never be carried on. If the patent was can-
celled, the House of Commons might be brought to
vote some compensation to Wood, provided it was
done indirectly, and his name did not appear.’

The dose was too nauseous to be swallowed with-

1 ¢Qarteret to Newcastle, De- cember 3.’ Jbrd.
cember 1.’ MSS. Record Office. 3 ‘Carteret to Newcastle, De-
2 ‘Newcastle to Carteret, De- cember 16.’

542

BOOK
LY’;
—

1724

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

out reluctance and wry faces. Townshend was espe-
cially indignant. ‘ The King,’ he said, ‘ was astonished
to receive such advice. He had asked for the opinions
of reasonable persons, and he was answered that the
patent must be withdrawn, and that money would
then be silently voted to hush up the quarrel. The
King never asked, or accepted, money from Parliament
without specifying the purpose for which it was
needed. He could not bring himself to make a
private bargain. He had never meant to force the
copper on his people: he would never allow it to be
forced on them, and an assurance so distinctly given
ought to be sufficient.’ *

Townshend’s letter was read before the Irish
Council. They were not satisfied. The country had
made up its mind that the accursed thing should
have no entrance there under any pretext whatsoever.
Midleton resigned the seals, and the war seemed about
to recommence; when Archbishop Boulter, then newly
settled in the Primacy, interposed with judicious ex-
planations, satisfied Walpole of the real danger of
allowing the dispute to continue, and induced him to
capitulate on the offered terms.

‘All parties,’ the Archbishop wrote, ‘ without dis-
tinction of party, country, or religion, are against the
halfpence. Their agreement in this has had a very
unhappy influence on the state of affairs here, bringing
together Papists, Jacobites, and Whigs; so that ’tis
questioned whether, if there were occasion, justices
of the peace could be found that would with any
strictness search and disarm Papists. The appre-
hension of the loss they will sustain in their estates
if these halfpence are introduced has cooled the zeal

1 ‘Townshend to Carteret, December 29.’ MSS. Record Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

of numbers that were before warmly affected. It
appears also, and may more appear, that the uneasi-
ness is a protection to any sedition, uttered or
published, that has anything about the halfpence
intermixed with it. No witnesses against such de-
linquents would be safe from popular fury. Papists
and Jacobites have been very industrious in this affair
to bad ends. Foolish people have taken advantage of it
to talk of independency. Men of sense, however, abhor
any such notion. ‘They take the safety of their lives
and properties to lie in the connexion with England.
I trust the folly of some and the wickedness of others
will never provoke an English ministry to take angry
steps to distress a nation where the title of every Pro-
testant to his estate is inseparable from that of his
majesty to the crown. Their affection will revive
when the present heat is over; nor can this nation be
hurt sensibly without great damage to England.

But the uneasiness will remain till the patent is
absolutely sunk. . . . I have asked them whether
they would not admit ten thousand pounds worth or
twenty thousand pounds worth of the copper. They
say they will admit none. ‘They are all determined,
and you cannot venture to let Parliament sit till these
heats are laid. I have told them that Wood must
have been a great sufferer already, and must suffer
more if his patent is revoked; that there is no doubt
of its legality, or proof that he broke the terms of it.
All here, however, are positive that his agents uttered
a baser coin than those current at the Mint. He
will not resign without compensation, and sedition
may provoke his majesty to sustain him. We ought,
therefore, to propose some amends to Mr. Wood to
induce him to resign. Sensible people answer that

544

BOOK
BE
———_—_

1725

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

they dare not propose anything for fear of being
fallen upon in Parliament. But if the Ministry will
compute what they think it reasonable to allow Mr.
Wood ; and if, after he has resigned his patent, an
order is sent from his majesty to pay some one in
trust for Mr. Wood, without mentioning his name,
such a sum for such a term of years as they shall
judge equivalent, they will be able to provide that
payment in Parliament.'

The Primate had expressed fully what Lord
Carteret had been able only to hint at. After taking
time to consider, the Government consented to terms,
which, though unwelcome, were less severe than they
might have expected. ‘The method, your Grace pro-
poses,’ Newcastle replied to Boulter, ‘seems reasonable,
and may be a handle for something to be done when
we come to a resolution.’ Before the autumn session
commenced the resolution had been arrived at, and
the Viceroy was able to meet Parliament with an
assurance that the patent had been cancelled. The
private arrangement was carried out by which Mr.
Wood was indemnified for his losses and for his mor-
tification, and both Houses made gracious acknowledg-
ments in the answer to the address. In the Commons
there was no difference of opinion. With apparent
heartiness they thanked the King for his great good-
ness and condescension. In the Upper House the Arch-
bishops of Dublin and Tuam, Lord Midleton, and other
Peers moved, and carried on a division, that to the
words ‘goodness and condescension’ should be added
‘oreat wisdom.’ ‘The sarcasm, a last arrow probably
from the quiver of the Dean of St. Patrick’s, would

1¢The Primate to the Duke of Newcastle, January 19, 1725 (abridged).’
MSS. Record Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

have turned the compliment into an insult. The
Dean was held to have cleared his account with
Walpole sufficiently without impertinence to the
King.'' Before the amended answer was presented
the Primate again interposed. Archbishop King and
Lord Midleton struggled hard for the ‘great wisdom,’
but calmer counsels prevailed. The words were lost
on a second division by a majority of twenty-one to
twelve, and the scandal of the Duchess of Kendal’s
halfpence was at an end.’

? Walpole had interposed in the not believe him to be a Christian.
English House of Commons to * “The Primate to the Duke of
prevent Swift from being made a Newcastle, September 21 and 23.’
bishop, and had implied thathedid MSS. Record Office.

VOL. I. NN

546

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

In the midst of the heat and dust of the Wood
hurricane, at a moment when the Duke of Grafton -
reported himself unable to stem a torrent which was
swollen by the fusion of all the factions in Ireland;
when the sacramental test could not be repealed,
because the Catholics had so many friends in the
House of Commons, and the dislike of Dissenters was
stronger than the dread of Popery, the heads of a
bill, if we are to believe the standard Irish historian,
were introduced, carried, presented by the Speaker to
the Lord Lieutenant in the name of the entire re-
presentative assembly, and by the Lord Lieutenant
earnestly recommended to the Home Government, of
so extraordinary a nature that, were the story true in
the form in which it has come down to us, the attempt
by an Englishman to understand the workings of
Irish factions might well be abandoned as hopeless.
‘In the year 1723,’ says Plowden, ‘the heads of a
bill were prepared for the strengthening the Protes-
tants with all the invective acrimony (s7c) which infu-
riated fanaticism could devise. One blushes for the
humanity of an Irish House of Commons, which, in
satiating its lust for persecution, adopted unani-
mously a clause for castrating every Catholic clergy-
man that should be found in the realm. ‘The bill,
thus surcharged with this Gothic barbarism, was pre-
sented on the 15th of November to the Lord Lieutenant
by the Commons at the Castle, and they most ear-
nestly requested his Grace to recommend the same in

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

the most effectual manner to his majesty,! humbly
hoping from his majesty’s goodness, and his Grace’s
zeal for his service and the Protestant interest, that
the same might be obtained to pass intoa law. It was
transmitted to England, and for the honour of human-
ity there suppressed with becoming indignation.’ ”

A statement, so positively made, has passed into
the region of acknowledged certainties. It has been
beaten into the metal of the historical thoroughfare,
and being unquestioned has been moralized over by
repentant liberal politicians as illustrating the bane-
ful fruits of Protestant ascendancy. The Catholics,
unlike the Dissenters, had a legally recognized exist-
ence. Such of their clergy as were registered, and
had abjured the Pretender, had as much right to offi-
ciate in their chapels as the Lord Lieutenant’s chap-
lain in the chapel in Dublin Castle. The registered
Priests were described by Swift as Whigs, and sup-
porters of the Hanoverian Government; and even
against those who properly fell within their provisions,
the existing penal laws were rarely or never put in
force. Yet it has been believed without difficulty, and
without enquiry, that suddenly, and without special
provocation of any kind, a House of Commons more
than usually well inclined to the Catholics, turned
thus furiously upon all classes of their clergy, legal or
illegal, and expected that England would reverse her
policy and agree to a measure for the violent and
immediate extinction of the Catholic religion in Ire-
land. It was observed in the Commons’ Journals,
that a bill of some kind on the subject was pre-

1 The italics are Plowden’s,
4 Historical View of the State of Ireland, vol. i. p. 221.

NN 2

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

sented to the Viceroy, in the year which Plowden
mentions, that it was sent to England, and that it was
not returned. ‘The traditionary account of its cha-
racter was accepted as needing no investigation. The
indignation of England was said to have been aroused,
for it was the policy of the Irish Catholics to flatter
England, as their defender against the domestic Pro-
testant tyrants. Yet, if indignation was felt, it was
unexpressed, for the Duke of Grafton was unaware of
its existence. He did not even understand that the
bill was rejected. He understood merely that it was
postponed, and so little conscious was he that the
heads contained anything unusual, that he enquired
the reason why it had been laid aside, that he might
explain what would be otherwise unintelligible.*

In widely credited historical fictions there is usually
some chrysalis of fact which tradition has developed.
In the present instance the imagiative part can be
separated from the real with satisfactory complete-
ness. Corresponding to the two classes of priests,
the registered and the unregistered, there were, in the
last century as in the present, two kinds of Irish
Catholic policy. There were the quiet and moderate
Catholics, who had had enough of rebellion and con-
spiracy ; who wished only to live at peace on the rem-
nant of their fortunes, and were contentedly loyal to a
government which left them practically unmolested.
There were the factions who fed continually on the
recollection of their wrongs, ‘and lived in constant
hope of aid from the Catholic powers, to root out the

1 ‘By the last accounts from Hng- reasons which induced you to lay
land I find the Popery Bill is post-it aside, that I may explain, for
poned, which the gentlemen of this _ the juncture is critical.’—‘ Duke of

country having had very much at Grafton to Lord Carteret, January
heart, I should be glad to learn the 22,1724.’ MSS, Record Office,

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

Protestants, and shake off the yoke of Great Britain.’!
Of this party, the regular clergy, the Jesuits, the
priests, who were trained in Spain, France, and Flan-
ders, were the head and soul. In close correspond-
ence with the Continent, receiving their directions
from Rome or Flanders, or the mock court of the
Pretender, they were the persistent enemies of the
English settlement, the recruiting sergeants who
gathered the thousands of eager Irish youths that
were enlisted annually for the Catholic armies, the
impassioned feeders of the dreams which were nour-
ished in the national heart for the recovery of Ireland
for the Irish race, the return of the Stuarts, and
the expulsion of the detested Saxon. These were
the originators of all the political troubles which con-
tinued to distract Ireland. The registered priests
were, for the most part, orderly and well-disposed.
In Kerry, where the cause needed thorough-going
men, they were put out of their cures as too soft and
malleable, and their places taken by others of stronger
national type,” who were the encouragers of the

1 “Address of Convocation, 1713.’
MSS. Record Office.

* The unregistered priests were
not universally of the disloyal sort.
A curious picture of one of them
is given by Mr. Dennis, of Kingsale,
in a letter to Secretary Dawson. It
was in 1714 when, in the alarm
about the Pretender, special orders
were sent to the magistrates to
enforce the laws.

Mr. Dennis writes :—

‘Kingsale, June 11.

‘Sir,—Pursuant to the Lord
Lieutenant’s Council order, I
seized and committed a priest, one
father Noe Mulshinoge, who never
was registered. He is a very old,

decrepit man, and for four years
past had scarce been able to stir
with the gout. He’s a drunken
fellow, and was very serviceable to
Protestants in King James’s time,
and constantly kept with, and to
hig power supported, them. He
has behaved himself very civilly
here since the trouble, and banished
one Bishop Lyne, and several other
of their clergy, who came here to
reclaim him, and had they stayed
it would have been in vain. He
always went by the name of King
William’s priest, and, were it not
for the sway that he bears over
the Papists, I believe he’d be of
another religion. J sent him twice

500

BOOK
IV.
Seay

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

hougher and the ravisher, the smuggler and the Rap-
paree; whose business was to render futile the efforts
of the English settlers to introduce order and enforce

the law.!

to Cork gaol, and the judges sent
him back like a bad penny. He
has tendered bail, who are very
responsible Protestants, that he in
his time heartily served, which
I’ve refused to take. Let me know
whether I may take security for
him. Ifhe must be sent to Cork
1 must get a horse thither, for he’s
not able to go a mile.”—MSS.
Dublin Castle.

' The activity of the unregistered
priests in enlisting recruits for the
Pretender appears in countless
letters preserved in the Dublin Re-
cords. A series of depositions on
the same subject are printed in
the Journals of the Irish House of
Commons for 1783. John Hen-
nessey, late parish priest of Done-
raile, said, ‘ that in August or Sep-
tember, 1729, he was in company
with Connor Keefe, Popish Bishop
of Limerick, Francis Lloyd, Bishop
of Killaloe, and Doctor Stone, a
Franciscan friar of Dublin, at the
house of Teigue Macarty, Popish
Bishop of Cork. On that occasion
Keefe and Lloyd delivered a letter
to Macarty, from Christopher
Butler, titular Archbishop of
Cashel, intimating the arrival of a
letter from the Papal Nuncio at
Brussels, to the effect, ‘that the
Pope had complied with the re-
quests of the bishops and arch-
bishops of Ireland, and that his
Holiness had sent him an indul-
gence for ten years to raise a sum
of money to restore King James to
his right.’

Hennessey deposed that he soon
after obtained a copy of the bull.

‘Every communicant, in virtue
of that document, ‘duly confessing
and receiving on the patron days
of every parish and every Sunday
from May to September, having
repeated the Lords Prayer five
times, the Apostles’ Creed once, and
paying two pence each time, was
to receive a plenary indulgence,
with intent that God would
speedily place King James on the
throne of England,’

In the course of conversation
Hennessey and his bishop had a
dispute, ‘as to the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of running goods and
robbing King George of his duties.’
The Bishop ‘held it no sin,’ and
permitted the priest to teach to
that effect, saying, ‘as King George
had no right to the crown of these
realms he had no right to the
duties.’

Hennessey was one of the priests
who wished to fraternise with
Protestants, and was consequently
obnoxious. The chapel congrega-
tion at Doneraile complained of
him to the Bishop, as ‘no better
than a Protestant’ himself. ‘If
Lucifer came out of hell,’ they
said, ‘he could not carry more
pride. His chief study, when he
can get any pence, which he
seldom can, is to hasten to the
Protestants of Doneraile, and drink
it in brandy and punch. We pray
you, without delay, recall from us
that wicked unfortunate Protestant
priest John Hennessey, for the
gentry and community does not care
to hear his mass; and Mr. Morgan,
lately complaining to my Lord

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

If English authority was to be maintained, it was
fair and reasonable to distinguish between the regis-
tered and unregistered priests. To prohibit the
teaching of rebellion and anarchy was not to interfere
with religion; and if the chapels were to remain open,
and if the laws intended to prevent the succession of
the Catholic clergy were to be left in abeyance, the
Government had a right to take care that indulgence
was not made a cloak for treason. That the Catholic
bishops, who took their inspiration from Rome, pre-
ferred the sort who would make themselves most po-
litically useful, was a reason for using a tighter rein
with them.’

From the day the penal laws were passed, the Go-
vernment had been in growing embarrassment. ‘They

Doneraile of his wicked courses,
his answer was to complain to his
superior.’

A Catholic parishioner appeal-
ing to a Protestant nobleman
against his priest, and being re-
ferred by him to the Catholic
bishop, whom, according to law, it
was that nobleman’s business to
prosecute and transport, is suffi-
cient evidence of the laxity with
which the penal statutes were prac-
tically enforced.

1 Warnings as to the character
of these priests were continually
reaching the Castle. In 1744, when
the rebellion was known to be im-
minent, a certain W. D., who
feared to give his name lest he
should be murdered, wrote from
Limerick to, the Duke of Devon-
shire. ‘There is one Peter Nayler,
a parish priest and vicar-general of
the diocese of Kilmacduagh, in
county Galway, who, when he
hears confessicns, obliges his peni-
tents to give him a certain sum of

money in order to remit it to a
foreign prince for his support, and
tells them they are obliged in con-
science to doit; and likewise he
says, he can absolve them from
any oaths of loyalty to the present
King, and by this reason he may
withdraw the subjects from the
King and cause a rebellion. In
county Clare likewise, one Mr.
Michel O’Brien, vicar-general of
Kilfenore, does the same. One Pat
Dogherty, parish priest near Ennis,
does the same, and five others.
They stir up their penitents, and
give them such hearts that they
are willing to do anything rather
than disoblige their pastors; and,
my lord, unless you prevent this
business the whole kingdom is in
danger. All these gentlemen, both
priests and friars, now living in
this kingdom of Ireland, ought to
swear allegiance publicly to the
King.”’—‘ W. D. to the Duke of
Devonshire, January 30, 1744.’
MSS. Dublin Castle.

5902

BOOK
Ly.

—_sYoo”

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

had hoped that the terrors of the threatened penalties
would prove sufficient ; and even observers as keen-
eyed as Swift expected, that when the existing gene-
ration of priests had died off, Popery would come to
a natural end. Had the laws been enforced in Ireland
as strictly as in England, the desired effect might
have been produced. But the machinery of the con-
stitution required the support of general opinion. In
England popular sentiment was on the side of the
law. In Ireland it was antagonistic. The police, or
the army which would supply its place, had no ex-
istence; and the Government finding that they could
not carry out the laws without violence, preferred, for
the most part, to earn an idle popularity by affecting
to hold them in suspense. On the eve of rebellion,
as in 1714, they attempted fretful, irritating, and
wholly ineffectual measures of temporary repression.*
In the year preceding, when St. John and Harley
desired to encourage the Jacobites, magistrates who
made themselves officious were frowned upon. Nun-
neries and priories sprung up under the eyes of the
officials, and interference of all kinds was steadily dis-
countenanced.” Galway, one of the most important

1 The magistrates at such times

were utterly powerless. Mr. Crof-
ton, of co. Leytrim, writes in 1714
to Secretary Budgell, that he had
issued orders for arrests to be made.

‘Yet I do not find,’ he says,
‘that any of the priests are taken.
I know, indeed, it is very difficult
—the much greater part of the
country being Papists—to take any
of the priests, or other ecclesiastical
persons. The few Protestants in it
are afraid of meddling with them,
and I freely own it is my humble
opinion, it will hardly ever be done

here by that method.’— MSS. Dub-
lin Castle.

* “In the close of the late reign
great discouragement was given
by the then men in power to such
as were active in suppressing friaries,
and putting the lawsagainst Popery
in execution. Great numbers of
friars have within these very few
years come into the kingdom, and
settled themselves in this country.’
—‘ Representatives of the Grand
Jury of Galway, 1715.’ MSS.
Dublin.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

ports in Ireland, a place of so much consequence that
exceptional laws had been passed to keep it in Pro-
testant hands, was allowed nevertheless to become so
exclusively Catholic, that there were no longer suffi-
cient Protestant freeholders in the town to form a jury.
The corporation, though they took the oaths, and, on
entering their offices, went through a pretence of con-
formity, were Papists toa man. Priests, friars, and
bishops landed openly there, remained without con-
cealment under the protection of the mayor, and dis-
persed about the country at their leisure.’

On the accession of the House of Hanover, the an-
ticipation was of an immediate rebellion; and, had
the Pretender prospered better in Scotland, it would
have been doubtless realized. Ormond was expected
at Waterford, at the head of the Irish brigade. Itine-
rant fanatics wandered about, denouncing the Reform-
ation, calling Luther and Calvin emissaries of Satan,
inviting the Irish to draw their swords for country
and religion, and either conquer or earn a place in
Paradise.” The Dublin mob kept the Pretender’s
birthday annually with the national ceremonies of
a procession and a faction fight. Before the new
dynasty was fixed in its seat, some real though short-
lived exertions were actually made to crush disloyalty,
and especially to stop the inflowing torrent of priests
from the continental seminaries. There were a few
arrests; there were a few, but not so many, trans-
portations. Gradually the fever died away. The
difficulties were constant. Magistrates would not
risk unpopularity. Juries refused to convict. The
peasants declined to give evidence. The necessity

1 Trish Statutes, 4 George I. 2 “Depositions relating to a Riot
cap. 15. in Ulster” MSS. Dublin Castle.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

for severity, on the other hand, seemed to disappear.
The Catholic Powers recognized George the First.
England, the great protector of French and Flemish
Protestants, felt obliged to show equal respect to the
intercession of her Catholic allies in favour of Irish
Papists. As her fears subsided, she discovered, in
the Duke of Newcastle’s language, ‘ that it was not for
the public service, even of the Protestant interest, that
anything should be done that might alarm the Roman
Catholic Powers with whom the King was in alliance.’

Secure at home, in the common strength of the
Protestant spirit in England, George the First’s min-
isters could consider these questions at their leisure.
In Ireland, where the Protestants were few and scat-
tered, the recollections of the 23rd of October were
still uneffaced. ‘To them a landing of Ormond or the
Pretender implied, or might imply, confiscation and
massacre. On them would fall the personal effects of
a rising, the elements of which they knew to be seeth-
ing in their midst. Between the Protestant gentry
and the loyal Catholic clergy there was a steady
increase of good feeling. ‘The laws,’ wrote an ardent
Protestant in 1717, ‘are too severe already.’1 An
idea was finding general favour that every parish
should be allowed a priest, regularly licensed by the
Government; a plain oath of allegiance to which no
conscientious objection could be made, being the only
condition. Arrangements were contemplated for the
continuance of the succession, and salaries were spoken
of for them to relieve the pressure on the people.
The Regulars meanwhile, whom the more intelligent
Catholics themselves ‘regarded as a nuisance,’ might
then be ‘ totally extirpated’ and the laws be really and

1 ‘Anonymous Common Place Book, 1717.’ MSS. Record Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

effectively executed, to keep out the disaffected and

55

CHAP.

ad

3)

disloyal seminarists.! In proportion to the disposition ne Bae

to reconciliation with one section of the Catholic clergy,
there was a corresponding determination to clear the
country if possible of the others, and to permit no
bishops and vicars-general, who absolved subjects from
their allegiance, and taught the people that the King
had no right to his customs duties. The true remedy,
as they by this time knew, lay elsewhere than in penal
laws—lay in an effective Church, enclosing in itself
all Irish Protestants—lay in an education system co-
extensive with the country, in a resident gentry con-
scious of their duties, and in the development of Irish
industry. ‘These things, however, required time. Of
the best of them they were robbed by hard fortunes
and English tyranny. Until the licensing system
was fairly on foot they knew perfectly well that severe
laws could seldom be enforced; but they thought
that some deterring effect might be produced if the
scarecrow were made a little more frightful.

The Duke of Bolton in opening Parliament in 1719
had urged very strongly the desirableness of more
union among the Protestants in the presence of the
increasing strength of the Papists, and of their noto-
rious inclination to the Pretender. ‘The animosity of
Churchmen against what they called dissent, forbid-
ding an approach to the Presbyterians, the House of
Commons determined to weaken their enemies by an
addition to the penal laws against the more mis-
chievous of the clergy. The number of prelates,
friars, and unregistered priests was daily growing
larger. Prosecutions, which in nine cases out of ten

1 ¢ Letters to the King: by Charles Hogg, December 10, 1723.’ MSS.
Record Office.

1723

556

BOOK
a

a

1719

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

broke down for want of evidence, yet if they succeeded,
were almost as useless. The transported priest either
went back to his seminary, and another came over in
his place, or he returned himself to a part of the
country where he was unknown. The law was thus
defied with the confidence of certain impunity. These
foreign priests ‘were the fomenters of all rebellions and
disturbances.’ ‘ Unless a more effectual remedy could
be found to prevent their coming into the kingdom,’
Ireland, it was felt, ‘would never be quiet or well
affected to the Crown.’’ A committee of the House of
Commons therefore drew the heads of a bill which
they considered would keep such persons at a safe dis-
tance, and among other clauses it contained a proposal
that every unregistered priest or friar found remain-
ing in the kingdom after May 1, 1720, might be
branded with a hot iron in the cheek, as a mark by
which ne could be immediately identified.

Before it was transmitted to England the bill was
reviewed by the Lord Lieutenant and the Privy Coun-
cil. The Council, among whom was the Chancellor,
Lord Midleton, and two Bishops, while most anxious
for its success, considered that the penalty of branding
was both too mild in itself and also that it would fail
of its effect. The hot iron had been tried already for
the Rapparees: ‘the Rapparees had made it a com-
mon practice to brand innocent persons with the same
mark, to destroy the distinction it was intended for.’
These four or five noble Lords, therefore, did certainly
recommend as a substitute for the iron a penalty,

1 <The Lords of the Irish Council 2 ¢The Duke of Bolton to Secre-
to the Lords Justices of Great tary Craggs, August 25, 1719.’
Britain, August 22, 1719.’ MSS. MSS. Record Office.

Record Oilice.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

which was reported, rightly or wrongly, to have been

55

CHAP.

7

used in Sweden with effect against the Jesuits. They eee

did propose, not that all the Catholic clergy in Ireland,
as Plowden says, but that unregistered priests and
friars coming in from abroad should be liable to cas-
tration.’ It was thought perhaps by those half dozen
gentlemen, that the horrors of such a punishment
would keep the persons against whom it was threat-
ened from landing on the Irish shores. An impression
possibly prevailed, that a mutilation which would
have disqualified a man from receiving priests’ orders
would subsequently invalidate them. Whatever the
motive, the Council did certainly, though with diffi-
dence and hesitation, introduce this change into the
proposed bill of the Parliament. The Duke of Bolton
accompanied it with a letter, in which he confessed
an expectation that it would not be accepted.? The
Council themselves wrote, that ‘they would gladly
have found some other punishment which in their
opinion would have remedied the evil.’ They left
the English Lords Justices either to replace the
branding clause, or substitute some other penalty.
They insisted only on ‘the absolute necessity of
making the law against unregistered priests and
friars more severe than it was at present.’®

1 Not certainly as implying a
charge of immorality. Amidst
the multitude of accusations which
I have seen brought against the
Irish priests of the last century I
have never, save in a single instance,
encountered a charge of unchastity.
Rather the exceptional and signal
purity of Irish Catholic women of
the lower class, unparalleled pro-
bably in the civilized world, and
not characteristic of the race which

in the sixteenth century was no
less distinguished for licentious-
ness, must be attributed wholly
and entirely to the influence of the
Catholic clergy.

? “The Duke of Bolton to Secre-
tary Craggs, August 25.’ MSS.
Record Office.

3 “The Lords of the Council to
the Lords Justices, August 22,
1719.’ MSS. Dublin Castle.

1719

558

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

There was no occasion, as Irish writers have sug-

—*"_ gested, for the interposition of Cardinal Fleury. The

17195

Irish Secretary himself wrote that the clause was of
no consequence if the substance of the bill was allowed
to pass.’ Lord Stanhope at once struck it out as
‘ridiculous.’ Shorn of the grotesque appendage, it
went back to Ireland, where it passed the House of
Commons, but it was thrown out by the Lords on
another section, which was held to bear too hardly on
the estates of Catholic landowners.? The story that
both Houses of the Irish Parliament desired that
every priest in Ireland should be brutally mutilated
is thus reduced to more modest dimensions. The
House of Commons drew the heads of an act by which
a class of Catholic clergy, whom they were legiti-
mately anxious to keep out of the country, should be
treated like vagrants and deserters. The unfortunate
ingenuity of a handful of Lords and Bishops made
an alteration which was contemptuously flung aside ;
and the bill, after the work had been undone, was
lost after all in the Irish Upper House, as unjustly
severe.

It will be answered that Plowden’s narrative refers
not to the viceroyalty of the Duke of Bolton in 1719,
but to that of the Duke of Grafton in 1723.

1 ‘Mr. Webster to Secretary De-
lafaye, September 22.’ MSS. Re-

which did not plainly appear by
the letter of it, since the retro-

cord Office.

2 «The Committee of the House
of Lords have rejected the clause
in the Popery Bill relating to re-
versionary leases. Thus all the
rest is involved in the same fate.
The clause was thought unjust, as
giving a subsequent determination
of the meaning of a former law,

spect was to reach such reyersion-
ary leases as had been made ona
supposition that the former law
had left them such a liberty. .. It
is a great misfortune.’—‘ The Duke
of Bolton to Secretary Craggs, Oc-
tober 31, 1719.’ MSS. Record
Office.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

It is true that an attempt to revive the lost bill

599

CHAP.

was made four years later, not with, but without, the ————

sensational proposition; and it was made at the invi-
tation of England herself, and for a special reason, in
one of those bursts of alarm and anger which have
periodically provoked English statesmen into acts of
spasmodic severity. Bishop Atterbury, after seven
years of restless efforts to bring about an invasion of
Ireland by a Spanish force under the Duke of Ormond,
had, in 1722, laid a plot to seize the Tower and the
bank, and to proclaim the Pretender in London.
General Dillon, an Irish Catholic in the French service,
was to land in England with some thousands of the
Irish brigade. Ormond was, if possible, to carry out
at the same moment his design on his own country.
The plot was discovered. Irish priests were found as
usual to have been the most active instruments in car-
rying on the correspondence. The English Government
awoke to the necessity of cooling down these feverish
spirits; and the Duke of Grafton, in opening the Irish
Parliament in 1723, dwelt in his speech on the perils
to religion and liberty which had been so nearly
escaped; and he expressed ahope that duty, patriotism,
and the just detestation of such wicked and unnatural
contrivances would animate both Houses to give the
world an evidence of their loyalty. The King’s only
object for Ireland, he said, was to make it a happy
Protestant country. The Parliament, he trusted,
would give its serious attention to provide laws for
strengthening the Protestant interest, and prosecuting
more effectually those already in being against the
Catholic priests, whose numbers were notoriously
increased.’

1 ‘Speech of the Lord Lieutenant, August 29,1723.’ Commons’ Journals,

1725

a ee

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The responsibility of the initiation was thus as-
sumed by Walpole’s cabinet. ‘The Irish Commons,
so exhorted, passed a series of resolutions against the
connivance of magistrates, false conversions, and pre-
tended conformity, by which the penal laws were
systematically evaded. They then took up again the
lost bill of 1719. Lord Fitzwilliam and other gentle-
men, whose properties were affected by it, and whose
interest had thrown it out, were heard in objection
at the bar of the House. After long discussion the
heads were agreed upon and were presented by the
Speaker to the Viceroy, as Plowden says, with a
special request that he would recommend them to the
consideration of the Government. The Duke replied
that he had so much at heart a matter which he had
himself advised, that the Commons might depend on
his respecting their wishes. The Council, warned by
experience, attempted no second alterations. The
nature of the penalties was left apparently for England
to decide, for the Council this time insisted merely on
the need of ‘some effectual means’ to stop the influx
of priests; and requested Walpole, Townshend, and
Stanhope to determine what those means should be.!

The ‘ Wood’ hurricane was at this moment unfor-
tunately at its height, and absorbed by its violence
every other consideration. [Embarrassed by the larger
problem, the English Government had no leisure to
consider the difficult question of dealing with the
unregistered priests. The bill was laid aside, not
rejected, but merely postponed, and before another
session the alarm had subsided. But that there was

1 The words referring to the absolutely necessary..—‘Sketch of
penalty are merely ‘That some Heads of Popery Bill, Council

more effectual remedy to prevent Chamber, Dublin, December, 1723.’
these great evils is, in our opinion, MSS. Record Office. —

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

561

no collision between the two countries, and no di- cua.
vergence of opinion; and that the Irish Catholics careeae

have no reason on this occasion to thank Walpole for
standing between them and their Protestant oppres-
sors, may be concluded with certainty from the Duke
of Grafton’s words at the prorogation. He insisted,
as strongly as at the opening, on the need of a vigorous
execution of the laws already existing, to the neglect
of which the increase of priests was due. For him-
self he promised to contribute his part by giving
directions that, for the future, such persons only
should be put in the commission of the peace as had
distinguished themselves by steady adherence to the
Protestant interest.’

1 Commons’ Journals, Feb. 12, 1724.

VOL. I. 00

1724

562

1725

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

So ended the last attempt to punish, by penal laws, the
unregistered Catholic clergy as such. ‘ Weariness of
the struggle and the mildness of the Government
determined that the conversion of the nation should
be left to time, unless the priests should be mad
enough to give fresh provocation.’* ‘ The Irish
people,’ it was thought (and the words are a remark-
able tribute to the value of authority in Ireland,
however imperfectly it was exerted), ‘the Irish people
were more docile and less obstinate than either the
Scotch or Welsh, and, had the same pains been taken
to convert them which were used in Wales and Scot-
land, Ireland would have long since become Protestant.”
The object of intelligent people thenceforward was to
find a means of reconciling the loyal priests and the
Government, and subsidizing a power which had
proved too strong to be violently overthrown.°

Many bills, or attempted bills, directed at the cur-
tailment of Catholic influence, bills to prevent inter-
marriages between Catholics and Protestants, bills
to annul clandestine marriages accompanied with
violence and rape, bills to prevent the intrusion of
false converts into public employments or seats in the

1 Reflexions for the Gentlemen of
Ireland. Dublin, 1788.

2 Ibid.

8 ¢ Possibly it might be a good
plan to abolish the payments of
dues, offerings, and fees, from the
poor Papists to the priests, and

settle salaries for them. Their in-
terests would then be closely tied
to those of the state, and they
might be managed like cannons,
whose mouths are still pointed as
they please who fill their bellies.’
—Lbid.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

House of Commons, bills to check the practising of
Catholic solicitors, can be traced for another genera-
tion in the records of the Irish Parliament. But the
real feeling of the Protestant gentry on this momen-
tous subject was from the present period rapidly
changing. A signal evidence of the alteration remains
in a sermon preached before the House of Commons,
which received the thanks of the House, and was
printed by order, at the very time when, if tradition
spoke truly, both Peers and Commons were en-
deavouring to force a measure upon the country
which would have placed the Protestants of Ireland
on a level of barbarity with Spanish inquisitors. The
preacher was Doctor Synge, Chancellor of St.
Patrick’s, afterwards Bishop of Clonfert. The occa-
sion was the 23rd of October, the anniversary of the
Irish St. Bartholomew day. The year was 1725.
The text was the 23rd of the 14th of St. Luke,
‘Compel them to come in:’ the subject, the legiti-
macy of compulsion, as applied to conscience.

‘Treland and England,’ the preacher said, ‘are in
that peculiar position that many of those who have
enjoyed the protection of the Government are only
watching their opportunity to overthrow it. The
conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth, the Gunpowder
Plot, the dreadful massacres of this day, are so
many evidences of what is plain from history. For
this reason the wisdom of the legislature has thought
it necessary to frame several laws to weaken the
power and interest of the Catholics of Ireland, and
because these laws do not answer the end proposed,
others more severe may come hereafter to be tried.

‘ Self-preservation is the first law of life, but laws
of this kind are lable to one objection, which in the

002

564

BOOK
IV.
—e—eooo”
1725

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

opinion of many persons is fatal; that the cause of
division being a difference of religion, no laws can be
formed on such a subject without invading the natu-
ral liberties of conscience. Since the design of the
legislature in appointing the anniversary thanks-
giving on this day is to perpetuate the memory of a
barbarous and cruel conspiracy, and the dreadful
effects on the Protestants of Ireland produced even by
a partial execution of it, it will not be amiss to con-
sider this objection, and enquire what influence it
should be allowed to have.

‘The principles of the Church of Rome on this
subject are confessed. That Church regards heresy
as a crime which it has a right to punish with death.
Some Protestants have held the same opinion. Hobbes
has maintained that the civil power may define the
national religion. Men may think what they please,
but, in the expression of their thoughts, they must
conform to the law. For myself I conclude that, if
we consider men’s opinions and practices in religion
with respect only to the Christian law, neither the
governors of the Church, nor the civil magistrates, have
a right to use force to restrain or punish them.
Heresy may, or may not, be a crime in itself, but the
civil magistrate may punish only those forms of crime
which are visibly injurious, such as theft, adultery,
or murder; and all persons whose social principles
have no tendency to hurt the public are entitled to
toleration. Repression in such cases leads only to
faction and sedition. The religion is not to blame,
but the persecution employed against it; and the
remedy is, not to increase the severities, but entirely
remove them. ‘There are, however, some false prin-
ciples in religion which the civil magistrate is

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

compelled to notice. The general opinion is, that
religions are not to be Polenied which seem Hae:
tive to society, and on this principle Irish legislation
has proceeded. It is a position which I cannot
accept, and for this reason. [ distinguish between
inward principles and outward actions. All are
agreed that the plea of conscience will not cover crime.
It conscience erring invincibly prompts a man to do
a wicked action, it may perhaps excuse him in the
sight of God; but as man cannot distinguish between
the pretence and the reality, those who are guilty of
treason must suffer as traitors. The question is,
however, whether when men have adopted principles
into their religion which formerly have influenced
others, and may probable influence them again, to
engage in designs destructive of the public good, the
magistrates ought not to refuse to persons of that
erroneous religion liberty to worship God according
to their consciences.

‘In favour of toleration it is said broadly, that the
refusal is unlawful, and does more harm than good.
The magistrate has nothing to do with opmion. To
prevent men from meeting for religious purposes is
practically impossible, and therefore the less it is
tried the better. You have to consider whether a
limited toleration under the civil magistrate is not
on the whole a more likely means to prevent the evil
consequences of bad principles than a total denial of it.

‘The magistrate * is bound to provide for the public
security ; but he has remedies of another kind, which
will be effectual to his end. He may make laws to
limit the property of the professors of a false religion,

1 This is particularly to be at- direction in which intelligent Irish
tended to, for it indicates the opinion was running.

565

CHAP.
AS
——$—$,--—_——-

1725

566

BOOK

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

to divide it into several hands, and to hinder them

IV. athe NE EE
——-—_ from making new acquisitions which in kind or degree

1725

may be dangerous. ‘Though men’s religion be their
own concern exclusively, their property, so long as
they continue members of society, is and must be
subject to the supreme powers. It may be taken from
them either in whole or in part, and the right of
acquiring more be abridged when public good requires.
The richest merchandize may be destroyed when there
is danger of infection. Houses may be demolished to
check a conflagration. Agrarian and sumptuary laws
limit men’s rights of enlarging their possessions. Y et
laws of this kind were never accounted unjust. The
magistrate too may provide means of instruction.
He may establish schools under public inspection, and
so provide for the natural disappearance of the evil
in another generation. If these means fail, he has a
further remedy, which though violent is, in cases of
extremity, undoubtedly lawful. He may oblige such
persons to leave the country, and remove out of a
society which they will not allow to remain in peace.
If it be objected that men will dissemble under such
conditions, rather than leave their homes, the answer
is that these means may be adopted only as a last
resort when nothing else will serve.’

Having laid down these general principles, Doctor
Synge concluded by applying them.

‘The Catholics,’ he said, ‘ do in fact hold doctrines
pernicious and dangerous to the public peace. They
maintain it to be not only lawful but right to extir-
pate heretics, and they must therefore inevitably and
at all times be enemies to a Protestant government.
They hold the detestable maxim, Nulla fides ser-
vanda cum hereticis. They insist that the Pope has

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

power to excommunicate and depose heretical princes,
and absolve subjects from their allegiance, and at this
moment they regard another, and not his majesty,
to be lawful King of England. Against persons hold-
ing these opinions we have a right to protect our-
selves. The best remedy would be to convert them,
not outwardly, which does more harm than good,
but inwardly and really. We should see to the en-
couragement of true religion, and the education of
children. Further, we must distinguish between
Catholics who at heart adhere to these dangerous
principles, and Catholics who, though continuing in
that communion, are ready to disclaim and renounce
them. All who will make these concessions, we are
bound to tolerate. We shall then hear no more of
tyranny over consciences ; and those who afterwards
incur the penalties of the law must, themselves being
judges, be owned to suffer not as persons professing
the Romish religion, but as persons who refuse to
give the Government a fair and reasonable security
for their being loyal and peaceable subjects.’ ’

The House of Commons, in thanking the Chancellor
of St. Patrick’s for his sermon, accepted his principles
as their own. The House of Lords, on the 3rd of the
ensuing December, passed a resolution, ‘ that the most
probable way to restrain Popish priests and regulars
from coming into the kingdom, would be to allow a
competent number of secular priests to exercise their
functions under such regulations as might be for the
security of the civil state.’ Dr. Synge, referring to

1 “Sermon preached before the which Dr. Synge received the
House of Commons at St. Andrew’s thanks of the House. Published
Church, Dublin, October 23,1725. by order. Abridged.

By Doctor Edward Synge;’ for

568

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BooK this vote of the Peers, in a reply to an attack made
er upon him by a Beceem fanatic, argued that if a

1725

sufficient supply of priests was permitted by the law,
the temptation to encourage others would be re-
moved ; such of them as were recognized would
combine to keep out the rest: and the question for
the Government to consider was, whether it was more
prudent, more convenient, more for the interests of
religion and the commonwealth, to have five hundred
secular priests educated in countries and universities
where the violent views of the Jesuits were not re-
ceived, making, on their admission, a complete re-
nunciation of the extravagant claims of the Papacy,
and taking the oaths of allegiance and abjuration ; or
to have two thousand, for the most part regulars, lurk-
ing in holes and corners, educated where the most
extravagant doctrines were most in request, never
renouncing them, and giving the state no security
for their good behaviour.’

If the scheme thus sketched was never carried into
effect, the fault was less in the Irish legislature than
in the inherent difficulties of the subject. The esta-
blishment, for to this it must have amounted, of the
Catholic Church in Ireland, would have probably
involved the expatriation of the Irish Catholic epis-
copate. The five hundred priests would have been
ordained abroad, and admitted only as they were
wanted to supply vacancies. If those objections
could have been overcome, the consent would still
have been required of the English Parliament, and
would probably have been asked for in vain. An end,
however, which was not to be obtained directly, was
procured less satisfactorily by continued connivance.

1 Reply to Mr. Radcliff, by Dr, Synge.

EFFORTS OF THE IRISH PARLIAMENT.

The hierarchy was left undisturbed, and an under-
standing gradually grew up, that the Bishops should
give practical assistance to a Government which was
on the whole so lenient. The educated Irish Catho-
lics began from this time to forget their disloyalty.
Among the state papers preserved in Dublin is an
examination of a Bishop in the year 1745, whose
name is disguised behind initials, and those probably
incorrect. He was questioned as to an intention of
insurrection. He was able to assure the Government
that there was none. He had himself, in his diocese,
discouraged ‘externes,’ as the foreign priests were
called; he had kept the Jesuits at arm’s length, and
suppressed convents and friaries more effectively than
the county magistrates could have done all combined.
Conspiracy, he said, there could be none of which
he could be left in ignorance. And, ‘if he knew of
any practices,’ he promised to give notice to the
authorities at the Castle.’

1 ‘FKxamination of N.S., 1746.’
Dublin, WSS. The Bishop, who-
ever he was, gives curious particu-
lars as to the condition and organ-
ization of the Irish priesthood.

At that time there were twenty-
four bishops and archbishops. The
Pope appointed them, sometimes
at the postulation of the priests of
the diocese. N. 8S. had been a
parish priest for twenty-six years
before he was made a bishop. He
had his orders in Spain ; ordination
in Ireland being, he said, unusual.
The friars were governed by their
own provincials, who, if necessary,
could inflict corporal punishment
on them. He himself, though a
bishop, retained his parish, and
had two curates to help him, They
must have all been very poor, and
made the burden of their main-
tenance as light as possible,

‘In his parish, he said, ‘some
gave him five shillings and five
pence, some one shilling and a
penny, some sixpence halfpenny.
In some parishes the priests got
only corn and bread, and other
little things. Collections were
made on Sundays. In his parish
he got half the collections and the
friars of a religious house the
other. He had thirty-two priests
under him. They gave him a
guinea each at the distribution of
the oils. His income from his
parish was forty pounds a year, of
which he gave a third to his coad-
jutors. The collections at his
chapel door were about sixteen
shillings a year. His parish was
the best in the diocese. Common
parishes were worth thirty or thirty
five pounds a-year—no more.

Cr

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

CHAPTER ILI.
PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

SECTION I.

THERE are four systems under which a dependent
people may be held together under the forms of a
coherent society.

They may be governed wisely and firmly under a
rule impartially just, by the laws, so far as intellect can
discern them, appointed by the Maker of the world.

They may be governed, without justice, by supe-
rior force, which considers nothing but its own will.

They may be left to govern themselves according
to such ideas as to the majority of them seem good,
authority claiming nothing but political allegiance,
and maintaining a police to repress the grosser form
of crimes.

And, lastly, they may be ‘ managed’ by adroit
handling, the internal factions being played off one
against the other; while the central authority pre-
vents violent collisions, maintains a general equipoise,
and dissolves dangerous combinations by ‘corrup-
tion’ and influence.

The first of these methods, which succeeds always
and in all countries, 1s the most rarely tried, because
it implies virtues which are rare at all times, and
especially rare in men in power—self-denial, patience,
wisdom, courage, the subordination of the rulers
themselves to the rules which they impose on others,

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

The English, under the high impulse of Puritanism,
attempted it once in Ireland, but for the few years
only, during which they endured for themselves the
moral restraint of deep and noble convictions. When
they ceased to govern themselves nobly, they were
no longer able to govern Ireland nobly; and after a
short-lived experiment gave up the effort.

The second method, coercion without justice, be-
came the rule in Ireland at the Revolution. This
too, if carried out, might have been successful in
keeping the Irish in subjection. Being a people
incapable of self-restraint, the Celtic peoples are and
always have been pre-eminently amenable to an au-
thority which dares to assert itself. But coercion
implied force ; force, or forces—a large and disciplined
army ; and England, free herself, imagined that she
could coerce Ireland under the forms of her own con-
stitution, and refused to supply materials of despotism
which might be dangerous to herself.

Coercion failed for want of strength. Self-govern-
ment of a real kind, self-government, accompanied
by the enfranchisement of the Catholics and Dis-
senters, it was dangerous to try. No one indeed as
yet thought of trying it in a country where nine-
tenths of the land had been taken violently from the
old proprietors, whose crime had been to challenge for
Ireland her right to her own laws and her own creed.

There remained, therefore, the last expedient, the
easiest and also the worst : the policy, if so base a
system may be honoured by such a name, which had
been tried already by the Plantagenet and Tudor
sovereigns, and had produced a condition of society
in which order and morality were words without
meaning, and out of which, in the vision of the

572

BOOK
IV.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

saint, human souls were seen descending into hell

———— as thick as hail showers. This method, set upon its

feet once more, became again the rule, till misgovern-
ment produced its inevitable fruits—agrarian con-
spiracies, mock patriotism, rebellion, and the still
weltering chaos of discontent and disloyalty.

The attempt to prevent, by unexecuted threats,
the continuance of the priesthood and the Catholic
hierarchy having decisively failed, the next object of
English statesmen was to disarm their hostility and
detach them from the cause of the Pretender. The
change of view was natural and not indefensible.
Catholicism in Europe was losing its political cha-
racter. New principles of combination, with new
objects, were forming themselves between the leading
powers, and a Catholic crusade against Protestantism
was ceasing to be possible. The adherence of the Irish
to the Papacy was no longer necessarily dangerous.
England might be at war with France, and yet
France, if care was taken to keep the priests in good
humour, need no longer as a matter of course find
an ally in Irish disaffection. The same influences
might be made available to neutralize domestic dis-
content. To promote the prosperity of Ireland was
not a matter which presented itself as a duty to an
English administration, whatever its political com-
plexion otherwise. The poorer the country could be
kept the less likelihood there was of its being trouble-
some. The only anxiety was to preserve outward
quiet, to secure the voting of the supplies, and to
suppress Parliamentary mutinies which might threaten
the commercial monopolies. The agitation which
England had most to fear was among the Protestants,
whose manufactures had been ruined, and whose

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

energies there was a determination to repress. The
Catholic population formed a counterpoise which it
was convenient to keep in good humour, while to
protect them from persecution was an easy compli-
ment to Catholic allies on the Continent. In effect,
therefore, under the two first Georges, English states-
men said to the Irish priesthood, ‘ We will defend
you from the penal laws if you in turn will dis-
countenance the agitation from Ormond and the
Pretender. If you will be loyal to England, we will
take care to shield you from Protestant ascendancy.’
The simplest method would have been to modify the
laws; and the Irish Parliament itself would have gladly
consented to some arrangement by which the priest-
hood could have had a recognized existence. But no
hint can be traced among the English state papers of
any such desire. ‘The state of English opinion might
perhaps have made an alteration of the penal statutes
impossible; perhaps their continued maintenance was
essential to the continuance of Catholic gratitude.
This ambiguous handling, however, though conve-
nient to Walpole and Newcastle, was less satisfactory
to the Protestants of Ireland. They had been planted
as a garrison in a hostile country. They had been
set to rule on principles which, unless acted upon
with sufficient consistency to destroy the creed at
which they were aimed, were an enduring and yet
useless insult ; and they saw the professors of that
creed recovering strength and numbers, and re-acquir-
ing wealth and consistency. They were in possession
of the estates of the native proprietors, who had lost
them in defence of their religion ; and the toleration
of that religion was a quasi-confession that the con-
fiscation had been an unrighteous act. Their position

574

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK was the more cruel because viceroy after viceroy, in
IV.
—_— the speeches from the throne, continued to urge

Parliament to enforce the penal laws, while in private
those same viceroys were obliged to forbid them to be
enforced. Carteret, in 1725, reminded the Lords and
Commons, that as all Protestants in Ireland had but
one common interest, so they had often too fatally
experienced that they had one common enemy. In
1727 Carteret again urged the execution of the law
to prevent the coming in of priests from abroad. In
1726, in the interval between those two speeches, he
was instructed by Newcastle, ‘ that nothing must be
done to alarm the Catholic powers with whom Eng-
land was in allance.’’ The Duke of Dorset, in 1731,
recommended the Legislature ‘to consider what
further laws were needed to prevent the growth of
Popery and secure them from danger from the number
of Papists in the kingdom.’ Yet when the heads of
a bill were sent over for a purpose, it was set aside as
unusual ; and at that very moment, and before and
after, in defiance of repeated promises and two Irish
Acts of Parliament, the English Government was
daily receiving and granting petitions to the repre-
sentatives of dispossessed families for a reversal of
their attainders, which gave them a right to recover
their lands. In 1740 as many as eighty suits were
pending in the Irish Courts against Protestant land-
owners in the county of Cork alone, who had pur-
chased their estates under the security of a Parlia-
mentary title, and of an act specially declaring that
no attainders should be reversed without Parliament’s
consent.” The purchasers were half-ruined in defend-

1 ‘Newcastle to Carteret, February * Commons’ Journals, Ireland,
24,1726.’ MSS. Record Office. Feb. 8, 1740.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

ing themselves even when they gained their suits.
Families who had been in undisturbed possession for
fifty or sixty years found themselves turned adrift
and penniless. Indeed, as the Irish Bar was con-
structed, they had scarcely better hope of justice
than under Tyrconnel himself; for the practice of the
courts was almost exclusively in the hands of con-
verts who were Protestants but in name, of men
who had been Catholics in London, took the sacra-
ment once on their way to Dublin, and were admitted
to plead on the strength of it, but were essentially
Catholics always, and devoted their whole services to
the party to which at heart they belonged.*

Since Romanism was to continue, it became neces-
sary to define more sharply the terms on which it was
to exist, and to take measures to secure the lives and
fortunes of the colonists from being sacrificed to Eng-
lish compromises, or the Catholic birds of prey in the
Four Courts. Catholics who consented to abjure the
Pretender had been hitherto admitted to the franchise.
The rate of increase in the Protestant population
was in itself smaller than among the Catholics, from
their more prudent habits, and was further checked
by the emigration. The disproportion of numbers
threatened to throw into Catholic hands the control
of half the constituencies in the southern provinces,
and the privilege of voting was taken from them.?

The Government, in pursuance of their views of
conciliation, since they could not by law appoint Catho-
lics to the commission of the peace, selected from
among the Protestants those gentleman who would be

1 “Archbishop Boulter to New- 2 1 George II. cap. ix. Lrish
castle, March 7,1728.’ MSS. Re- Statutes,
cord Office,

575

CHAP.
jay
 —

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

most agreeable to the Catholics: recent converts whose
faith was from the lips outwards; men whose wives
were Catholic, whose children were bred in the creed
of their mothers. A committee of the House of Com-
mons stated, that while this practice continued the
peace of the country could not be preserved. Con-
ciliation sofollowed gave the administration of the laws
to ruffians whom the laws rather should have been a

whip to scourge."

The heads of a bill were prepared, providing that
no convert should be admitted to office under the

crown if his family were

1 The difficulty of finding com-
petent magistrates was one of the
most pernicious results of absentee-
ism. Had the great landowners
remained at their posts the Govern-
ment would have had no excuse
for passing them over, or putting
power into the hands of such a
person as is described in the fol-
lowing story:—In the year 1729
Mr. Hubert Burke, a professing
Protestant, was a magistrate at
Loughrea, and in that capacity en-
tertained the collector of the re-
venue when he came to gather the
hearth-money. Mr. Bagwell, such
was the collector’s name, was lying
one winter’s night in bed at Burke’s
house when Burke’s eldest son
came drunk into the room with a
fiddler and a servant, and held a
candle to the collector’s nose.

Springing out of bed Bagwell
snatched a stick out of young
Burke’s hands, bade him leave the
room, and after a scuffle drove him
out and locked the door.

In the morning young Burke
sent Bagwell a challenge. Bagwell
replied that he wasin Loughrea on
the service of the Government. He

brought up as Catholics,

had neither time nor inclination for
such fool’s play as duelling, and
sent the messenger about his busi-
ness,

Upon this the family chose to con-
sider that they had been grossly in-
sulted. Ancient habits and manners
lingered in Galway. The old gen-
tleman informed his son, that ‘if
he did not bring him gentleman’s
or kerne’s or churl’s satisfaction’
out of a man who had struck a
Burke, he would never own him
more.

The youth promised obedience.
In the evening he collected a party
of ruffians in the yard, sent in word
to the collector that some one
wanted to speak with him, and
when he appeared set upon him
with a loaded whip, broke his skull,
and left him for dead.

A commissioner of the revenue
in the neighbourhood, hearing of
Mr. Bagwell’s treatment, applied
for a company of soldiers from
Portumna barracks to take young
Burke prisoner, and bring him to
Dublin for trial. <A civil warrant,
he said, would be useless, for the
offender's father, being a magistrate,

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

nor till seven years after his conversion. England
attempted resistance, but was eventually obliged to
comply. The condition of the bar offering a strong
temptation to the heirs of pardoned families to sue for
recovery of their estates, the heads of a similar bill
affecting barristers and solicitors were sent over in
1727, backed with the earnest recommendation of
Archbishop Boulter. The bill had been drawn by
his advice so as not to touch Papists, but only per-
sons calling themselves Protestants ; ‘foreign min-
isters therefore, he said, could not with decency
object.’* Foreign ministers did not, in the present
instance, constitute the difficulty. England was de-
liberately undoing the efforts of past legislation in
favour of the Catholics for its own immediate conve-
nience. The Solicitors and Barristers Bill was refused.
It was again sent over in 1731, and again rejected.
The Irish Parliament, however, was determined. In
1734, on the third trial, England gave way; and it
became the law of Ireland that no one should practise
as a solicitor who had not been a Protestant from his
14th year, or unless he had been five years articled
to some clerk in chancery in England or Ireland.’

recollection of his adventure. In
1743 he writes from Tipperary, ‘I
have a large walk in this country,

could procure any number of villains
to prevent wt from being executed.
Were ‘a Burke tried at the Gal-

way assizes he had so many rela-
tions and namesakes that no verdict
could be procured against him.’
Moreover, without soldiers, neither
he nor his accomplices could be
taken at all, or,if taken, be conveyed
to the county gaol.—‘ Information
of Samuel Bagwell taken before
John Carr, Chief Commissioner of
the Revenue.’ MSS. Dublin, 1729.

Bagwell recovered from his
broken head, but retained a bitter

VOL. I.

some parts of it being wild and
well stocked with the vermin
called Papists, who, I fear, will de-
stroy me when I am amongst them
upon my collection.’ — ‘Samuel
Bagwell to Secretary Poulton,
March 14, 1743.’ MSS. Dublin.

1 “The Primate to the Duke of
Newcastle, March 7,1728.’ MSS.
Record Office.

2 7 George II. cap. 5.

Pak

578

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION II.

BOOK ANoTHER act, of still greater consequence, expe-
——-— rienced a yet more significant opposition. ‘The Irish

1730

Catholics, after the revolution, had been disarmed.
With the semi-feudal habits which survived in Ireland
far into the last century, it was the custom of [rish
gentlemen to ride abroad themselves armed and
attended: by large numbers of servants with sword
and pistols. In the absence of police, and amidst
the still widely prevailing lawlessness, each house-
holder was obliged to undertake the defence of his
own home and family. An armoury and a supply of
muskets and pikes formed part of the ordinary fur-
niture of a country house. If no restrictions had
been placed upon the Catholics, their numbers would
have enabled them to extemporize a force which

might rekindle the civil war. As a pledge for the

security of the public peace, the right to possess
arms in these large quantities was limited to those
who were in fact its guardians, and Catholics were
restricted to their fowling-pieces.

Galled by a distinction which was a badge of dis-
trust and inferiority, and encouraged by the obvious
determination of the English Government to paralyze
the penal laws as far as Ireland would allow them,
the Catholic gentry, at the beginning of the reign of
George IL., openly resumed their swords, and were
believed to have collected stores of arms, like the
Protestants, in their houses. The magistrates had a
power by law to issue search warrants; but if they
used such a power, they were likely to be murdered,

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

or burnt in their beds. If they escaped Irish ven-
geance, they fell under the displeasure of the English
Government.’ The memories of 1641 and of 1690
were still too recent for the Protestants to feel
anything but dismay, if those who, in the speeches
from the throne were still called their enemies, were
allowed quietly to resume the means of destroying
them. ‘They were as a garrison set to hold a con-
quered country. Placed in a position which expe-
rience had shown to be supremely perilous, they
had undertaken the service in return for the lands of
which the inhabitants had been deprived, and they
knew themselves to be the objects of the enduring
hatred of the dispossessed proprietors. The means
originally intended to complete the conquest had been
abandoned. ‘The policy pursued towards Jrish in-
dustry had thinned their numbers, destroyed their
employments, taken from them the only means by
which Ireland could have been reconciled to their
rule; and, because they dared to complain, the persons
whom they were set in their places to control, who
regarded the Protestant settlers as aliens and robbers,
were being allowed quietly to recover the means of
recommencing a struggle which at best would be
bloody and dangerous.

In the summer of 1730, a Catholic gentleman was
indicted at Galway for carrying arms in the streets.
His religion was avowed; the fact was not disputed.
The defence was that the Disarming Act applied only
to persons who were alive at the time that it was
passed, and on this ground he was acquitted.? The

1¢The Primate to the Duke of 2 ¢Tn fact,’ says Boulter, ‘it was
Newcastle, December 4, 1781.’ drawn so ill as to leave room for
MSS. Record Office. that opinion,’
LA oa

580

BOOK
IV.
-__ro—"”
1730

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Dublin Catholics at once put on their swords, at once
carried pistols in their holsters; and, when they rode
into the country, had their half-score or score of
armed servants behind them. Two years later, as if de-
liberately to assert the re-establishment of their right,
Lord Gormanston and one of the Barnwells, both
Catholics, appeared with swords at the assizes at Trim.

They were both popular men, and against them
individually there was no ill-feeling; but the grand
jury, ‘men of fortune, and several of them members
of Parliament,’ feeling that acquiescence would be a
public sanction to the Galway interpretation of the
law, met the challenge as boldly as it was made. Gor-
manston and Barnwell were indicted under the old
Disarming Act, and the question was referred to the
Dublin judges for decision. The Viceroy, then the
Duke of Dorset, was absent in England. An attempt
made by the Irish Parliament to pass an explanatory
act had been defeated in England by the action of a
Catholic agency there. The Catholics had been heard
to boast that they could ensure the failure of all future
attempts to take their weapons from them."

The Lords Justices, the Primate, the Chancellor,

cause tocomplain. In the country
there was inexplicable languor. ‘I

1 ‘Boulter to Newcastle, Decem-
ber 4, 1731.’ MSS. Record Office.

An investigation in the Irish House
of Commons in 1733 revealed the
means by which money was raised
to defeat all billsin England which
the Irish Catholics disapproved.
They affected to believe that the
attempt to disarm them implied an
intention ‘to extirpate their re-
ligion, and that it was not to be
saved except by money.’ Collec-
tions were made at the chapel
doors all over Ireland. Dublin was
the focus of the agitation, where
the Catholics had confessediy least

am sorry,’ writes one of the Dublin
committee to an agent in the
south, ‘that with all your ex-
ertions you can raise so little in the
city and suburbs of so considerable
a place as Cork, in the face of the
terrible apprehensions most of us
have. . . . We don’t like pressing
the clergy who are so poor, but the
clergy should work on their flocks,
and not leave the burden upon us
who live at Dublin, who have
much more just reason to be ex-
cused upon this occasion than those

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

and the Speaker of the House of Commons wrote to
entreat the Viceroy that the law might be left to
take its course, and that the opportunity might not
be lost of enforcing respect to authority. Lord Gor-
manston’s behaviour ‘ was considered by the grand
jury as a defiance of the law in the face of the coun-
try.’ ‘The prosecution,’ they said, in evident fear
that they would be blamed, ‘was not an act of the
Government:’ all that they had done had been ‘to
decline to interpose in the common course of justice.’
‘They flattered themselves that it could not be taken
amiss by any foreign court when truly informed of
the circuinstances, and of the great lenity generally
shown to Catholics in Ireland.’ The two offenders
‘might not be convicted’ after all; and, if they were
convicted, the Government might pardon them if it
was thought expedient.’

The trial was, perhaps, hurried over in anticipation
of the expected answer from England. Gormanston
and his companion were found guilty, apologized, and
received a pardon, at the unanimous petition of the
grand jury.

But the assertion of the law was deprived of its
force by the imbecillity of the Viceroy and his masters.

ber 25, 1733.’ Commons’ Journals,
December 19, 1733.

who live remote from the Govern-
ment, and are always soonest op-

pressed. JI am sorry to find the
gentlemen in most parts of the
country do not show so great a re-
gard to religion or liberty. We
should have but little hope of put-
ting out those bills here if we
should have the misfortune of their
returning from England without
amendments. Our greatest efforts
must be to stop them on that side.
We want money, therefore, at
once. —‘ Wolf to Nagle, Decem-

Walpole’s Cabinet, it appears,
took bribes as well as gave them.
The necessity of providing money
to stop bills, which were either just
or unjust—which, if just, ought to
have been returned—if unjust,
to have been rejected on their
demerits, adds the last touch to
this detestable picture.

1¢ The Lord Justices to the Duke
of Dorset.’ MSS, Dublin, 1738.

581

CHAP.
Ly

~~

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

The Disarming Act had not been rejected in order
that, by the judges’ construction, the existing statutes
should be declared still to be in force. The Lords
Justices were reprimanded for allowing the prosecu-
tion to be pressed; and Dorset confessed, in the terms
of his reproof, that the administration of law in Ireland
was dependent on the pleasure of the foreign Catholic
Powers.

‘I submit it to your Excellencies,’ the Viceroy
wrote, ‘ how this matter may be looked upon abroad,
when a law made to prevent such disturbances from
Papists as may affect the public peace and welfare of
these kingdoms shall appear to have been ‘executed
with rigour at a time when all things are quiet and
peaceable, and no danger could arise to the public
tranquillity from the indiscretion of these gentlemen
who presumed to wear swords without a licence.’*’

The grand jury and the Lords Justices had desired
only to intimate to the Catholics that the law was
still binding upon them. They were made to under-
stand that, whether it was binding or extinct, the
Irish Catholics were not to be interfered with except
in time of war, or when there was present imminence
of rebellion. They were to be left undisturbed to
prepare at their leisure for action when a foreign
quarrel should give them an opportunity. The Irish
Protestant gentlemen, on whose heads the tempest
would fall, were unable to regard the proposal with
the same equanimity. The treachery of England
towards them compelled them to persevere in a course
which tended more and more to embitter their rela-
tions with the people. They continued to insist on

“The Duke of Dorset to the Lords Justices, July 7, 1733.’ MSS.
Dublin Castle.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

a disarming act as indispensable for Ireland’s safety,

58

CHAP.

9

o

and England continued to resist; until, in 1739, her rates ae

ministers found themselves on the edge of a rup-
ture with Spain. When danger brought them to
their senses, they remembered that the Protestants
formed after all the sole part of the population of
Ireland on whose loyalty they could rely in time
of trial, and wavered back to a policy of coercion,
which was doubly galling because it had been so long
suspended.

Encouraged by England’s attitude towards them
the Irish Catholics had begun naturally to hope for a
complete repeal of each and all of their disabilities.
In 1739 they presented an address to George the
Second, thanking him for the toleration which they
enjoyed, and professing the most ardent loyalty.

‘They had a just abhorrence,’ they said, ‘for their
forefathers’ primitive actions.’ They detested ‘the
thought of rebellion to aid a foreign power against his
majesty’s interests.’ ‘They had acquired fortunes by
trade, which they desired to invest in land, and found
themselves prevented by the severity of the law.’
‘They were oppressed by idle and wicked vagrants
informing against their titles, leases, and tenements ;’
and they had thought, they said, of emigrating to some
country where ‘they might reap the benefits of their
labours,’ ‘and leave some stake in lands to their
posterity which would secure them to be faithful sub-
jects of the princes under whom they lived.’ But
they preferred, if it might be permitted, to remain
loyal subjects of the English Crown. ‘ Money,’
they said, ‘laid out in improving a long lease’ would
be a security for their good behaviour; and more
dependence could be placed on them when they had

1739

584

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK given a guarantee for their good conduct, than ‘as
ae long as they had their effects in their pockets.’*

1739

The time was coming when the lesson of the
Reformation would have been really learnt, when
Catholic gentlemen would have discovered that, with-
out abandoning their faith, they could be in truth
and sincerity good subjects of a Protestant Govern-
ment; that the Pope had neither in theory nor fact
a right to meddle with their temporal allegiance.
When religion was no longer made use of as a cloke
or a palliation for political conspiracy, demands for
the relaxation of the penal laws could be presented
boldly, and could not be refused. But the expe-
rience of centuries wes not to be set aside and oblite-
rated by the good behaviour of one generation; and
the revival of the old pretensions to control the
policy of the Irish Government, which has been the
fruit of completed toleration, raises a doubt whether
concession was not after all premature. The suspicion
attaching to the representatives of a creed which has
dyed its garments in blood so deep as Romanism
has done will only finally disappear when the heads
of a Church which sanctioned the atrocities of the
Inquisition has with equal solemnity condemned
them. Earnest Catholics, at present, seem rather
bent on justifying the fetters im which it was found
necessary to chain them; they still refuse the ac-
knowledgments which are due to the conscience of
Europe; and, rather than make frank confession of
their fathers’ sins, they take refuge in dishonest eva-
sions, or in audacious denials of the established truths
of history.

1 “Address of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, September 26, 1739,’
MSS. Record Office.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

The Catholics who addressed themselves to George
the Second were in a more wholesome frame of mind.
The cowardice of modern Protestants, who disavow
and condemn a policy which merits no blame and
needs no apology, had not yet taught them how
much they might dare with impunity. They could
admit without disguise or shame their forefathers’
guilt. They affected to believe, and, being humbled
into good sense, perhaps they really felt that they had
been treated with leniency. The day of emancipation
was coming, coming as the gift in part of that very
Irish Parliament which they now dreaded as their
oppressor. But it had not come yet; nor was it
by rapes and abductions, by houghing cattle, by
perjured conversions, by juggling lawsuits, or by
purchased advocacy in the back corners of the Eng-
lish Cabinet, that they would hasten its arrival. War
was declared by England against Spain a month after
the presentation of the petition. It was discovered
that, while these gentlemen, on behalf of part of the
Catholic community, were affecting so profound a
loyalty, the flights of the Pretender’s Wild Geese from
the Kerry rivers were never more numerous. Letters
intercepted from Irish residents in Spain shadowed
out an intended invasion. Count Dillon was re-
ported to be himself in Munster organizing an insur-
rection ; and hot patriots declared ‘ nothing to be
more certain than that a bloody war would break out
all over Ireland in six months.’* The Duke of
Devonshire, who succeeded Dorset in the viceroyalty,
recognized and admitted a peculiar insolence in the
Catholic attitude; and the necessity of listening to

1 ¢Bernard Ward to his father at August 29,1739.’ MSS. Record
Carrigham, Ross. From Madrid, Office.

586

BOOK
re

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the demand for the Disarming Act became apparent

—. at last even'at St. James's.

1740

The Cabinet gave way, but so gave way as in yield-
ing to secure themselves from Catholic resentment.
Though legislation on the subject was confessed to
be necessary, the Duke of Devonshire was not per-
mitted to recommend it from the Throne. He was
instructed to leave the initiative to the Irish Par-
lament, to take no part, and to avoid all appearance
of taking part, ‘ that an answer might be the more
easily given to foreign Princes who would interfere.’ *

The Parliament accepted a responsibility which
ought not to have been thus exclusively thrown upon
it. Instead of the concessions which the petition
of the Catholics demanded, the heads of a Dis-
arming Bill were at once introduced. They were
heard in Council in objection; their arguments were
answered; and the Viceroy transmitted the bill to
England with a story which showed conclusively
that the time was not ripe for trusting the Irish
nation with larger powers. <A colony of Quakers in
Kildare had celebrated the Fifth of November with
the usual bonfire. ‘Their chapel and an adjoining
house were immediately burnt bya mob. A. company
of soldiers was sent to arrest the ringleaders in the
outrage. The entire Catholic population rose in
fury, swearing that all the Quakers and all the county
of Kildare should not hang them; and a large
military force alone saved Naas gaol from sharing the
fate of the chapel.’

Rumours were flying that a Spanish camp had been

1¢The Duke of Devonshire to November 8, 1739.’ MSS. Record
the Duke of Newcastle, October Office.
12, 1739.’ ‘The Duke of New- 2 ‘Tevonshire to Newcastle, Jan-
castle to the Duke of Devonshire, uary 12, 1740.’ bid.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

formed in Gallicia. French officers were discovered
enlisting recruits at Limerick; English regiments
were being tampered with ; and deserters had gone off
with the Wild Geese.1 The Government, too happy
that the Irish Parliament had been bolder than
themselves, returned the Bill, which was imme-
diately passed. The depleted arsenals were again
fully supplied. Authority once more dared to assert
itself. Disaffection cowered again into its hiding-
place with instant submissiveness ; and to this one
effort of resolution, after so long and so mischievous
a struggle, Ireland owed the unbroken quiet in the
rebellion of 1745, of which, by some absurd irony,
the indulgent rule of Lord Chesterfield has gained
the exclusive credit.

1 4 Devonshire to Newcastle, March 18, 1740.’

588 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION III.

BoOK For the half century intervening between the Duke
—— of Grafton’s government and the revolt of the Ameri-
can colonies, Ireland was without a history. The
fruits of misgovernment were steadily growing. Each
year the seeds of future disorder were sown over a
wider area. Each year the Celts grew stronger, the
English Protestants more helpless to stem the evils
which the wise among them too plainly perceived.
Viceroy succeeded Viceroy, resided for a quarter or
half a year while Parliament was sitting, and left
the administration to Lords Justices, who, powerless
for good, came gradually to value authority for the
opportunities of patronage. England governed Ire-
land for what she deemed her own interest, making
her calculation on the gross balance of her trade
ledgers; and leaving her moral obligations to accumnu-
late, as if right and wrong had been blotted out of the
statute book of the universe. JIreland’s great men—
for great men were born in Ireland as elsewhere—
drifted away out of a scene where no road was open
to honourable aspiration. Her politicians were men
who, for the most part, had no prospects elsewhere;
her second best, for her best had made their homes
in England. for fifty years there were no men in
the Irish Parliament deserving to be called emi-
nent. ‘The periodic agitations were without defined
purpose, and were the expressions merely of pain
from chronic sores, which, day by day, grew more
inflamed. Three-fifths of the rents were carried

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

to London or Bath, or the Continent, where the so-
called gentry of Ireland forgot their duties, and con-
cealed their nationality. Her aristocracy left their
estates to agents, and if their bankers’ balance was
satisfactory, asked no questions as to how their dues
were levied. Her men of talent, who should have
given her a national art and a national literature,
her distinguished lawyers and physicians, and men
of science, passed to the country which offered fairer
rewards to eminence, and social intercourse in which
it was possible to feel at home. Ireland herself,
cursed with a separate legislature, and with a nation-
ality which revived under oppression, was drained of
every element which could have given her firmness
and consistency, and was left to flounder from
calamity to calamity.’ Rank, genius, wealth, in-
tellectual cultivation, all, or aimost all, that could
have given vigour to her legislation, and tone to her
society, forsook her. Her code of laws were an in-
stitute of anarchy, so administered as to turn authority
into a jest, and so contrived as to make law a synonym
of iniquity.

The more honour is due to the few families who,

great in character or m

1 A condition apparently inevi-
table in all dependent countries
in times when the first duty of man
lies in the making and enjoying his
own fortune. Rome prolonged her
empire by recruiting from the
provinces her bar, her senate, and
her armies. Spain, Gaul, Africa,
the East were all emasculated that
Rome might be strong. Similarly
at the present day men of business
accumulate fortunes in Australia
to spend them in London. Poli-
ticians win distinction in colonial

rank, remained at their

legislatures as a step to greatness in
the Imperial Parliament. Colonies
which aspire to preserve their
wealth and talents for themselves,
will inevitably seek independence,
unless they are identified with the-
mother country, and share with it
to the full its glories and its pri-
vileges. There is no wholesome
alternative between entire assimi-
lation, and a separation so complete
as to create a pride in a distinct
nationality.

CHAP.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

stations—families in whom traditions of the past
century were not yet wholly extinct, who recognized
that they owned Irish soil for some better purpose
than to squeeze materials of luxury out of the tillers
of it. Yet even these were driven gradually into
disaffection, as they saw their efforts to save their
country blighted or cast aside.

With extreme difficulty they at last obtained their
Tillage Bill, though shorn of the bounties which
would have given it vitality. It was reduced to an
injunction that out of every hundred acres of land
in cultivation five must be under the plough ; and,
still more unfortunately, no means were provided to
enforce even this obligation, the neglect of which
brought the rising of the Whiteboys.'

Working on the foundation of the Charter Schools,
they carried measures which needed only to have
been executed to have swept poverty out of Ireland.
In 1715, they passed an act empowering the ministers
and churchwardens in every parish to apprentice
children who are found begging to substantial Pro-
testant housekeepers or tradesmen.* ‘The parishes

1 «The Protestant absentee land-
lords treated their duties generally
with a cynical completeness of con-
tempt. The report of 1729 on the
causes of the Protestant emigra-
tion from Ulster says, ‘that their
agents habitually let the lands by
auction to the highest bidder ; they
turned Protestant tenants out of
their holdings, without compensa-
tion for improvements, and let the
farms to Catholics on short leases,
and at rack rents.’—‘ Report on the
Causes of the Emigration, June 6,
1729.’ MSS. Record Office.

2 ‘Whereas there are in every
part of this kingdom numbers of

helpless children who are forced to
beg, and, if care be not taken of
their education, will become not
only unprofitable but dangerous to
their country ; whereas it is hoped
that many may be entertained in
comfortable service, and others
bred up in useful callings if well-
disposed persons could have a fair
prospect of receiving a return
by the labour of poor children
suitable to the charge of training
them ;’? the act provides for the
application of the general appren-
tice system, as it was in use in
England.—2 George I. cap. 17.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

were bound by the common law to support foundling
and orphan children. It was found that to evade
the cost the overseers thrust helpless little creatures
under six years of age from parish to parish, and
while the authorities were disputing over the charge
of their maintenance, the objects of their cruelty often
perished. Workhouses were established in conse-
quence in Dublin, and afterwards in most other large
towns, where the governors were required to take
charge of such children, to educate them on the
Charter School principles, and afterwards to bind them
out."

In 1729 the administration of justice in Ireland
came under the notice of Parliament: the Mayor and
Corporation of Dublin were found to be drawing a
handsome revenue out of extortions practised upon
prisoners. Out of thirteen aldermen, seven only
acted as magistrates; and each of the seven had a
gang of constables specially depending on him. Their
clerks were provided with blank warrants, in which
they entered what names they pleased, and by arrest-
ing innocent persons and extorting fees for the cost
of detention, and afterwards for the favour of release,
turned poorly paid offices into a source of abundant
incomes for master and for man.’

Newgate was a crown prison. The master of it

1 3 George Il. cap.3. 9George a child of eleven. They were ar-

II. cap. 5.

2 Here is a specimen out of
many cases which came before the
House of Commons :—

‘John Bryan having lost some
plate, and hearing from two con-
stables of Alderman Bolton that
one Margaret McCabe had stolen
it, the alderman’s clerk issued a
warrant for her and her daughter,

rested and taken, the child to Bride-
well, and the mother to the Black
Dog, the debtors’ prison, where those
who could pay for it were allowed
what was called better treatment ;
the child as a favour was allowed
to join her there. They were
brought the next day before the
alderman, when nothing being
proved against them they were re-

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

was a crown officer.

It could scarcely be pleaded

that a decent administration of the gaol could be
dangerous to English trade; and, in the absence of
difficulties on the score of trade, the Castle authorities
might have been reasonably expected to see that
these places were decently managed. The House of
Commons had the merit of dragging to light the

leased, but not till the mother had
paid the following bill :—
To the alderman’s clerk

toremove her daugh-

ter from Bridewell to

the Black Dog . £0 2 8
Fees and expenses for

herself and daugh-

ter there . , Oe tae
To Alderman Bolton
next day on being
discharged 0 10 10
To his clerk at the same
time. : ; 014 2
For liquors drunk at the
clerk’s house at her
expense . 0 3 0
£2 1 82

The prisons were dens of infamy
and extortion. The sheriff mar-
shal, whose salary as keeper of
Newgate was ten pounds a year,
was found to make his place worth
on average nearly 1,200/.

Newgate meant a dungeon, star-
vation, and irons. The sheriff
marshal was allowed a_ separate
gaol of his own called the Black
Dog, the management of which
he deputed to his sub-sheriff at 207.
a year. At both prisons he made a
trade of ‘vending liquors.’ Each
prisoner consigned, though but for
a night, to the Black Dog was
taxed two shillings for a treat, and,
if he refused, was beaten and
stripped. The charge for a bed
was ashillinganight. Hach room

was a mere closet; and in many of
these closets were five beds, In each
bed three, four, or five persons were
set to sleep if the place was crow-
ded, and two shillings were extorted
from each. The sheriff marshal’s
wife collected the rents. Whena
prisoner’s money was gone he was
passed down into a dungeon, lighted
from a common sewer, 12 feet
square and 8 feet high, called the
Nunnery, where the strolling wo-
men were lodged. The place so
stunk from the sewers, that the
House of Commons committee
could only remain long enough to
measure the dimensions. Four-
teen and sometimes twenty women
were placed there of a night. If
they attempted to come out for air
and light they were beaten back.

Newgate, when the committee
visited it, was found choking with
prisoners. Wretched objects were
lying naked on the ground, some
dying, some dead of cold and hun-
ger. Some had been four days
without food of any kind. The
committee enquired what allow-
ance of bread was made to the
crown prisoners, and found that the
custom of allowing bread had been
for some time discontinued. The
stench among the naked starving
felons was so intolerable that the
committee fled after a stay of half
a minute——Commens’ Journals,
October 15, 1729, vol. viii. Appen-
dix.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

deadly evidence of shameful and insolent neglect,
and, so far as lay in them, purged out and reformed
the foul abuses which were found rampant there.
Felons, after this, were regularly and rapidly trans-
ported, sold to planters in the colonies, and paid in
their persons for the cost of sending them out.

Other more ordinary work, too, was not forgotten.
Roads were made, which were the admiration of
Arthur Young; canals were cut; bogs were drained ;
a new Parliament house was built, with both thrift
and skill, for a fourth of the sum for which the same
building could be erected to-day. New streets and
squares sprung up in Dublin, which, if without
beauty, show in their stability, within and without,
that the art of doing good work had been learnt, and
not as yet cast aside. Glimpses show themselves at
times, in the transactions of Parliament, of high
spiritual aims. As late as 1771, the Commons made
an attack upon drunkenness, and passed heads of a
bill to suspend the whiskey distilling which, as they
said, was demoralizing the country. Lord Town-
shend, then Viceroy, informed the English ministry
that the House had the bill exceedingly at heart,’
that it was generally popular, and would give content
and satisfaction throughout the kingdom; and a mea-
sure which had no other object than to encourage
_ sobriety would have actually passed into law had not
England, in the capacity of guardian of human free-
dom, interfered. ‘The dawning science of politicai
economy had discovered that Governments are uncon-
cerned with morality. Besides the interference with

1 The entire cost scarcely ex- 2 ‘Lord Townshend to the Earl
ceeded 34,000/. See the Commons’ of Rochfort, March Pi poe yy A Ne
Journals, MSS. Record Office.

wi. I. QQ

BOOK
LV;

~_—_+~o”

17382

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the natural liberty of the subject, it was found that,
to pass the Bill, would involve a loss to the excise.

One other creditable measure has to be mentioned,
which was not extorted from England or English
jealousy, but from the bigotry of the bench of
Bishops of both countries. The learned prelates,
who denied the validity of Presbyterian marriages,
and prosecuted kirk elders for concubinage, were
so impressed with the solemnity of a sacrament
performed by a competently ordained priest, that a
ceremony by which a Protestant girl had been tied
by force to any villain who had carried her off and
ravished her, they persisted in regarding as an indis-
soluble bond. Until all such unions were declared
null and void, no effort to check the practice was of
the least avail. At length, in 1732, the Irish Bishops
were brought to yield, and the heads of a satisfac-
tory bill were sent over for approbation to London.!
Objections were anticipated from ‘ their brethren in
England; and the expectation was too justly ful-
filled. The bill was set aside, ‘as of an extraordinary
nature,’” and the ravishing continued merrily with-
out interruption. In 1735, after some outrage more
flagrant than usual, there was a partial concession.
When the sufferer was a lady of fortune, the English

1 ¢T believe you know it is a
common practice in Ireland for a
tall, strong Papist to hurry away a
pretty girl with a good fortune into
the mountains, and there commit
acts of horror and violation, and
that the poor undone maid is glad
at any rate to be made an honest
woman. This is readily performed
by the holy men who are at hand
to assist their lay friends on such
occasions. ‘These outrages, besides

many other evils arising from forced
and clandestine marriages, have
engaged the bench of Irish Bishops
to come into thislaw. Howit will
be relished by their brethren in
England you will have an oppor-
tunity to observe.’—‘ W. Cary to
Secretary Delafaye, January 2,
1732. MSS. Record Office.

> ‘List of Irish bills rejected,
February, 1732.’ Ibid.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

bench consented that, after a tedious and expensive
suit in the ecclesiastical courts, a marriage might
be set aside.’ The distinction between rich and poor
was felt to be odious. ‘The House of Commons in-
sisted, in 1743, that all such marriages should be,
ipso facto, void. The Bishops resisted with the most
determined obstinacy ; they were willing to declare a
separation by their own spiritual authority; they
protested against ‘ disannulling a marriage.’ The
Commons declared that the principle had been con-
ceded in the act already passed, and that farmers’
daughters had as good a right to protection as heir-
esses.” The Bishops shut their ears. The struggle
was protracted for two years, and it was not till
1745, under the viceroyalty of Lord Chesterfield,
that their preposterous and grotesque resistance could
be at last overcome. In a bill then drawn by the
Commons, every marriage performed by a Popish
priest between Protestant and Protestant, or between
Protestant and Papist, was unreservedly declared to
be null. The heads which contained these sweeping
clauses were carried in the Commons without a dis-
sentient voice. ‘They were presented to Chesterfield
by the Speaker, attended by the entire House. The
Speaker represented that, by these marriages, more
than by any other cause, Protestant settlements were
broken up, family ties dissolved, and the worst spe-
cimens of the Catholic clergy supported and en-
couraged. Chesterfield himself endorsed the opinions
of the Lower House.’

1 9 George II. cap. 11. > “Heads ofa Bill, with Viceroy’s

2 ¢The Duke of Devonshire to and Council’s Letter.’ WSS. Dublin,
the Duke of Newcastle, December 1745. 19 George I. cap. 13, Irish
25” 1743. Statutes.

ea 2

596

BOOK
Ly.
et

1747

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION IV.

In the country as well as in Dublin there were Pro-
testant gentlemen who, so far as their strength
extended, were making amends for the imbecility of
the Government. Those who have read Arthur
Young’s ‘ Tour in Ireland,’ have accompanied him to
the houses of great Peers and Commoners, where
stately manners, high motives, and refined intelli-
gence were as conspicuous as in the noblest families
of England; where the privileges of a ruling class
produced the virtues of a true aristocracy, in contrast
to the vices which degraded the baser members of
the same order. Gross as was the degeneracy of the
majority, a chosen few were still spending their for-
tunes in improving agriculture, in reclaiming moun-
tain and morass, in building schools and churches,
conscious of the duties which they owed to the people,
and earning their gratitude and affectionate devotion
by the unselfish fidelity with which those duties
were discharged. Scattered thinly over the four
provinces, the salt of the country, they continued,
generation after generation, in brave and honourable
execution of a work which brought its own reward
with it: they sate enthroned in the imagination of
the peasantry as their natural rulers; the Banshee
wailed for them when they died; the ‘good people’
took them under their protection, as they in turn
were the protectors of the poor. Out of these families
have risen many of the most brilliant officers of the
English army, the most illustrious ornaments of the

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

English House of Commons. In their own country,
occasionally, we are brought face to face with one or
other of them when selected in time of trouble for
some special work of difficulty or danger: we are
enabled to see the metal of which they were com-
posed, and to admire the use which the Government
thought fit to make of them.

Galway, lying on the Atlantic, with its open har-
bour, was the most vulnerable point of the island.
Through Galway the priests had free egress and
ingress. Galway was the second, if not the greatest,
depét of the smuggling trade. The Articles of Galway
had left the Catholics in unbroken strength there.
The Houghers had thinned the Protestant settlers.
Whenever an invasion was contemplated, Galway was
the spot where a foreign contingent was most sure of
finding a favourable reception. ‘The Protestant in-
terest of Connaught,’ said an Act of Parliament in
1717, depended on the loyalty of that single town,
yet no care had been taken to strengthen the Protes-
tant element there. As Galway was in 1717, so it con-
tinued, governed by a corporation of Catholics, who
had perjured themselves as a qualification for office.
The penal laws, neglected everywhere, were in Gal-
way openly defied. The handful of troops in the
castle were left to themselves, undisciplined and dis-
organized. Nunneries and friaries were multiplied.
Smugglers loaded and unloaded at the quay. If, for
decency’s sake, on the appearance of a commissioner
of the revenue, it was necessary to put on an appear-
ance of energy, due notice to the offenders before-
hand secured the futility of the search warrant.
Although the country remained undisturbed in the
rebellion of 1745, yet in the extreme west the Dis-

598

BOOK
Lvs

——-- oo”

1747

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

arming Act had been enforced imperfectly. It had
been long notorious that in Galway, as in Kerry, re-
cruits and money had been regularly levied for the
Pretender. Prudence required that the town should
not be left entirely in the hands of the Pretender’s
friends, and, in 1747, an officer, who had served at
Culloden, Colonel Stratford Eyre, son of Mr. Eyre,
who had been governor of Galway in 1715, was sent
by the Government to command there. , Colonel Eyre,
who had been born and educated in the country, under-
stood the ways of it. He found himself set to de-
fend a town of which the walls had not been repaired
for a quarter of a century ; the castle in ruins; the
very name of military authority forgotten. By law
no Catholics ought to have been in Galway at all.
There were thirty Catholics there to one Protestant,
and the Protestant was becoming Protestant but in
name. ‘There were 180 ecclesiastics, Jesuits, friars,
and seculars. Robert Martin, owner of half Conne-
mara, resided within the liberties, and was making a
fortune by smuggling there. He was described by
Eyre as ‘able to bring to the town of Galway in
twenty-four hours 800 villains as desperate and as
absolutely at his devotion as Cameron of Lochiel.’!
The Mayor and Corporation, the fee-simple of
whose united property did not amount to 1,000/., re-
ceived the tolls and customs duties. By their charter
they were bound in return to maintain the fortifi-
cations. Being what they were, they preferred to
divide the town revenue amongst themselves. The
mayor, an O’Hara, was the son of Lord Tyrawley’s
footman ; the sheriff was a beggar; of the alder-
men one was a poor shoemaker, the other a broken

1 “Col. Eyre to Secretary Wayte, November 20, 1747.’ MSS, Dublin.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

dragoon. In conformity with the usual Castle policy,
Colonel Eyre was directed to act in harmony with
the civil authorities; on taking possession of his
office he furnished the Secretary with a specimen of
the manner in which the funds were appropriated by
them.’

From the Corporation there was no help to be
looked for ; Colonel Eyre being made responsible for
the town, had no leisure to wait till he could bring
the Mayor and Aldermen to a sense of their duty.
He re-established discipline in the garrison with a
strong hand; he himself stopped the gaps in the
walls where they had fallen down; and, taking the
reins with a firm hand, he gave orders for the gates to
be closed, as was usual in garrison towns, at sunset.

The Corporation had not laid open Galway to all
comers, that a soldier from the army of the hated
Duke of Cumberland should come thus amongst them,
interfering with their pleasant habits, and making
himself their master. They sent in a complaint,
largely signed, against the innovation of the locked
gates. The streets of Galway, they said, must be
free at all hours of day and night, without sentinels,

1 Last Saturday, the 20th of for calling him a Pa-

February, the Corporation of Gal- pist . : ; ow “827; 0
way gave their favourite, Mr. Fitz- To Mr. Ellis for money
patrick, for his services in sup- he paid ten years ago
porting the rights of the corpora- on a contested election 27 0
tion. ; , . £900 0 Given to the farmers of
To Mr. O’Hara fordo.. 120 0 the markets in the
To Mr. Blake for his ex- year 1744 on account
penses in taking out a of losses that year. 72 0
mandamus : . 45 10 To Alderman Ch. Gerry
To Mr. Cooke for defen- for his services as
ding the Corporation chamberlaim . a) LBS O
against the mandamus 91 0 MSS. Dublin Castle, February 27,
To Mr. Miles for prosecu- 1747.

ting Domenick Lynch

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

or inconvenient persons, to restrain the citizens in
their goings and comings.

Colonel Eyre, who was at no loss to understand
their meaning, sent for them, and told them distinctly
he could not comply. He was sent to Galway, he
said, to restore discipline, and he meant to do it.
Galway was a garrison town, and the rules of garri-
son towns should be enforced. No one would be really
inconvenienced by the closing of the gates at sunset,
except those who were breaking the law, either
smugglers, or nuns and friars who had no right to
be in Ireland, or else devotees who haunted their
chapels. He declared distinctly that he did not mean
to look through his fingers. He intended to do his
own duty, and he intended also that they should do
theirs.}

Here, evidently, was a man with the spirit in him
of a true ruler; a man beyond all others fit to govern
a people like the Irish; beyond all others certain, if
not interfered with, to command their affection and

1 Colonel Eyre’s words have
something of a Cromwellian ring
about them.

‘And now, gentlemen,’ he con-
tinued, ‘since you are here in your
corporate capacity, | must recom-
mend you to disperse those restless
Popish ecclesiastics. Let me not
meet them in every corner of the
streets when I walk as I have
done. No sham searches, Mr.
Sheriff, as to my knowledge you
lately made. Your birds were
flown, but they left you cakes and
wine to entertain yourselves withal.
I shall send you, Mr. Mayor, a list
ofsomie insolent unregistered priests,
whoabsolutely refused me to quarter
my soldiers, and to my surprise you

have billeted none on them. These
and James Fitzgerald, who is aiso
an unregistered priest, and had the
insolence to solicit votes for his
brother upon a prospect of a va-
cancy in Parliament, I expect you'll
please to tender the oaths to, and
proceed against on the Galway and
Limerick Act. Let us unite to-
gether in keeping those turbulent
disqualified townsmen in a due
subjection. Lastly, gentlemen, I
put you in mind of the condition
on which tolls and customs are
grantedtoyou. Repair the breaches
in these walls and pave yourstreets.’
—‘Speech at Galway, 1747, en-
closed to Secretary Wayte.’ MSS.
Dublin.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

obedience. Such a man England ought specially
to have valued; but England’s stomach had grown
feeble. She had lost her nerve, and was frightened
at shadows. Though Eyre spoke boldly his mind
misgave him; he wrote to Secretary Wayte to entreat
that the Castle would stand by him. He even deter-
mined to see the Viceroy himself, and was going to
Dublin for the purpose. Being threatened with as-
sassination,’ and a day fixed for his death, he stayed
in Galway unhappily till the date was past ; and the
delay was fatal. The Mayor was beforehand with
him His Excellency, convinced of the moral ex-
cellence and innocent intentions of the Galway Cor-
poration, overruled Eyre’s orders, forbade him to
interfere, by inconvenient restrictions, with the pur-
suits of the inhabitants; bade him understand, in
short, that although if mischief came he might pay
with his head for it, nevertheless, it was the pleasure
of the Castle that nothing should be done which
could give umbrage to the Catholics of Ireland.

The consequences were immediate and character-
istic. The governor was at the mercy of the towns-
men, and might now be insulted with impunity. A
follower of Robert Martin, a Connemara boy, named
Brennan, marched ostentatiously past the sentinel at
the bridge, carrying a gun and pistol. The man
being notoriously a Cathelic, the sentinel took them

1 “Sir, as I had not the pleasure
of seeing you since you came to
your government of Galway, I hope
soon to see you in the Elysian
fields, as I am just going off the
stage. And I am sure, if you don’t
leave that town, you'll lose your
life before the 10th of next month.
’Tis all your own fault, for you
could not bear the employment

which you got, not for your bravery,
but for the slaughter you com-
mitted on poor people after Cullo-
den fight. You'll be served as
Lord Lovat’s agent was. God be
merciful to your soul.’—‘ Anony-
mous letter enclosed by Eyre to
Secretary Wayte, December 11,
1747.’ MSS. Dublin.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

from him; and Eyre politely returned them to Martin
with a message, that if he was sending arms into the
town, he had better for the future send them by per-
sons qualified to carry such things. Martin refused
to receive back his property: Eyre, finding his cour-
tesies rejected, declared that he would enforce the
law, and confiscate both gun and pistol. The assizes
were coming on, and Martin had the impertinence to
serve a summons on the governor to appear before
the judges, and answer to a charge of larceny.’

What else could have been expected? Enclosing
this singular document to the Secretary, Eyre ven-
tured to insist that it was the immediate consequence
of his own treatment. If the law was to be thus
openly insulted, he said, Government would become
impossible, and neither the Popery Act, nor any
other act, could be enforced in any part of Ireland.
For himself, ‘he could not stand his ground unless
the restraint was taken off which the Lord Lieu-
tenant had been pleased to lay on him.’

The eyes of the authorities remained unopened.
Eyre continued governor of Galway, but confined
practically to his military duties;? and with so plain

1 Robert Martin, Esq., E. Butler, ,
Pr; L. Mears, Tomei
Stratford Eyre, Esq. Dublin MSS.
Dt. By the Lords Jus- * A party of Frenchmen came to

tices of assize for
the Connaught
circuit.

The defendant is hereby required
personally to appear before us at
8 o’clock in Galway on the 6th
of April next, to answer the prose-
cutor’s bill for 5/. sterling, being
the value of one gun and one pistol,
being prosecutor’s property, which
defendant took and converted to
his own use. Dated March 30,
1748. Signed by order,

Galway on an unknown errand,
and lay for some time concealed in
aconvent. They had landed with-
out passports or credentials. Eyre
sent for them to come to him. They
refused, and he arrested them. The
mayor immediately took them out
of his hands, and ‘in the presence
of the prisoners threatened to com-
mit him if be interfered further.’
—‘Hyre to Secretary Wayte, Au-
gust 19,1755,’ MSS. Dublin. This,
too, was passed over by a Govern-

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

603

an indication that they might do what they pleased cmap.

il

without danger of interference, the Galway towns- ——~_

men made haste to extinguish the small remains that
were left of the Protestant colony. The Governor
was obliged to look on passively while a Protestant
grammar school, which he remembered as a boy
flourishing and well attended, came to an end for
want of pupils, and a gorgeous mass-house rose where
the school had stood. Protestant families, which had
been hitherto staunch, forsook a cause which had lost
confidence in itself, and conformed to Popery. Eyre
forwarded to the Secretary a letter which had reached
him unsigned, but for the truth of every word of
which he said that he could vouch himself, explain-
ing how in a short time the Protestant interest of
Galway, once thought of such importance as to be the
subject of a special Act of Parliament, was passing

into nothing."

ment which desired to believe all
to be well, and would therefore
notice nothing that was amiss.

1 ¢Sir, I hope you will pardon
the trouble I give you when you
understand the subject I mean it
on. Nor do I know a more proper
person, not only from the station
her majesty has been pleased to
place you in, but from the known
adherence you and your family have
to the Protestant interest and
principles, to whom I might speak
the fulness of my mind.

‘Tt cannot be strange to you, who
from your minority have known
this place, how unhappily the
poor few Protestants are situated,
and dependent on the multitude of
their Popish neighbours. And to
make our case more miserable, those
attempts that have been made to
add a little strength to our declin-
ing numbers have (as an abandoned
people not worth common pity)

met with discouragement. Our
neighbours, flushed with success
and exulting in the destruction of a
hopeful Protestant seminary which
promised to be raised among us, are,
to our shame be it spoken, erecting
a large church in or near the centre
of our town, to be illustrated with
altar pieces, music, organs, paint-
ings, &e. What are we to expect
as the consequence. Our youths and
weakminded are tempted by the
glare and gildings of these struc-
tures, and the crafty insinuations of
ecclesiastics with which the place
abounds; our public worship is neg-
leeted, our churches decay, and in
their room the others flourish and.
are supported. From the fulness
of my soul I acquaint you with this.
I grieve to see the decline of the
few poor Protestants that are here,
or rather fear an entire extermina-
tion of them. MSS, Dublin.

1747

604

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION V.

Book THE Disarming Act partially neutralized the feeble-
IV. He
——-— ness of the administration; but while wrong was

1747

established in the place of right, and while England
was managing Ireland, not for Ireland’s good but for
her own imagined interest, no disarming act or other
superficial remedy could stay the progress of social
disease.

The Irish Parliament had struggled long against
the advancing tide; but, in the Irish Parliament itself,
fatal influences were at work, and a new and poisonous
element was beginning to show itself. The decay of
religion left the gentry without the restraints which
had held their fathers within bounds. The sense of
injustice brought with it deserved resentment; but it
was a resentment which, avoiding the wholesome roads
marked out for it by Swift and Berkeley, took the
form of rhetorical declamation. The modern Irish
patriot now appeared on the scene; the adventurer,
whose trade was agitation, who, careless of [reland’s
welfare, made his own way to wealth and distinction
by constituting himself the champion of her wrongs.

From the beginning of Anglo-Irish history there
can be traced, in the leading spirits of the island, a
particular notion of the meaning of the word liberty.
True liberty means the being governed by just
laws, laws which are in harmony with the will of the
Maker and Master of the world. It is the worst
curse of injustice that it leads men to look for redress,
not to better government but to none, and to regard

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

their own consent as the measure of the restraint to
which they may rightly be submitted. Liberty, the
Irish said, and even Swift lent his authority to the
definition, liberty consisted in the being ruled by laws
which men made for themselves, tyranny in being
ruled by laws made for them by others. If this be
true, the minority in every constitutional state lives
under a tyranny, for it lives under laws against
which it has formally protested. The better the
government of a disorderly and licentious people, the
greater the wrong that is done to them, because such
government most contradicts their own natural ten-
dencies. Yet it is this idea which runs through Irish
political discontent, and so long as the consent of the
governed is recognized as essential to the legitimacy of
authority, so long and so far Ireland will possessa griev-
ance, which only complete separation will remove.

The consent of man was not asked when he was
born into the world; his consent will not be asked
when his time comes to die. As little has his con-
sent to do with the laws which, while he lives, he
is bound to obey. Leta nation be justly governed,
and if it is wise it will not quarrel with the destiny
which has provided for it the greatest of earthly
blessings. English misrule in Ireland reached a
point at last at which its grasp relaxed, and weak-
ness compelled a surrender of a power which had
been so scandalously misused ; not, however, through
any rising virtue on the part of the oppressed Irish,
or through any divine aspiration after freedom and
self-sovernment, but because wrong had borne its
necessary fruit in the feebleness of the oppressor.

As late as Chesterfield’s viceroyalty, though legiti-
mate discontent had been often expressed in the

606

BOOK.
by
—- —’

1749

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

House of Commons, there had been little systematic
opposition to the English connexion. In 1703, both
Houses passionately desired an act of union, and the
storm raised by the halfpence died away when the
victory had been won. So long as a combination
with the Catholics against English rule was undreamt
of, an Irish Protestant patriot was conscious at bottom
that he could not maintain himself without England’s
help. So long as his Protestantism lasted as a real
principle, he endured the injuries of his country as
a lighter evil than compromise with his old enemy.
As the century waned away, community of mjury
created a sympathy of resentment. The steady in-
crease of Irish misery formed a contrast every year
more marked with the growing splendour of England;
and if material progress was thenceforward to be the
chief aim of humanity, there was no conceivable
reason why Ireland, Protestant or Catholic, should be
denied a share in it.

In 1747, Lord Harrington having taken the place
of Chesterfield, Charles Lucas, a Presbyterian apo-
thecary, commenced the publication of the ‘ Citizen’s
Journal’ in Dublin. The debates in Parliament were
private. It met only in alternate years, and such
fragments of speeches alone went abroad as could be
carried away by memory. Here, for the first time,
the people had an opportunity of seeing their wrongs
expressed for them in a clear and permanent form.
The paper came out weekly. It contained free criti-
cism on the behaviour of the rich to the poor, the
corruption of the courts of justice and the landlords’
tyranny. Cases were published of tradesmen being
horsewhipped who had dared to ask to have their bills
paid. If the tradesman complained, he found the

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

sheriff was the offender’s bottle companion ; if he went
to the judge, he was silenced by higher interest.
Similarly townships were shown to have been de-
populated by the agents of absentees; constables to
have been knocked down in the streets and to have
had to bear it, ‘for the poor were the great men’s
slaves.’ So far there was no treason. Lucas might
have published his journal every day in the year,
and in each issue he might have varied his indict-
ment against the state of Irish society. But from
the social wrongs he passed to the national, and
denounced, not with the vigour of Swift but with a
noisy eloquence, effective because resting upon truth,
the iniquity which had robbed Ireland of her manu-
factures.

The first number of the paper was dedicated to
the King. Lucas appeared at the Castle at a levee,
intending, and having allowed his intention to
be known—intending to ask Lord Harrington if
he had transmitted the dedication to the Court.
Harrington sent an officer to desire him to leave the
reception room. He obeyed, and published in the
next issue an account of his treatment. He touched
the familiar string which never failed to vibrate—the
right of Ireland to make her own laws, and he created
such a ferment that, Sir James Sommerville dying,
and a vacancy being thus created in the repre-
sentation of Dublin, Lucas offered himself to the
suffrage of the citizens with every chance of success.

Harrington sent copies of the journal to England,
to inform the ministers of the storm that was
gathering.» The Dublin guilds were preparing to

1 They are to be seen in the Record Office, characteristically wneut.
MSS. Ireland, 1749.

608

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book present Lucas, as they had presented Swift, with the

IV.

1749

freedom of their respective corporations.’ The
‘incendiary,’ so the Viceroy described him, ‘ had
gained so many converts, that it was absolutely neces-
sary to put a stop to his proceedings.’ Before the
writ for the city election could be issued, at the
opening of the autumn session for 1749, Lord Har-
rington denounced him from the throne. The
Commons, as yet uninfected with ‘ sedition,’ passed
a vote that he was an enemy of his country. The
mayor and aldermen, whom he had attacked in the
interest of the townsmen, declared their abhorrence
of him and his paper. A warrant was issued for
his apprehension and committal to Newgate; and
Lucas, bending before the tempest, left the country
and took refuge in the Isle of Man.

Only, however, for a brief exile. As they grew
desperate of other remedies, Irishmen of all ranks
began to believe that it would never be well with
them till they had the management of their own
affairs. Lucas came back soon after, and, in spite of
mayor and Castle influence, was returned for Dublin.
To misgovern with a high hand was ceasing to be
possible; and, as they refused to see and undo the
wrong which they had inflicted, the policy of English
Cabinets thenceforward was to corrupt where they
could no longer defy. Ireland was now to be
managed—managed with the abuse of patronage, and,
still worse, with the abuse of the Pension List. The
landowners who had pocket boroughs were bribed
with peerages, and promotions for their children.
Popular and needy adventurers sold their country

1¢QLord Harrington to the Duke of Bedford, October 12, 1749.’
MSS, Ireland.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

609

for pensions provided out of the hereditary revenues. CHAP.

The Irish establishment, no more available for royal
mistresses and court favourites, was the instrument
of the deliberate demoralization of the political intel-
hgence of the nation.

The trade of agitation became, from this time, the
surest road to advancement in the service of the
state. ‘To oppose the Government, to become trou-
blesome in Parliament, to create a party in the
country by denunciation of the hereditary oppressor,
and, having become dangerous, to betray the wretches
who trusted in them, to sell their services for title or
promotion, or, grosser still, for bribes or sinecures,
for which the means were supplied by the taxes, was
the recognized occupation of aspirants to fame and
fortune. ‘Their detestable calling was pursued by
themselves with an effrontery which disdained con-
cealment, and was rewarded by the Government, not
always without expressions of disgust, but as, on the
whole, the readiest means of keeping quiet a trouble-
some dependency.

In the absence of the Viceroys the administration
was in the hands of the Lords Justices, and, with
the administration, the disposition also of patronage
and of the public money. ‘There were usually three
of these great officers, of whom the Primate was
one, the Speaker of the House of Commons another,
and the third either the Chancellor, or some influ-
ential nobleman. So long as Boulter lived, cor-
ruption was rare or unknown.’ He was upright,
honourable, and straightforward, and to the utmost

1 Boulter was an eminently sin- single sentiment in his most con-
cere man, totally free from cant of  fidential letters, at the publication
all kinds. There is scarcely a of which he need have blushed.

VOL... I: RR

1749

610 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK of his ability, which was really considerable, he
—*"_ laboured for the true good of Ireland. He died
in 1742. Hoadley succeeded him, but held the
Primacy for five years only, and Hees was then ap-
pointed to the first place in the Church of Ireland a
prelate of whose virtues (for some virtues it is to be
supposed that he possessed) history has preserved
no record. George Stone, the son of a. banker, the
grandson of a gaoler at Winchester, for reasons
known to himself or his father, selected the Church
as his profession. Made Dean of Derry almost as
early as he could hold preferment, he was advanced
rapidly through the sees of Ferns and Leighlin,
Kildare and Derry, to the archbishopric, which he
obtained while still in the vigour of his life. If the
qualities which he most exhibited in his high office
were those to which he owed his rise, he was litted
forward thus rapidly for his fashionable manners, the
profound absence of moral scruple or conscience, and
a singular dexterity in handling the political ele-
ments of a corrupt and corrupting time. This man
was, for many years, the virtual dictator of Ireland.
From his handsome person he was called the ‘ Beauty
of Holiness.’ Innocent of profligacy in its ordinary
forms, he was credited, perhaps unjustly, with abomi-
nable vices; but, as foul smells adhere most strongly
to unwholesome bodies, the odour, not of sanctity,
which enveloped Stone is an evidence that he was an
unhealthy representative of the successors of St.
Patrick.

The Duke of Dorset, who had once already governed
as Viceroy, from 1731 to 1756, returned for another
five years in 1751. Growing ofa and being perhaps
constitutionally indolent, he made his son, Lord

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

George Sackville, Irish secretary; and Lord George
and the Primate ruled Ireland with the help of the
Pension List. The financial administration had
been an exception to the general neglect. The
debts contracted in putting the kingdom in a state
of defence in 1715, had been largely reduced, and
were now under half a million. The revenues now
exceeded the expenditure. The House desired that
the surplus should be applied to clearing off the
little that remained. The Crown challenged a right
to dispose of it without giving account to Parlia-
ment ; and Stone and Sackville, by free use of these
funds among the political leaders, were able for a
time to keep the curtaindrawn. In the four years of
their supremacy they came many times to issue with a
powerful Parliamentary minority. Suits continued
to be revived by the representatives of forfeited
families, whose outlawries, notwithstanding all that
had passed, the English Government persisted in
taking off. Sir Thomas Prendergast, after fifty-
three years’ possession of an estate, which had been
given to his father by King William, found his right
challenged by the O’Shaughnessies. The O’Shaugh-
nessies were supported by subscriptions among the
Catholics. Prendergast, threatened with ruinous
legal expenses, appealed to the House of Commons;
and the Commons, in the teeth of Government in-
fluences, decided by a close division, after a violent de-
bate, that ‘ they would proceed against all persons who
assisted the O’Shaughnessies in carrying on their suit,

1 A favourite toast at patriot the sword and the Bible; and may
public dinners in Dublin was ‘May the importation of Ganymedes be
all secretary bashaws and lordly discouraged in Ireland!’ Plowden.
high priests be kept to their tackle,

RR2

CHAP.

612

BOOK
a bf
—_——_~”

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

as acting in defiance and contempt of Parliament.”?
Arthur Neville, the Surveyor-General, a favourite of
the Duke of Dorset, and a member of the Lower
House, was censured for misappropriation of moneys,
and expelled from the Legislature. An enquiry
into the Pension List would have followed; but Boyle,
the Speaker, who had been the chief promoter of the
agitation, had gained the object for which he cared,
in compelling the Government to make terms with
him. Dorset was recalled as a constitutional conces-
sion, and the Primate was dismissed for a time
from the Privy Council; but the essential mischiefs
continued unabated. The country was plundered
further to corrupt those who threatened to expose
the corruptions. Boyle was made Earl of Shannon,
while similar pensions rewarded and dispersed his
followers. |

The game, however, once entered on could not be
again abandoned. Honest members were indignant
at being so defeated, and were the more resolute to
persevere. Dishonest members found the temptation
irresistible to follow so lucrative a trade as agitation
was seen to be.

Lord Hartington succeeded Dorset in the vice-
royalty, but succeeded to an uneasy inheritance. The
Commons, at the opening of the next session, expressed
its regret that they should have been supposed to desire
to encroach on the Royal prerogative. They trusted
his majesty would believe that they were seeking only
the welfare of their country, and at once the House
resolved itself into a committee to consider the heads
of a bill to secure the freedom of Parliament, by
vacating the seat of any member of the House of

1 Commons’ Journals, December 11, 1755.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

Commons who accepted pension or office from the
Crown.

The same means were again. used which had before
been successful. A corrupt majority was secured,
and a vote obtained that the committee should sus-
pend its proceedings.' The Commons still demanded
an account of the pensions granted in the year pre-
ceding, and a list was made out and laid before them,
which professed to be complete, amounting to less than
10,0002. ;? but either the list was falsely drawn, or the
most considerable grants were concealed behind some
cloak of technicalities; for in the next year a resolu-
tion was introduced, ‘that the pensions and salaries
placed on the civil establishment of Ireland since
the 23rd of March, 1755, amounted to the annual
sum of 28,103/.;° and, amidst reproaches, recrimina-
tions, dishonesty, and general discontent, Lord
Hartington left Ireland to form an administration
with Pitt, and the Duke of Bedford was named to
succeed him.

1 Commons Journals, March 17, 3 MSS. Record Office, Ireland,

1756. 1757.
? Ibid. May 5, 1756.

CHAP.

614 THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

SECTION VI.

BOOK For a moment, and seemingly by accident, Ireland,
—— at this crisis, attracted the attention of the future
Lord Chatham. Ignorant as Pitt evidently was of
the condition to which the country was reduced, and
strikingly significant as that ignorance was of the
neglect with which Irish affairs were treated, the
interposition of the last great English minister, brief
though it was, shines out amidst the general chicanery
and cowardice, as if he belonged to another order
of beings. Had the intellect which was to raise
England to the first place among the European
powers, found leisure to attend more carefully to
the poor island, which had been, was, and was to be
England’s disgrace and weakness, it was not yet too
late to recover the lost ground. It was not too late
to restore a nobler spirit into the degraded and de-
grading administration. The fashion of dissolutions
had ceased. The same House, which had been elected
at the accession of George the Second, was still sitting
after thirty years, renewing its life by elections as
seats were vacated by death, and retaining the same
disposition and the same traditions. The session of
1757 opened with a renewal of the assault on the
Pension List. Resuming the lost bill, but proceeding
in another manner, the Patriot party introduced a
series of resolutions, that the granting of pensions to
persons not residing in Ireland—the absentee aris-
tocracy who controlled so many borough seats—was
a national wrong; that the increase of civil pensions,

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

for many years past, was a grievance which demanded
redress ; that the granting pensions for a long term of
years was an alienation of the revenues of Ireland, an
improvident disposition of the revenue, and an injury
to the crown and public. As drunkards themselves
petition for a removal of the temptation which de-
stroys them, the members who were themselves the
recipients of those dishonouring gratuities, were com.
pelled, by shame and the stream of opinion, to vote
with the rest. The resolutions were passed unani-
mously, and the Viceroy was requested to name a
day on which he would receive them, at the hands of
the Speaker attended by the entire House.

The Duke of Bedford a well-meaning but proud
and stupid man, accustomed to think of Ireland as a
dependency, which had no rights beyond the regis-
tering of England’s pleasure, was astonished and
indignant. He summoned the Council. The reso-
lutions, he said, were derogatory to the King’s pre-
rogative, indecent in expression, and so improper
that, were he to promise to transmit them to Eng-
land without expressing his disapproval, he would
make himself participem cruminis. He should, there-
fore, invite the House to reconsider its action. The
Council answered, that the Duke might do as he
pleased. ‘The House, however, would not give way;
and would resent such a message as an encroachment
on its privileges. The Duke took, therefore, what he
called a gentler method. He allowed the Speaker to
present the resolutions, which were brought to him,
with the solemnities adopted only on the most solemn
occasions. ‘ But the matter which they contained,’ he
said, ‘ was of so high a nature, that he could not sud-

616

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Book denly determine whether it would be proper for him

IV
—,—"

17

o7

to transmit them or not.’}

His ‘ moderation’ ‘had not the effect which he ex-
pected.” The House refused to enter his answer in
the Journals. He appealed to the Speaker, whom he
hoped to find as malleable as his predecessors.” He
received only ‘a hard and dry answer that, in a
point of this sort, he had no influence ;’* and a vote
was carried to suspend the supplies till the resolu-
tions were sent over.

The lamentation which Bedford poured out to Pitt
was a ludicrous confession of the nature of the influ-
ence on which the Castle had allowed itself to depend.

‘Revenue officers,’ he said, ‘ officers in the army,
even—which is more extraordinary—pensioners who
have enjoyed his majesty’s bounty, were so disgusted
at the like marks of favour which the King has been
pleased to bestow on others within these two years
past, that they voted to obstruct his majesty’s and
the public service, till they should have assurance of
a satisfactory answer to their injurious demands.’ *
He begged to be recalled, or, if not recalled, to be
armed with powers to withdraw the pensions, and to
cancel the appointments of the ungrateful recipients”
of the wages of corruption.

By no other means

1 ‘Bedford to Pitt, November 17,
MSS. Record Office. 1757.’

2 John Ponsonby, second son of
the first Earl of Bessborough, who
had succeeded Boyle, created Earl

very ill-judged intercession in his
behalf, a singular mark of his
majesty’s favour, Colonel Cunning-
ham. He voted for postponing
the Money Bill. I thought giving

of Shannon.

5 Ponsonby was found less hard,
as will be seen at a late period.

4 ‘One person, I am ashamed to
name,’ the Duke goes on, ‘as he
received but the day before, through

him his rank, would confirm him
to his majesty’s service, and would
also have tied the Lord Primate,
whose creature he is.’—‘ Bedford
to Pitt, November 17,1757.’ DLSS.
Record Office.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

could ‘faction be overawed,’ and respect recovered
to the Government. He recommended a dissolution.
No period was affixed by law to the duration of the
Irish Parliament. The present House of Commons
had been elected on the King’s accession, and had
every year grown more unmanageable.’ *

Surprised probably, for the first time, into serious
attention to the condition of Ireland, Pitt at once
directed that the resolutions should be sent over.
‘The worst heat,’ he observed, had been provoked by
the refusal to lay the grievances of the country
before the Crown; the irritation would be allayed,
and there would be leisure to consider what else it
might be necessary to do if the Duke could be more
conciliatory. He desired Bedford’s ‘ own sentiments,’
‘the amplest light,’ ‘a clear and full view,’ as a means
towards ‘some prudent determination.’*

Had Pitt been on the spot, he might have done
something considerable. Cromwell himself had not a
keener loathing for dishonest manceuvres; and, by
aiming at the real evils, he would have rallied the
honest part of the House of Commons, and destroyed
faction by removing its excuse. Bedford, trained in
official routine, without original insight, and nour-
ished upon constitutional commonplaces, was con-
sciously helpless in an element so new to him. As
soon as the embarrassment had reached its height, he
was assailed by the leaders of the various factions, who,
on their own terms, offered to extricate him. Three-
quarters of the House of Commons were virtually
nominees of the Peers. They were divided into three
parties, of whom the Earl of Kildare, the Primate,

1 ¢ Bedford to Pitt, November 17, 1757.2 MSS. Record Office.
2 ¢ Pitt to Bedford, November, 1757.’ bed.

618

BOOK
IV.

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

and the Speaker were respectively the chiefs. Kildare

——— and Ponsonby were personal enemies, and each was

1757

eager to secure some advantage at the other’s expense.
The Primate, who resented his removal from the
Council, was willing to forgive, if restored to a share
of patronage and power. He had friends in the
English Cabinet who furnished him with copies of
Pitt’s most secret despatches, and thus negotiated for
himself at special advantage. The Duke could not
bring himself to the humiliation of listening at once
to either of these competitors. The point of the
resolutions being conceded, supplies were voted. Par-
liament separated for the Christmas recess, and the
Viceroy was able to compose himself to send Pitt the
information which was desired. The problem, as it
presented itself to Bedford, was not how to govern
Ireland wisely and well; but rather ‘ how to preserve
it in the proper -subserviency which it owed to the
mother-country ’—an object, in itself legitimate and
essential, yet impossible to be obtained till the
mother country recognized the conditions under
which she had rights over Ireland at all.

‘Faction and party,’ the Duke said, ‘have spread
through all orders of men. There are not twenty in
the House of Commons, including the servants of the
Crown, on whom I can depend, or who are not more
attached to some particular interest than the service
of the Crown. ‘Two parties have taken in hand to
distress the Government, or force themselves into it ;
while the other party, which alone can check them,
will not risk its popularity unless I consent to throw
all power into the hands of its leaders. One of the
two parties is the Primate’s, which, by unnatural con-
junction with that of the Speaker, in opposition to

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

the administration. of the late Lord-Lieutenant, is

619

CHAP.
Buk

equal, if not superior, in numbers to the Earl of —--_

Kildare’s. JI might have looked for help from the
latter; but many of them are so infatuated with a
vain popularity, and as vain a notion of securing their
elections at a future Parliament, that I cannot depend
on their assistance in opposing questions that may be
proposed by their most bitter enemies. This is true ;
and the remedy is, that when I go to England I
leave the sword in the hands of a deputy in whom |
can confide—one who, by birth and attachment, shall
be free from all Irish connexions. You cannot make
a regency out of the heads of these factions, who
would be equal in power, and equally solicitous of
obtaining favour for those of their connexions.
Should two join against the third, what mischief
might we not look for? I adhere to my system.
This kingdom ought not to be governed by parties.
How long it has been so, and the ill effects arising
from it, all the world knows too well. Any point
touching on the English prerogatives is eagerly
caught at. They talk of taxes on absentees or pen-
sioners, &c. It may be necessary to dissolve them ;
or prorogation may bring them to a better mind.
Strong measures, however, lie visibly ahead.’?
Strong measures—but what, or how? No one
knew better than Pitt that the sword, unless so tem-
pered as to heal the wounds which it inflicts, exaspe-
rates the symptoms which it is employed to cure.
‘The Duke,’ he replied, ‘might have been more
particular in explaining why parties in Ireland could
not combine in measures for Ireland’s good.’ The
plan of leaving the power to Lords Justices ‘ free

1 ¢ Bedford to Pitt (abridged), January 4, 1758.’ MSS. Record Office.

1758

620

BOOK
IV.
——

1758

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

from Irish connexions,’ ‘might deserve consideration
in a subsidiary, conciliable, and healing disposition of
spirits. ‘In a temper of national resentment and
growing exasperation,’ it might only increase the
mischief. Dissolution or prorogation he thought
‘wholly unadvisable and dangerous.’?

That Bedford should go to England, and see Pitt
in private, was made absolutely necessary by a
betrayal of their correspondence on both sides of the
water. The Viceroy’s letters were the property of
the political leaders within a few hours of their being
written. Each of them knew his embarrassments.
Each feared to be left at the mercy of his rivals, and
all alike to have the spoils of office stolen from them,
by the appointment as deputy of some impartial
Englishman.

The money having been voted for the usual two
years, the concluding weeks of the session of 1758
were smoothed by mutual compromises. The struggle
was suspended till Parliament should again meet,
while the Viceroy worked in private to make a tem-
porary arrangement during his absence. The first
plan was to combine all parties, and leave three
lords justices. The Primate offered to serve with
Kildare and Ponsonby. But Kildare declined. ‘The
hate of parties to each other in public affairs,’ wrote
Bedford, ‘for in private I see less of it than in most
other countries,’ is ‘so great, that I cannot conciliate
them; and to leave the sword to either would be
fatal.’ Jtildare, however, was not the only powerful
nobleman in Ireland. The Primate and Ponsonby
were willing to work together. Lord Shannon,

1 <¢ Pitt to Bedford, February 2, * ¢ Bedford to Pitt, February 9.’
1758. MSS. Record Office. Ibid.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

having won his earldom and his pension, was not
unwilling to earn future favours. In a letter, ‘most
secret and particular, the Duke informed Pitt that
he had at last formed a combination which would
answer during a short absence. The Primate pro-
mised to be faithful in future, if his late conduct was
not remembered against him. The Viceroy under-
took, in return, that he should have his share in
public patronage.’ The sore question of the Pension
List was allowed to he over for the present, and Bed-
ford sailed ‘in the yacht’ for England, at the
beginning of May.

The curtain rises again in the autumn of 1759. A
matter had occurred meanwhile which, if in Ireland
it created no astonishment, was regarded in England
with indignant surprise. The Irish Chancellor of the
Txchequer, Mr. Antony Malone, and Mr. Clements,
one of the Tellers, both members of the Privy Council,
established a private bank in Dublin, fell into diffi-
culties, and created a confusion in the public ac-
counts. That they had traded with the public money
they loudly denied ; and their delinquency, if it had
extended so far, was condoned by the Irish Parlia-
ment.” By their own confession, however, vast
sums of money, public or private, or both together,
had passed through their hands. They had paid off
the mortgages on their estates, and had largely added
to them. They failed to meet their engagements,
and were forced to suspend payment; and though
their debts were ultimately cleared, and Irish senti-
ment dealt with them leniently, the opinion in
London was severely unfavourable.

1 ¢ Bedford to Pitt, February 10, 1758,’ MSS. Record Office.
2 33 George IT. cap. 4.

622

BOOK
LY.
——

1759

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

By this time to private scandal and Parliamentary
faction there was added a public danger. The French
war was at its height, and it was expected that a
blow was to be aimed at England through the
vulnerable side. A squadron of five ships, under
M. Thurot, sailed from Dunkirk in October, to cruise
in the Irish seas, while a powerful fleet collected at
Brest—which, rumour said, was to land an army in
Munster, in the middle of the winter. The rela-
tions between France and Ireland were manifold and
intimate. The smuggling commerce was enormous ;
the Irish brigade corresponded regularly with their
families at home. Officers had passed to and fro in
disguise ; and the air was full, as usual, of rumours of
insurrection. Fifty thousand Catholics were reported
ready to rise in arms to meet their deliverers, and
their disposition to rebel was believed in Paris ‘to be
a practical fact.

Many anxious conversations on the state of Ireland
had passed meanwhile between Pitt and Bedford. The
Duke had told Pitt that, ‘after eight months’ expe-
rience, he considered Ireland as a country where
laws had lost all energy, magistracy all authority,
and even Parliament itself all reverence; and that
nothing but military force could restrain the subject
within due obedience.’ *

Pitt’s replies are unrecorded. Obviously how-
ever, from his subsequent language, it was to the
Protestants and to Protestantism that he looked for
recuperative force there, not to any relaxation of
Catholic disabilities; that he regarded the discontent
of Protestants in the midst of a hostile population as

1 ¢ Bedford to Pitt, reminding him of a conversation in the spring,
December 25, 1759,’

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

too strange a phenomenon to be accounted for by  cHap.

62¢

>
vo

; IL.
mere factiousness. For the moment the war was all- ——~—~

absorbing. Early in the autumn Bedford returned
to Dublin. The French were daily looked for. The
army was concentrated at Clonmel, ready to turn in
whatever direction the enemy might appear. Lime-
rick was the point of danger. If the landing was at
Limerick, the city, it was thought, could not be
saved. There was no force available but the regular
troops. In 1715, every able-bodied Protestant had
pressed into the militia, and the whole country was
an armed camp. In 1759, the city of London alone
raised a larger force than the whole of Ireland. The
lords and gentlemen had been profuse in professions
and promises ; ‘but the inefficacy of their zeal, their
supineness after so strong and frequent warnings of
dangers, could not but,’ to Pitt’s troubled mind, ‘ad-
minister just ground of wonder and alarm.’*

The spirit of the seventeenth century was dead.
Protestantism had spent its force, or survived only
among the Presbyterians, whose bitterness over their
prolonged disabilities was stronger than their loyalty.
Public spirit, pride in the glorious empire of which
they were permitted to be a part, had no longer an
existence in the minds of the Irish colonists ; or, if
they recognized that they possessed a country, it was
‘to thank God that they had a country to sell.’

English courage arrested the invasion. The [French
fleet, after sailing from Brest, was met by Hawke at
Quiberon, and smashed in pieces. Thurot and his
squadron descended on Carrickfergus, took the castle,
plundered the town, and threatened Belfast. Had

1 ¢ Pitt to Bedford, November 2, 1759,’ MSS. Record Office.

1759

624

BOOK
TV,
—_— ---——"

1760

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

Belfast been attacked it could not have been saved,
‘not so much as a single firelock,’ so Pitt wrote in-
dignantly, ‘having been put into the hands of any
Protestant in that part of Ireland since the com-
mencement of the war;’’ and Belfast was the only
town in Ireland, except Dublin, of which the pillage
would have been worth the risk of the adventure.
Happily, before Thurot had time to learn with what
ease he might make the capture, the English were
upon him. Three frigates lay in harbour at King-
sale, the Aolus, the Pallas, and the Brilliant,
Captain Elliott, in the AZolus, commanding. Thurot’s
five ships had been reduced to three also, of almost
equal force with Elliott’s. Already, before the attack
on Carrickfergus, they had been heard of on the coast,
and the English squadron was on its way to look
for them. |

Thurot was found still at anchor in Carrickfergus
Bay. The wind was blowing hard off shore. The
English could not close ; and, under cover of night,
Thurot slipped out into the channel. But Elhott was
after him with daylight, and came up with him on the
morning of the 28th February, between the Mull of
Galloway and the Isle of Man. After a sharp en-
gacement of an hour and a half, in which the French
admiral was killed, the three ships struck, and were
towed as prizes into Ramsay harbour, and the French
descent on Ireland was at an end.”

The Dublin populace, meanwhile, had taken the
opportunity of displaying the change of temper which
had come over them since 1703, when Ireland,

1 ¢ Pitt to Bedford, March 13, of Bedford, February 24, and 29,

1760.’ MSS. Record Office. 1760.’ Lbid.
2 *Captain Elliott to the Duke

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

almost on her knees, had petitioned for incorporation

625

CHAP.

in the empire. Provoked, perhaps, by a knowledge ee

of Bedford’s words to Pitt, that Ireland could only
be controlled by military force, a rumour had gone
abroad that the Parliament was about to be sup-
pressed ; that the country was to be governed as a
province from London, and the taxes to be voted at
St. Stephen’s. Every day, after the opening of the
autumn session of 1759, a disorderly crowd hung
about the doors of the Parliament House. Unpopular
members were hooted at and hustled, and the city
authorities had been required, with very little effect,
to keep order. There was an adjournment for a few
days in November. On the day of the reassembling,’
a mob of several thousand persons, armed with
swords and bludgeons, collected in College Green,
broke into the House of Lords, and placed an old
woman with a pipe in her mouth on the throne, as
an indication of their respect for the Viceroy. They
then took possession of the doors and approaches, and
every member, Peer or Commoner, as he came up,
was made to swear to be true to Ireland before
he was allowed to enter. The Chancellor, Lord
Bowes, an Englishman, refused the oath, and was
turned back. The disturbance lasted through the
whole morning. ‘The Mayor came down, but looked
on complacently, and refused to interfere. In the
afternoon Bedford sent for him and the Sheriffs,
bade them swear in special constables instantly,
and quell the riot. The Mayor, from ‘ill judged
popularity,’ said he did not know on whom he could
depend. Bedford offered him the support of the

1 December 3,
. eB SS

1759

626

BOOK
LV:
Sasa See

1759

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

troops. The Mayor replied that, as there was no riot
act in Ireland, he could not sanction the use of the
troops. He had urged the people to disperse, and he
hoped they would obey. He would not order them
to be shot ‘in an affair about the privileges of Par-
lament.’

The city was thus left at the mercy of armed
ruffians. Fifty soldiers were marched into the streets,
as a demonstration; but, as no one would give them
orders to act, they were only laughed at. At last,
the Duke took the responsibility on himself. A party

of cavalry were sent out, with directions in writing,

to disperse the crowd, using as little violence as pos-
sible, but still to disperse them. The rioters retreated
into the side streets, and defended themselves with
stones; but finding this time that authority meant
to assert itself, and that they were ridden down
and sabred, they stood their ground till sixteen of
them had been killed, and then disappeared into their
dens.

In the riot itself, though no such scenes had been
witnessed in Dublin for forty years, there was
nothing calculated to create serious apprehension.
It was the conduct of the civil authorities which gave
it exceptional importance ; which led Pitt, when he
heard of what had happened, to reflect seriously, per-
haps for the first time, on the Irish problem; and
gave occasion for a curious and extremely valuable
interchange of letters with the Duke of Bedford.
The disturbance originated in a part of Dublin called
‘the Earl of Meath’s Liberty,’ inhabited almost ex-
clusively by Protestant artisans, among whom some
excitement had been created two years before by
a visit from John Wesley. Methodism, since Wesley’s

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

preaching, had more or less agitated the fower classes
of the Dublin Protestants; and, as a new form of
dissent, had given special annoyance to the official
mind of the Viceroy.

Interpreting the feelings of the Dublin populace by
his own, and especially indignant at the indifference
with which the banking transactions of the Irish
Chancellor of the Exchequer had been passed over,
Mr. Pitt considered the uproar to have been pro-
bably a demonstration against Mr. Malone and Mr.
Clements. Bedford still persisted in throwing a
shield over the delinquents, and, with the contempt
of an English aristocrat for the opinions of a mob,
set it down to the dissolution of authority and the
republican tenets of the new sect, which he stig-
matized with the name of Swaddlers. He shrunk
from ordering an enquiry into the Mayor’s conduct,
and was disposed to transfer the entire responsibility
to the Parliament.’

Through the mists and clouds of Irish misgovern-
ment, Pitt’s answer shines out like an exceptional
flash of sunlight. Though he had no leisure to
master the intricacies of the past administrative blun-
dering, his powerful sense grasped instinctively the
only principles on which order and good government
could be restored. In the persevering efforts to
screen a real enormity, he saw how deep was the root
of the disease, and in the Duke’s poor efforts to throw

totally Republican, and averse to

1¢The place in which the riot
English government, and therefore

rose, the Earl of Meath’s Liberty, is

chiefly inhabited by weavers, many
of whom are Protestants, and of
those called the “‘ New Light Pres-
byterians, or Swaddlers.” Their
tenets both here, and I am sorry
to say in the North of Ireland, are

they are at least, equally with the
Catholics, to be guarded against’—
‘ Bedford to Pitt, December 25,
1759” MSS. Record Office, Ire-
land.

bo

628

BOO
Lye
~_--—-—"’

1760

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

the blame on the Dissenters, an evidence of the mise-
rable infatuation which had so long paralyzed the in-
fluence of Protestantism. When Wesley visited Ireland
in 1747, the peasantry had flocked about him eagerly,
as the miners of Wales and Cornwall, and had been
only driven from him by terror of their priests. Of
all forms of the Protestant religion, Methodism and
Calvinism were best fitted to make converts among
the warm impassioned Celts. The Irish Government,
with insane ingenuity, at once made itself the pro-
tector of moral dishonesty, and selected for special
enmity England’s most effective allies.

‘ You remind me,’ so Pitt replied (and the letter
should have been engraved on the walls of the vice-
regal cabinet, for successive governors of Ireland to
read their duty there)—‘ You remind me that you
told me last spring, that you considered Ireland, after
eight months’ experience, as a country where law
had lost energy, magistracy all authority, and that
nothing but military force could restrain the subject
within due obedience.

‘T must remind you in turn, that the great danger
stated by your Grace, to be apprehended for Ireland,
turned principally, if not solely, on the excessive
superiority in numbers of Papists over Protestants.

‘For the Lord Mayor and magistrates of Dublin,
I can only observe that, in the late atrocious riot,
those magistrates may more properly be said to have
totally lost all sense of fidelity and duty, than that
law and magistracy have lost energy and authority—
a timely execution whereof so prudently and so
expressly recommended by your Grace, duly sup-
ported in the execution by the military force, could
not possibly have failed to prevent the consummation

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

of so opprobrious an indignity to Government, as well
as to have seized and brought to exemplary punish-
ment the ringleaders in such a daring attempt.

‘IT am hereupon to acquaint your Grace, that this
wilful and shameful inexertion of magistracy continues
to be considered here as being highly proper to be
taken up and enquired into by the executive power,
the exoneration whereof from itself by recommending
the same to the inquisition of the House of Commons
in Ireland, might tend to a further relaxation of the
authority of the King’s government by due course of
law.

‘In case, on such enquiry being had, there shall
appear full and sufficient grounds in law to prosecute
criminally and convict the said magistrates, it is his
Majesty’s pleasure that your Grace, after taking the
advice of his servants learned in the law, should order
proper legal proceedings to be commenced against
them.

‘ With regard to the causes of the late outrage, I
cannot but remark that, considering the riot to have
taken its rise in the Earl of Meath’s Liberty, chiefly
inhabited by Protestant weavers, there is still more
pregnant ground to apprehend, that the money trans-
actions of Mr. Malone and Mr. Clements have pro-
bably been one fatal ingredient amongst others,
observed by your Grace, towards distempering and
revolting the minds of a manufacturing multitude,
who (though nothing can extenuate the guilt of
such an insurrection) may perhaps have felt in their
trade the consequences of such a scandalous and
iniquitous business, which continues here to be viewed
in the same light, and to stand the object of public
animadyversion.

630

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

BOOK ‘It is with great concern I observe, your Grace thinks
IV. ;

—— there is cause to consider any one class of Presby-

1760 terians in Ireland as averse to English government, and

therefore at least, equally with Papists, to be guarded
against. Jam not very particularly acquainted with
the distinctive tenets of the sect among them men-
tioned by your Grace, but it highly imports Govern-
ment to reflect—however blameworthy the too rigid
adherence of Presbyterians to some things may justly
be thought in comparison to the excellences of the
Church of England—that nevertheless the Presby-
terian Dissenters in general must ever deserve to be
considered in opposition to the Church of Rome, as
a very valuable branch of the Reformation; and that,
with regard to their civil principles, that respectable
body have in all times showed themselves, both in
England and Ireland, firm and zealous supporters of
the glorious revolution under King William, and of
the present happy Establishment." ’

1 ¢ Pitt to Bedford, January 5, 1760. MSS. Record Office.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

SECTION VII.

Tue principles of government sketched out by Pitt
would have saved Ireland yet, if bravely acted on, from
the black morass of anarchy, into which it was rapidly
plunging. But, besides principles, there were needed
men who believed in them; and the professional
politicians into whose hands the affairs of England
were passing, and in whose hands they have ever
since remained, preferred, with such success as we
have seen, the roads better suited to their political con-
victions. The Dublin magistrates were not prosecuted,
for the Viceroy’s evidence against them would have
been required, and the Viceroy held his presence in
the witness box unsuited to his dignity.’ Pitt retired
from office, and his spirit disappeared from the Eng-
lish administration. The splendid position which he
had won for his country had overawed the Catholic
Powers, and had dispelled for a time the dream of invad-
ing Ireland. The Irish Catholics made demonstrations
of loyalty, and the Government of the Castle relapsed
into its convenient grooves. Irish patriots continued
to earn popularity by declaiming against the Pension
List, and successive Viceroys continued to silence op-
position by adding to its burdens. The details of the
erowing scandal are reserved for a future volume ; a
single specimen will serve to show how, for a few
more years, Ireland was not ruled but managed.

In 1767, in the viceroyalty of Lord Townshend,
George the Third desired to increase the strength of the

1 ¢ Bedford to Pitt, January 19.’ MSS. Record Office.

635

i

THE ENGLISH IN IRELAND.

military establishment in Ireland. The consent of
the Irish Parliament was necessary, and there was no-
thing in the measure itself to which serious objection
could be taken. But patriotism found an opportunity
in the proposal to lay a pressure on the Government
for its usual objects. Lord Shannon, Speaker Pon-
sonby, and the Prime Sergeant, a lawyer just rising
into fame, the able and brilliant Hely Hutchinson,’
raised the cry of Irish liberty in danger. The supplies
were threatened. A critical division was impending.
The popular triumvirate having shown their strength,
suspended their further action, waited on the Viceroy,
and calmly intimated to him the terms on which they
would desert their party, and go over to the Govern-
ment. Lord Shannon, whose father had secured a
peerage and a pension by similar methods, required
to be permanent Lord Justice during the Lord
Lieutenant’s absence. Ponsonby ‘ expected that the
office of examinator of the customs’ (which carried
with it extensive patronage) ‘ should be given to him
and his brother for their joint lives.’ Hely Hutchin-
son, who was making a large income in his profession,
modestly asked nothing for himself, but he demanded
‘ provision to be made for the lives of his two sons,
by a grant to them, and the survivor of them, of some
office of at least the value of 500/. a year;’ ‘if no
vacancy should happen before the rising of Parlia-
ment, that either a pension, or a salary of that amount,
should be added to some office to be enjoyed by his two
sons during their joint lives, and that his wife might
be created a viscountess.’
1 Hely Hutchinson was de- 1767.’

scribed by Townshend as ‘ the * Richard Boyle, second Earl,
most popular man in Parliament who succeeded his father in 1764.

to conduct a debate.—‘ Townshend He had _ married Ponsonby’s
te Lord Shelburne, November 16, daughter.

PROGRESS OF ANARCHY.

‘These,’ wrote the Viceroy to Lord Shelburne,
‘are the terms on which they will undertake to sup-
port us. If you consent, we shall get through the
session easy.’* Lord Chatham was at this moment
again Prime Minister, and, though too ill to attend to
business, his spirit was present in the English Cabinet.

‘ The leading persons in Ireland,’ Shelburne haugh-
tily answered, ‘ must act as they can answer to their
consciences and as representatives of the people.
The King will, at the end of the session, take into con-
sideration the merits of those who have exerted them-
selves for the support of the Government and the
good of Ireland. The conduct of those who shall
have acted from motives of a less honourable nature
will not escape his Majesty’s notice.’?

The words were brave, but the sequel was an
instructive commentary on the value of constitutional
government among politicians who had yet to learn
the rudiments of honesty.

A month later Townshend was obliged to tell
Lord Shelburne that, unless he was prepared to
reduce the Irish expenditure within the limits of the
hereditary revenue, and to rule Ireland without a
Parlament, the King’s government could not be
carried on.

But the secret history of Lord Townshend’s ad-
ministration, which, as he truly said, formed a crisis
in Irish political life, will be related in a future
chapter.

1 ¢Lord Townshend to Lord 2¢The Earl of Shelburne to
Shelburne (secret and separate), Lord Townshend, December 19,
December 12, 1767.2 MSS. Re- 1767.’ (Secret.) Lbed.
cord Office,

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

VOL. I. fh Mh

LONDON: PRINTED BY ee
i — gponriswoopk AND CO., NEW-STREET square Ie ou.
hk AND PARLIAMENT sreueT

a *
4 ‘ p72 - ; i
¥ i % ;

ee Mee aro Wa 5 ‘ v . sl {
a
+ e
, a eit
° i
P ‘
'
é m
‘i }
i
'
« ”
bs “ y j
i ‘ Fi é
> 7 ;
% Me
é i \
* x h & © *
}
j e & res rot
it ae ‘
b Pee Pit r hi
‘ may i i Pi hee
¥ ‘ 1 22
. “ 4
‘oe 4 3 oe epTT
i A 4 ts wah,
ve
]
q i
' Aas iy
4 yy
at? ;
:
3
@* a Es
‘
. \
‘ ; ane
Ye
bv n
‘
A
h
; i
\/a ;
‘, .
1
1
{
é BP My Vi '
’ y ‘

CABINET EDITION OF FROUDE’S HISTORY OF ENGLAND.

Complete in TweLvE VoLuMEs, crown 8vo. price 6s. each,

HISTORY OF ENGLAND

FROM

meaeerALL OF WOLSEY TO THE DEFEAT
OF THE SPANISH ARMADA.

BY JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE, M.A.

Uniform with the Cabinet Edition of Lord Macaulay's History of England.

The Author’s Prospectus.

J Wade occasion of my undertaking the present work was, as regards myself, an

involuntary leisure forced upon me by my inability to pursue the profession which I had
entered, but which I was forbidden by the law to exchange for another; and, secondly, the attitude
towards the Revolution of the 16th century which had been assumed by many influential thinkers in
England and on the Continent.

Goéthe had said of Luther and Calvin that they had delayed the intellectual growth of Europe
for centuries by calling in the mob to decide questions which should have been left to the thinkers.
Our own Reformers, who for three centuries had been the object of enthusiastic panegyric, were
being assailed with equally violent abuse by the High Churchmen on one side, and Liberal statesmen
and political philosophers on the other. Lord Macaulay had attacked Cranmer as one of the basest
of mankind. It had become the fashion to speak with extreme severity of the persecution of the
Catholics by Elizabeth. Even writers on the whole favourable to the Reformation described the
English branch of it as a good thing badly done.

My own impression about it was, that the Reformation was both a good thing itself and that in
England it had been accomplished with peculiar skill and success. The passions called out by
religious controversy, which in France and Germany were the occasions of Jong and bloody wars,
were controlled in England by the Government. I considered that on the whole the control had
worked beneficially, and that those who condemned the repressive measures adopted towards the
Romanists by Elizabeth's ministers had made imperfect allowance for the temper of the times and
for the impossibility of tolerating opinions which led immediately to rebellion. My original purpose
was to confine myself to the reign of the great Queen for whom, looking to the spirit in which her
government had been conducted, I felt great admiration. The attacks of Lingard and others upon
her personal purity I believed to be gratuitous and unjust. I intended as briefly as I could to
undertake her vindication. With Cranmer and his companions, unwilling as I was to accept Lord
Macaulay’s judgment upon them, I had not proposed to meddle. I shared the prevailing views of
the character of Henry VIII. ; and though I considered that if all the circumstances were known to
us there might be found much to modify our censure on the Archbishop’s behaviour, it was plain
that he had gone along with the king in the most questionable actions of the reign.

I found myself, however, unable to handle the later features of the Revolution without going
back to the beginning of it. The coming of the Armada was the last act of a drama of which the
divorce of Queen Catharine was the first. The publication of new materials, the improved accessi-
bility of the records in our own and other countries, and the voluminous diplomatic correspondence
which was thus opened to inquiry, threw fresh light upon much that had been obscure and
unintelligible. I was thus led first to study more closely, and then to undertake the narrative of the
entire period between the original quarrel with the Papacy and the point at which the separation of
England from the Roman communion was finally decided.

My general opinion on the character of the movement remains unchanged, but I have not
consciously allowed myself to be influenced by my prepossessions ; for of the persons whose actions I
have had to describe there are several of the most distinguished about whom I have been compelled
to alter the sentiments with which I commenced, at the sacrifice of favourite prejudices. A qualified
defence of Henry VIII. was forced upon me by the facts of the case. With equal reluctance I had to ~
acknowledge that the wisdom of Elizabeth was the wisdom of her ministers, and that her chief merit,
eS eaucee must divide with herself, lay in allowing her policy to be guided by Lord

urghley.

London: LONGMANS and CO. Paternoster Row.

CABINET EDITION OF FROUDE’S HISTORY OF ENGLAND—continued.

I owe an apology to the public for the length to which the book has run. I have this only to
say in my defence, that nine-tenths of the materials which I have used are in MS, and therefore
difficult of access. I have desired to enable my readers to form their own opinions rather than to
intrude mine upon them; and I have allowed the principal actors, therefore, to unfold their
characters and motives in their own language.

Thus, with my cordial thanks to the English public for the support which they have kindly
extended to me in this enterprise, I close a work which has been the companion of twenty years of
pleasant but of unintermittent labour.

SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS.

REIGN OF HENRY THE BIGHTH.
Vouvumes I. to IV.

CHAP. CHAP,
1. Social Condition of England in the Sixteenth 12. Foreign and Domestic Aspects of the Refor-
Century. ; mation in England.
2, The last Years of the Administration of 13. The Pilgrimage of Grace.
WOLSEY. 14. The Commission of Cardinal PoLEz,
3. The Parliament of 1529. 15. The Exeter Conspiracy.
4, Church and State. 16. The Six Articles.
5. Marriage of HENRY and ANNE BOLEYN. 17, ANNE of CLEVES and the Fall of CROMWELL.
6. The Protestants. 18. Scotland and Ireland.
7. The Last Efforts of Diplomacy. 19. Solway Moss.
8. The Irish Rebellion. 20. The French War.
9. The Catholic Martyrs. 21. The Peace of Crépy.
10. The Visitation of the Monasteries. 22. The Invasion.
11, Trial and Death of ANNE BoLEYN. 23. The Death of Henry the EIGHTH.
REIGNS OF EDWARD THE SIXTH AND MARY.
Voitumas V. and VI.
CHAP. CHAP.
24. The Protectorate. 30. QUEEN JANE and QUEEN MARY.
25. The Protectorate—continued. 31. The Spanish Marriage.
26. The Fall of the PROTECTOR. 82. Reconciliation with Rome.
27. The Reformed Administration. 33. The Martyrs.
28. Execution of the DUKE of SOMERSET. 34, Calais.
29. NORTHUMBERLAND’S Conspiracy. 35. Death of MARY.
REIGN OF ELIZABETH.
Votumes VII. ¢o XII.
CHAP. CHAP.
1. Accession of QUEEN ELIZABETH and the 19. Excommunication of ELIZABETH.
Restoration of the Royal Supremacy. 20. The Ridolfi Conspiracy.
2. The Reformation in Scotland. 21. Spain and England.
3. The Expulsion of the French. 22. Execution of the DukE of NORFOLK.
4, ELIZABETH and Lord ROBERT DUDLEY, 23. Massacre of ST. BARTHOLOMEW.
5. The Civil War in France. 24, Administration of Ireland.
6. Condition of England. 25. Development of the Character of ELIZABETH,
7. Ireland under Mary and ELIZABETH. 26. The Alencon Marriage.
8. MaRY QUEEN of Scors and the English 27. The Desmond Rebellion.
Succession. 28. Catholic Reaction in Scotland.
9. The DARNLEY Marriage. 29. Voyage of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE.
10. The Murder of DARNLEY. 30. The D’AUBIGNE Plot.
11. SHAN O’ NEIL. 31. Intended Invasion of England.
12. The English Navy under ELIZABETH. 32. General Uncertainty.
13. Dethronement of the QUEEN of SCOTS. 33. The War in the Netherlands.
14, MARY STUART at Lochleyven. 34, Execution of the QUEEN of Scots.
15. Flight to England. 35. Preparations for the Closing Struggle.
16, Seizure of the Spanish Treasure. 86. Defeat of the Armada,
17. The English Aristocracy. 37. Concluding Chapter.
18. The Rising of the North. INDEX.

London: LONGMANS and CO. Paternoster Row.

39 ParEernosteR Row, E.O,
Lonpon: March 1872.

GENERAL LIS? OF WORKS

PUBLISHED BY

Messrs, LONGMANS, GREEN, READER, and DYER,

-_ eT

ARTS, MANUFACTURES, &C...cccccccccocee 12
Astronomy, Murzororocy, Porviar

a a
BroGRAPHIcaL Works 3
Cuemistry, Mepicine, Surcrry, and

RE EER SCIENCES ....ccccscccsscsee 10
Criticism, Puttosopry, Poritry, &e.... 4
Five Arts and Intustratep Epirions 11
History, Porrrics, and Hisrorican

ee ee evinces css soncecccess ‘eute |
NE cose vdenascodscccccccecceveccsstl—at
KNOWLEDGE for the YOUNG ceseoscoseee 20

eer eewoseesensree

MisceELLANEous Works and Porpurar

PERTAPHY SIG) 2.52. dates cocs th she Adee: 6
Naturat History & PorutaRScrence 8
PERIODICAL PUBLICATIONS ....ccccesnsces 19

Bonteyand Tum DRAMA... .cccconccceee, AT
Rexicious and Moran Works ......... 14
HURATSFORTS WeGestceviypccnacecevecseet LG
TRAVELS, Voyacss, &e. ...... TPO et ee
WA ede a Cle) OT EON Gre nets cc take aiee oe mad:
Worxs of Urmrry and GeEnerRAn

EN FORMATIONS T 9. Aistivessetvaieetihetomeslg

——0$9} 00

History, Politics, Historical Memoirs, §c.

The History of England from
the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of the
Spanish Armada. By JAmes ANTHONY
Frovupe, M.A.

CABINET EpITI0N, 12 vols. er, 8vo. £3 12s.
Liprary Epirion, 12 vols. 8vo. £8 18s.

The History of England from
the Accession of James II. By Lord
MACAULAY.

SrupENt’s Eprriovn, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12s.
Propue’s Eprrion, 4 vols. crown 8vo. 16s.
CABINET EpirI0on, 8 vols. post 8vo. 48s.
Liprary Epririon, 5 vols. 8vo. £4.

Lord Macaulay’s Works. Com-
plete and uniform Library Edition. Edited
by his Sister, Lady TREVELYAN. 8 vols.
8vo. with Portrait, price £5. 5s. cloth, or
£8. 8s. bound in tree-calf by Riviere.

Varieties of Vice-Regal Life. By
Major-General Sir WurtitaAm DENIson,
K.C.B. late Governor-General of the Austra-
lian Colonies, and Governor of Madras.
With Two Maps. 2 vols. 8vo. 28s.

On Parliamentary Government
in England: its Origin, Development, and
Practical Operation. By ALPHEus Topp,
Librarian of the Legislative Assembly of
Canada. 2 vols. 8vo. price £1. 17s.

The Constitutional History of
England since the Accession of George IIT.
1760—1860. By Sir Tuomas Erskine
May, K.C.B. Cabinet Edition (the Third),
thoroughly revised. 3 vols. crown 8vo.
price 18s.

A Historical Account of the Neu-
trality of Great Britain during the Ameri-
can Civil War. By MounrAGuE BERNARD,
M.A. Royal 8vo. price 16s.

The History of England, from the
Earliest Times to the Year 1865. By C.D.
YonGE, Regius Professor of Modern History
in Queen’s College, Belfzst. New Edition.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 624.

Lectures on the History of Eng-
land, from the Earliest Times to the Death
of King Edward II]. By Witi1Am Lone-
MAN. With Maps and Illustrations. 8vo. 15s.

The History of the Life and Times
of Edward the Third. By Wii11am
Loneman. With 9 Maps, 8 Plates, and
16 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 28s.

History of Civilization in England
and France, Spain and Scotland. By
Henry Tiuomas Buckie. New Edition
of the entire work, with a complete InpEex.
8 vols. crown Syo. 24s.

A

-Realities of Irish'Life. By W.
SrevArT Trencu, Land Agent in Ireland
to the Marquess of Lansdowne, the Mar-
quess of Bath, and Lord Digby. Fifth
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.

The Student’s Manual of the
History .of Ireland. By M. F. Cusack,
Authoress of ‘The Illustrated History of
Ireland.’ Crown 8vo. price 6s.

A Student’s Manual of the His-
tory of India, from the Earliest Period to
the Present. By Colonel Mrapows Tay-
Lor, M.R.A.S. M.R.LA. Crown 8yo. with
Maps, 7s. 6d.

The History of India, from the
Earliest Period to the close of Lord Dal-
housie’s Administration. By Jonn CLARK
MARSHMAN. 3 vols. crown 8vo. 22s. 6d.

Indian Polity: a View of the System
of Administration in India. By Lieut.-Col.
GrorGE CHESNEY. Second Edition, re-
vised, with Map. 8vo. 21s.

Recreations of an Indian Official.
By Lieutenant-Colonel MALLEson, Bengal
Staff Corps; Guardian to His Highness the
Maharaja of Mysore. Crown 8vo. 12s. 6d.

An Historical View of Literature
and Art in Great Britain from the Acces-
sion of the House of Hanover to the Reign
of QueenVictoria. By J. MurrAy GRAHAM,
M.A. 8vo. price 14s.

Waterloo Lectures: a Study of the
Campaign of 1815. By Colonel CHARLES
C. CuEsneY, R.E. late Professor of Military
Art and History in the Staff College. Second
Edition. Svo. with Map, 10s. 6d.

The Overthrow of the Germanic
Confederation by Prussia in 1866. By Sir
A. MALET, Bart. K.B.C. late H.B:M. Envoy
and Minister at Frankfort. With 5 Maps.
8yo. 18s,

Chapters from French History ;
St. Louis, Joan of Arc, Henri IV. with
Sketches of the Intermediate Periods. By
J. H. Gurney, M.A. New Edition. fF ep.
8vo. 6s. 6d.

History of the Reformation in
Europe in the Time of Calvin. By J. H.
Merrie DjAupicn#, D.D. Vors. I. and
IL. 8vo. 28s. Vou. III. 12s. Vou. IV. price
16s. and Vou. VY. price 16s.

Royal and Republican France.
A Series of Essays reprinted from the
‘Edinburgh,’ ‘ Quarterly,’ and ‘ British and
Foreign’ Reviews. By Henry REEYE®,
C.B. D.C.L. 2 vols, 8yo. price 21s.

NEW WORKS pvp.isHEeD By LONGMANS anp CO.

Home Politics: being a Consideration
of the Causes of the Growth of Trade in
relation to Labour, Pauperism, and Emi-
gration. By Danie“ Grant. 8vo. 7s.

The Oxford Reformers—John Colet,
Erasmus, and Thomas More; being a His-
tory of their Fellow-Work. By FrepErRic
SreBoum. Second Edition. 8vo. 14s.

The History of Greece. By C. Turrt-

WALL, D.D. Lord Bishop of St. David’s.
8 vols. fep. 28s.

The Tale of the Great Persian
War, from the Histories of Herodotus. By
GrorGce W. Cox, M.A. late Scholar of
Trin. Coll. Oxon. Fep. 3s. 6d.

Greek History from Themistocles
to Alexander, in a Series of Lives from
Plutarch. Revised and arranged by A. H.
CLroucH. Fcp. with 44 Woodcuts, 6s.

Critical History of the lLan-
guage and Literature of Ancient Greece,
By Witi1amM Mores, of Caldwell. 5 vols.
8vo. £3 9s.

History of the Literature of

_ Ancient Greece, By Professor K.O. MéLuEr.
Translated by Lewis and Donatpson.
8 vols. 8vo. 21s.

The History of Rome, By Wirusrm

Inne. English Edition, translated and
revised by the Author. Vous. I. and II.
8vo. 30s.

History of the City of Rome from
its Foundation to the Sixteenth Century of
the Christian Era. By Tuomas H. Dyer,
LL.D. 8vo. with 2 Maps, 15s,

History of the Romans under
the Empire. By Very Rey. CHARLES
MERIVALE, D.C.L. Dean of Ely. 8 vols. post
8vo. price 48s.

The Fall of the Roman Re-
public; a Short History of the Last Cen-
tury of the Commonwealth. By the same
Author. 12mo. 7s. 6d.

Historical and Chronological
Encyclopedia; comprising Chronological
Notices of all the Great Events of Universal
History, including Treaties, Alliances,
Wars, Battles, &c.; Incidents in the Lives
of Eminent Men, Scientific and Geogra-
phical Discoveries, Mechanical Inventions,
and Social, Domestic, and Economical Im-
provements. By the late B. B. Woopwanrp,
B.A. and W. L. R. Cates. 1 vol. 8vo.

[ In the press.

Three Centuries of Modern His-
tory. By Cuarvtes DuKke Yonae, Regius
Professor of Modern History and English
Literature in Queen’s College, Belfast.
Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.

NEW WORKS pvuptuisHep By LONGMANS anp CO. 8

History of European Morals from
Augustus to Charlemagne. By W. E. H.
Lecky, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. price 28s.

History of the Rise and Influence of
the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe. By
the same Author, Cabinet Edition (the
Fourth), 2 vols. crown 8vo. price 16s.

Essays on Historical Truth. By
ANDREW BIsseT. 8vo. 14s.

God in History; or, the Progress of
Man’s Faith in the Moral Order of the
World. By the late Baron Bunsen. Trans-
lated from the German by SusANNA WINK-
WORTH ; with a Preface by Dean STANLEY
3 vols, 8vo. 42s.

Socrates and the Socratic Schools.
Translated from the German of Dr. E. ZEt-
LER, with the Author’s approval, by the
Rev. OswaLp J. REICHEL, B.C.L. and M.A.
Crown 8vo. 8s. 6d.

The Stoics, Epicureans, and
Sceptics. Translated from the German of
Dr. E. ZELLER, with the Author’s approval,
by OswAtp J. Re1cuet, B.C.L, and M.A.
Crown 8vo. 14s.

Saint-Simon and Saint-Simonism;
a Chapter in the Histery of Socialism in
France. By Arruur J. Bootrn, M.A.
Crown 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

The History of Philosophy, from
Thales to Comte. By Grorce HENRY
Lewes. Fourth Edition, corrected, and
partly rewritten. 2 vols. 8vo. 32s.

The Mythology of the Aryan
Nations. By Grorag W. Cox, M.A. late
Scholar of Trinity College, Oxford. 2 vols.
Svo. price 28s.

The English Reformation. By
F. C. Massincperp, M.A. Chancellor of
Lincoln. 4th Edition, revised. Fep, 7s.6d.

Maunder’s Historical Treasury ;
comprising a General Introductory Outline
of Universal History, and a Series of Sepa-
rate Histories. Fep. 6s.

Critical and Historical Essays
contributed to the Edinburgh Review by
the Right Hon. Lord MacauLay :—

STUDENT’s EDITION, crown 8vo. 6s.
PEOPLE’S EpDITIoN, 2 vols. crown 8vo. 8s.
CABINET EpirTIon, 4 vols. 24s.

Lisrary Epirion, 3 vols. 8vo. 36s.

History of the Early Church,
from the First Preaching of the Gospel to
the Council of Nicewa, A.p. 325. By the
Author of ‘Amy Herbert. New Edition.
Fep. 4s. 6d.

Sketch of the History of the
Church of England to the Revolution of
1688, By the Right Rev. T, V. Suort,
D.D. Lord Bishop of St. Asaph. Eighth
Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

History of the Christian Church,
from. the Ascension of Christ to the Conver-
sion of Constantine. By E. Burton, D.D.
late Regius Prof. of Divinity in the Uni-
versity of Oxford, Fep. 3s. 6d.

Biographical Works.

Autobiography of John Milton; | TheLife of Isambard Kingdom

or, Milton’s Life in his own Words. By
the Rev. JAmes J. G. GranaAm, M.A.
Crown 8vo. with Vignette-Portrait, price 5s.

Recollections of Past Life.
Sir Henry Hoiuanp, Bart. M.D. F.R.S.,
&ce. Physician-in-Ordinary to the Queen.
Second Edition. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.

A Memoir of Daniel Maclise,
R.A. By W. Justin O’DRIScoLL,
M.R.I.A. Barrister-at-Law. Wath Portrait
and Woodcuts. Post 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Memoirs of the Marquis of

, Pombal; with Extracts from his Writings
and from Despatches in the State Papers
Office. By the Conpe DA CArnota. New
Edition. 8vo. price 7s.

Reminiscences of Fifty Years.
By Mark Born. Post 8vo. price 10s. 6d.

By |

|
|

Brunel, Civil Engineer. By IsAmBarp
BruNnEL, B.C.L. of Lincoln’s Inn, Chan-
eellor of the Diocese of Ely. With Por-
trait, Piates, and Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

Lord George Bentinck ; a Political
Biography. By the Right Hon. B. Dis-
RAELI, M.P. Eighth Edition, revised, with
anew Preface. Crown 8vo. 6s.

The Life and Letters of the Rev.
Sydney Smith. Edited by his Daughter,
Lady Ho.uuanp, and Mrs. Austin. New
Edition, complete in One Volume. Crown
8vo, price 6s.

Some Memorials of R. D. Hamp-
den, Bishop of Hereford. Edited by his
Daughter, HENRIETTA HAMPDEN. 8vo.
with Portrait, price 12s.

4 NEW WORKS pvusBLisHED By LONGMANS anp CO.

The Life and Travels of George
Whitefield, M.A. By James PATERSON
GuEDSTONE. 8vo. price 143,

Memoir of Pope Sixtus the Fifth.
3y Baron Htnner. Translated from the
Original in French, with the Author’s
sanction, by Hubert E. H. JeERNINGHAM.
2 vols. 8vo. 24s. [ Nearly ready.

The Life and Letters of Faraday.
sy Dr. Bence Jones, Secretary of the
Royal Institution. Second Edition, with
Portrait and Woodcuts. 2 vols. 8vo. 28s.

Faraday as a Discoverer. By Joun
TynpaLi, LL.D. F.R.S. New and Cheaper
Edition, with Two Portraits. Fep. 8vo.
price 3s. 6d,

The Royal Institution ;: its Founder
and its First Professors. By Dr. BENcE
Jones, Honorary Secretary. Post 8vo.
price 12s. 6d.

Leaders of Public Opinion in Ire-
land; Swift, Flood, Grattan, O’Connell.
By W. E. H. Lecxy, M.A. New Edition,
revised and enlarged. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

A Group of Englishmen (1795 to
1815); Records of the Younger Wedgwoods
and their Friends, embracing the History of
the Discovery of Photography. By Exiza
Metreyanrp. 8vo. 16s.

Life of the Duke of Wellington.
By the Rey. G. R. Gtera, M.A. Popular
Edition, carefully revised; with copious
Additions. Crown 8yo. with Portrait, 5s.

Historyof my Religious Opinions.
By J. H. Newman, D.D. Being the Sub-
stance of Apologia pro Vita Sua. Post 8vo.
price 6s.

Father Mathew; a Biography.
By Joun FrANcis MAGuire, M.P. Popular
Edition, with Portrait. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Dictionary of General Biography;
containing Concise Memoirs and Notices of
the most Eminent Persons of all Countries,
from the Earliest Ages to the Present Time.
Edited by WituiAmM L. R. Cares. 8vo.
price 21s.

Letters and Life of Francis
Bacon, including all his Occasional Works.
Collected and edited, with a Commentary,
by J. Speppixc. Vots. I. & II. 8vo. 24s.
Vors. III. & IV. 24s. Vou. V. 12s.

Felix Mendelssohn’s Letters from
Italy and Switzerland, and Letters from
1833 to 1847, translated by Lady WALLACE.
With Portrait. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 5s. each.

Memoirs of Sir Henry Havelock,
K.C.B. By Joun CiLArK MARSHMAN.
People’s Edition, with Portrait. Crown 8yvo.
price 3s. 6d.

Essays in Ecclesiastical Biogra-
phy. By the Right Hon. Sir J. Srepien,
LL.D. Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Vicissitudes of Families. By Sir

J. BERNARD Burke, C.B. Ulster King of

Arms. New Edition, remodelled and en-
larged. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 21s.
5

Lives of the Queens of England.
By AGNEs StRicKLAND. Library Edition,
newly revised; with Portraits of every
Queen, Autographs, and Vignettes. 8 vols,
post 8vo. 7s. 6d. each.

Maunder’s Biographical Trea2-
sury. Thirteenth Edition, reconstructed and
partly re-written, with above 1,000 additional
Memoirs, by W. L. R. Cates. Fep. 6s.

Criticism, Philosophy, Polity, &c.

On Representative Government.
By Joun Sruart Mityi. Third Edition.
8vo. 9s. crown 8vo. 2s.

On Liberty. Ey thesame Author. Fourth
Fdition. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d. Crown 8vo.
Is. 4d.

Principles of Political Hconomy. By the
same. Seventh Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 30s. or
in 1 vol. crown 8vo. 5s.

Utilitarianism. Bythesame. 4th Edit.8vo.5s.

Dissertations and Discussions. By the
same Author. Second Edition. 3 vols. 8vo.
price 36s.

Examination of Sir W. Hamilton’s
Philosophy, and of the principal Philoso-
phical Questions discussed in his Writings.
By the same. Third Edition. 8vo. 16s.

The Subjection of Women, By
JoHN Stuart Mitu. New Edition. Post
8vo 5s.

Analysis of the Phenomena of
the Human Mind. By JAmes Mruu, A
New Edition, with Notes, [lustrative and
Critical, by ALEXANDER Bary, ANDREW
FINDLATER, and GEORGE Grote. Edited,
with additional Notes, by Joun Srvart
Miu. 2 vols. 8yo. price 28s.

The Elements of Political Eeo-
nomy. By Henry Dtunninc MACLEop,
M.A. Barrister-at-Law. 8vo. 16s.

A Dictionary of Political Economy ;
Biographical, Bibliographical, Histerical,
and Practical. By the same Author.. Vou.
J, royal 8vo. 30s.

NEW WORKS rPrvuBLIsHED

BY LONGMANS ann CO. &

A Colonist on the Colonial Ques-
tion. By Joun Maruews, of Toronto,
Canada. Post 8vo. 6s.

Lord Bacon’s Works, coilected
and edited by R. L. Exxis, M.A. J. Spep-
pinc, M.A. and D. D. Heati. New
and Cheaper Edition. 7 vols. 8vo. price
£3 138s. 6d.

A System of Logic, Ratiocinative
and Inductive. By Jouwn SrvartT MIL.
Seventh Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 25s.

The Institutes of Justinian; with
English Introduction, Translation, and
Notes. By T.C. Sanpars, M.A. Barrister-
at-Law. New Edition. 8vo. 15s.

The Ethics of Aristotle; with Essays
and Notes. By Sir A. Granv, Bart. M.A.
LL.D. Second Edition, revised and com-
pleted. 2 vols. 8vo. price 28s.

The Nicomachean Ethics of Aris-
totle. Newly translated into English. By
R. WiurtAMs, B.A. Fellow and late Lec-
turer Merton College, Oxford. 8vo. 12s.

Bacon’s Essays, with Annotations.
By R. Wuate ry, D.D. late Archbishop of
Dublin. Sixth Edition, 8vo. 10s, 6d.

Elements of Logic. By R. Wuarety,
D.D. late Archbishop of Dublin. New
Edition, 8yo. 10s. Gd. crown 8yo, 4s. 6d.

Elements of Rhetoric. By the same
Author. New Edition. 8yo. 10s. 6d, Crown
8vo. 4s. 6d.

English Synonymes,. ByE.JANEWHMATELY.
Edited by Archbishop WuaATety. 6th
Edition. Fep. 3s.

An Outline of the Necessary
Laws of Thought: a Treatise on Pure and
Applied Logic. By the Most Rev. W.
Tuomson, D.D. Archbishop of York. Ninth
Thousand. Crown 8vo. 5s. 6d.

The Election of Representatives,
Parliamentary and Municipal; a Treatise.
By Tuomas Hane, Barrister-at-Law. Third
Edition, with Additions. Crown 8vo. 6s.

Speeches of the Right Hon. Lord
MACAULAY, corrected by Himself. People’s
Edition, crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Lord Macaulay’s Speeches on
Parliamentary Reform in 1831 and 1832,
16mo. price ONE SHILLING.

Walker’s Pronouncing Diction-
ary of the English Language. Thoroughly
revised Editions, by B. H. SMART.  8vo.
12s. 16mo. 6s.

A Dictionary of the English
Language. By R. G. Laruam, M.A. M.D.
F.R.S. Founded on the Dictionary of Dr. S.
JOHNSON, as edited by the Rev. H. J. Topp,
with numerous Emendations and Additions.
4 vols. 4to. price £7.

Thesaurus of English Words and
Phrases, classified and arranged so as to
facilitate the expression of Ideas, and assist
in Literary Composition. By P. M. Rocet,
M.D. New Edition, Crown 8yo. 10s. 6d.

Three Centuries of English Lite-
rature. By CitArLes Duke Yonce, Regius.
Professor of Modern History and English
Literature in Queen’s College, Belfast.
Crown 8yo. 7s. 6d.

Lectures on the Science of Lan-
guage. By F. Max Mitturer, M.A. &e.
Foreign Member of the French Institute.
Sixth Edition, 2 vols. crown 8yo price 16s.

Chapters on Language. By F. W.
FARRAR, M.A. F.R.S. Head Master of
Marlborough College. Crown 8vo. &3. 6d.

Southey’s Doctor, complete in One
Volume, edited by the Rev.J.W. Warrer,
B.D. Square crown 8yo. 12s. 6d.

Historical and Critical Commen-
tary on the Old Testament; with a New
Translation. By M. M. Kaniscn, Ph.D
Vol. I. Genesis, 8yo. 18s. or adapted for the
General Reader, 12s. Vol. II. #'vedus, 15s.
or adapted for the General Reader, 12s.
Vol Ill. Leviticus, Part I. 15s. or adapted
for the General Reader, 8s. Vol. 1V. Levi-
ticus, Part II. 15s. or adapted for the
General Reader, 8s.

A Hebrew Grammar, with Exercises,
By the same. Part I. Outlines with Exer-
cises, 8vo. 12s. Gd. Key; 5s. Part Il. E2-
ceptional Forms and Constructions, 12s. 6d.

Manual of English Literature,
Historical and Critical: with a Chapter on
English Metres. By Tuomas ARNOLD, M.A.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

A Latin-English Dictionary. By
Joun T. Wuire, D.D. Oxon. and J. E.
Rippue, M.A. Oxon. Third Edition, re-
vised. 2 vols. 4to. pp. 2,128, price 42s.

White’s College Latin-English Diction-
ary (Intermediate Size), abridged from the
Parent Work for the use of University
Students. Medium 8vo. pp. 1,048, price 18s.

White’s Junior Student’s Complete
Latin-English and English-Latin Dictionary.
Revised Edition. Square 12mo. pp. 1,058,
price 12s.

f Exauisu-LaTIn, 5s. 6d.

Say - 1] a ae
‘eparatels s is
ss * “| Latin-Enauisn, 7s. 6d.

6 NEW WORKS pus isHeD By LONGMANS anv CO.

An English-Greek Lexicon, con-
taining all the Greek Words used by Writers
of good authority. By C.D. Yonex, B.A.
New Edition. 4to. 21s.

Mr. Yonge’s New Lexicon, En-
glish and Greek, abridged from his larger
work (as above). Square 12mo. 8s. 6d.

The Mastery of Languages; or,
the Art of Speaking Foreign Tongues
Tdiomatically. By THomAs PRENDERGAST,
late of the Civil Service at Madras. Second
_Edition. 8vo. 6s.

A Greek-English Lexicon. Com-
piled by H. G. Lipper, D.D. Dean of
Christ Church, and R. Scorr, D.D. Dean
of Rochester. Sixth Edition, Crown 4to.
price 36s.

A Lexicon, Greek and English,
abridged for Schools from LippELL and
Scorr’s Greek-English Lexicon. Fourteenth
Edition. Square 12mo. 7s. 6d.

A Practical Dictionary of the
French and English Languages. By Pro-
fessor Léon CoNTANSEAU, many years
French Examiner for Military and Civil
Appointments, &c. New Edition, carefully
revised. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Contanseau’s Pocket Dictionary,
French and English, abridged from the
Practical Dictionary, by the Author. New
Edition. 18mo. price 3s. 6d.

A Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
The Sanskrit words printed both in the
original Devanagari and in Roman letters ;
with References to the Best Editions of
Sanskrit Authors, and with Etymologies
and comparisons of Cognate Words chiefly
in Greek, Latin, Gothic, and Anglo-Saxon.
Compiled by T. Benrry. 8vo. 52s. 6d.

New Practical Dictionary of the
German Language; German-English, and
English-German. By the Rev. W. L.
BLAcKLEY, M.A. and Dr. Cart MArtry
FRIEDLANDER. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Miscellaneous Works and Popular Metaphysics.

The Essays and Contributions of
A. K. H. B. Uniform Editions :—

Recreations of a Country Parson.
First and Srconp SERIES, 3s. 6d. each.

The Commonplace Philosopher in
Town and Country. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Leisure Hours in Town; Essays Consola-
tory, Zsthetical, Moral, Social, and Domestic.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

The Autumn Holidays of a Country
Parson. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

The Graver Thoughts of a Country
Parson. First and Seconp SERIEs, crown
8vo. 3s. 6d. each.

Critical Essays of a Country Parson,
selected from Essays contributed to F’raser’s
Magazine. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d,

Sunday Afternoons at the Parish
Church of a Seottish University City.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Lessons of Middle Age, with some
Account of various Cities and Men.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

‘Counsel and Comfort Spoken from a.

City Pulpit. Crown 8vo. 3s, 6d.

Changed Aspects of Unchanged
Truths; Memorials of St. Andrews Sundays.
Crown 8vo. 3s, 6d.

Present-Day Thoughts; Memorials of
St. Andrews Sundays. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Short Studies on Great Subjects.
By JAMES ANTHONY Frovupe, M.A. late
Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. 2 vols.
8vo. 24s.

Lord Macaulay’s Miscellaneous
Writings :—

Lisrary EpITIon, 2 vols. 8vo. Portrait, 21s.

PEOPLE’s EDITION, 1 vol. crown 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Lord Macaulay’s Miscellaneous
Writings and Srrecues. Student’s Edition,
in One Volume, crown 8vo. price 6s.

The Rev. Sydney Smith’s Mis-
cellaneous Works, including Peter Plymley’s
Letters, Articles contributed to the Edin-
burgh Review, Letters to Archdeacon Single-
ton, and other Miscellaneous Writings, 1
vol. crown 8vo. 6s.

The Wit and Wisdom of the Rev.
Sypney Smiry; a Selection of the most
memorable Passages in his Writings and
Conversation. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

The Eclipse of Faith; or, a Visit toa
Religious Seeptic. By Henry Rogers.
Twelfth Edition. Fep. 8vo. 5s.

Defence of the Eclipse of Faith, by its
Author, Third Edition. Fep. 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Selections: from the Correspondence
of R. E. H. Greyson. By the same Author.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

NEW WORKS rvsutsuev py LONGMANS anp CO. i

Families of Speech, Four Lectures
‘delivered at the Royal Institution of Great
Britain. By the Rev. F. W. Farrar,
M.A. F.R.S. Post 8vo. with 2 Maps, 5s. 6d.

Chips from a German Workshop ;

being Essays on the Science of Religion,
and on Mythology, Traditions, and Customs.
By F. Max Miter, M.A. &e. Foreign
Member of the French Institute. 3 vols.
8vo. £2.

An Introduction to Mental Phi-
losophy, on the Inductive Method. By
J. D. Moret, M.A. LL.D. 8vo. 12s.

Elements of Psychology, containing the
Analysis of the Intellectual Powers. By
the same Author. Post 8yo. 7s. 6d.

The Secret of Hegel: being the
Hegelian System in Origin, Principle, Form,
and Matter. By JAmes Hurcutison Srir-
LING. 2 vols. 8vo, 28s.

Sir William Hamilton; being the Philo-
sophy of Perception: an Analysis. By the
same Author. 8vo. 5s.

The Senses and the Intellect.
By ALEXANDER Barn, LL.D. Prof. of Logic
in the Univ. of Aberdeen. Third Edition.
Svo. 15s.

Mental and Moral Science: a
Compendium of Psychology and Ethics.
‘By ALEXANDER Barn, LL.D.
Edition. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

The Theory of Practice; an Ethical
Inquiry. By SHApwortn H. Hopason.
2 vols. 8vo. price 24s.

Second |

Ueberweg’s System of Logic,
and History of Logical Doctrines. Trans-
lated, with Notes and Appendices, by T. M.
Linpsay, M.A. F.R.S.E. 8vo. price 16s.

The Philosophy of Necessity; or,.
Natural Law as applicable to Mental, Moral.
and Social Science. By CHartes Bray.
Second Edition. 8vo. 9s.

A Manual of Anthropology, or Science
of Man, based on Modern Research. By

| the same Author. Crown 8vo. 6s.

On Force, its Mental and Moral Corre-
lates. By the same Author. 8vo. 5s.

Time and Space; a Metaphysical
Essay. By SHapwortuH H. Hopcason,
8vo. price 16s.

The Discovery of a New World
of Being. By Grorce Tuomson. Post
Svo. 6s.

A Treatise on Human Nature;
being an Attempt to Introduce the Expe-
rimental Method of Reasoning into Moral
Subjects. By DAvin Hume. Edited, with
Notes, &c. by T. H. Green, Fellow, and

| ‘'T, H. Grose, late Scholar, of Balliol Col

lege, Oxford. [In the press.

Essays Moral, Political, and Li-
terary. By DAvip Humes. By the same
| Editors. [In the press.

* * The above will form a new edition of
| Davyip Hume’s Philosophical Works, com-
| plete in Four Volumes, but to be had in Two
separate Sections as announced.

Astronomy, Meteorology, Popular Geography, &c.

Outlines of Astronomy. By Sir
J. F. W. Herscuer, Bart. M.A. Eleventh
Edition, with 9 Plates and numerous Dia-
grams. Square crown 8vo. 12s.

Schellen’s Spectrum Analysis, in
its Application to Terrestrial Substances
and the Physical Constitution of the Hea-
venly Bodies. Translated by Jane and
C. LASSELL ; edited, with Notes, by W.
Hvueers, LL.D. F.R.S. With 13 Plates
(6 coloured) and 223 Woodcuts. 8yo. 28s.

The Sun; Ruler, Light, Fire, and
Life of the Planetary System. By RicHarp
A. Procror, B.A. F.R.A.S. With 10 Plates
(7 coloured) and 107 Woodcuts. Crown
8vo. price 14s.

Saturn and its System. By the same
Author. 8yvo. with 14 Plates, 14s.

C7

Navigation and Nautical As-
tronomy (Practical, Theoretical, Scientific)
for the use of Students and Practical Men.
By J. MERRIFIELD, F.R.A.S. and H.
Evers. 8vo. 14s.

Celestial Objects for Common
Telescopes. By T. W. Wexsp, M.A. F.R.A.S.
New Edition, revised and enlarged, with
Map of the Moon and Woodcuts. 16mo.
price 7s. 6d.

A New Star Atlas, for, the Library,
the School, and the{Observatory, in Twelve
Circular Maps (with Two Index Plates).
Intended as a Companion to ‘ Webb’s Celes-
tial Objects for Common Telescopes.’ With
a Letterpress Introduction on the Study of
the Stars, illustrated by 9 Diagrams. By
Ricuarp A. Procror, B.A. Hon. Sec
R.A.S. Crown 8yvo. 5s.

8

Bae

Other Worlds than Ours; ihe
Plurality of Worlds Studied under the
Light of Recent Scientific Researches. By
R. A. Procror, B.A. F.R.A.S. Second
Edition, revised and enlarged; with 14
Ilustrations. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

A General Dictionary of Geo-
graphy, Descriptive, Physical, Statistical,
and Historical ; forming a complete
Gazetteer of the World. By A. Keritn
Jounston, F.R.S.E. New Edition. §8vo.
price 31s. 6d.

Essays on Astronomy. By Ricnarp
A.Procror, B.A. Hon. See. R.A.S. Dedi-
eated, by permission, to the Astronomer-
Royal. 8vo. with 10 Plates and 20 Wood
Engravings, price 12s.

|

NEW WORKS pvprtisHep spy LONGMANS anp CO.

A Manual of Geography, Physical,
Industrial, and Political. By W. Hucues,
F.R.G.S. Prof. of Geog. in King’s Coll. and in
Queen’s Coll. Lond. With 6 Maps. Fep. 7s. 6d.

Maunder’s Treasury of Geogra-
phy, Physical, Historical, Descriptive, and
Political. Edited by W. Huanes, F.R.G.8.
With 7 Maps and 16 Plates. Fep. 6s.

The Public Schools Atlas of
Modern Geography. In Thirty-one Maps,
exhibiting clearly the more important
Physical Features of the Countries deli-
neated, and Noting all the Chief Places of
Historical, Commercial, and Social Interest.
Edited, with an Introduction, by the Rey.
G. Bur_er, M.A. Imperial quarto, price
os. Gd. sewed; 5s. cloth.

Natural History and Popular Seience.

Ganot’s Elementary Treatise on
Physics, Experimental and Applied, for the
use of Collegesand Schools. Translated and
Edited with the <Author’s sanction by
E. Atkryson, Ph.D. F.C.S. New Edition,
revised and enlarged; witha Coloured Plate
and 726 Woodcuts. Post 8vo. lds.

Text-Books of Science, Mechanical
and Physical. Edited by T. M. GoopEr®r,
M.A. The following may now be had,
price 8s. 6d. each :—

1. GoopEvVE’s Mechanism.

2. BLoxam’s Metals.

3. MiLier’s Inorganic Chemistry.

4, GrirFin’s Algebra and Trigonometry.

o. WAtTson’s Plane and Solid Geometry.

6. MAxwiELu’s Theory of Heat.

7. MERRIFIELD’s Technical Arithmetic
and Mensuration.

Dove’s Law of Storms, considered in
cennexion with the ordinary Movements of
the Atmosphere. Translated by R. H.
Scorr, M.A. T.C.D. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

The Correlation of Physical
Forces. By W. R. Grove, Q.C. V.P.R.S.
Fifth Edition, revised, and Augmented by a
Discourse on Continuity. 8vo. 10s. 6d.
The Discourse, separately, price 2s. 6d.

Natural Philosophy for General
Readers and Young Persons; being a Course
of Physies divested of Mathematical For-
mule, expressed in the language of daily
life, and illustrated with Explanatory
Figures, familiarly elucidating the Prin-
ciples and Facts. Translated and edited
from Ganot’s ‘ Cours de Physique,’ with the
Author’s sanction, by BE. Arkrxson, Ph.D.
F.C.S. Crown 8vo. with Woodeuts, 7s. 62.

|

Heat a Mode of Motion. By Pro-
fessor JoHN TYNDALL, LL.D.F.R.S. Fourth
Edition. Crown 8vo. with Woodcuts,
price 10s. Gd.

Sound: a Course of Eight Lectures de-
livered at the Royal Institution of Great
Britain. By Professor JoHN TYNDALL,
LL.D. F.R.S. New Edition, with Portrait
and Woodcuts. Crown 8yo. 9s.

Researches on Diamagnetism
and Magne-Crystallic Action; including
the Question of Diamagnetic Polarity. By
Professor TyNpDALL. With 6 Plates and
many Woodcuts. §Syo. 14s.

Wotes of a Course of Nine Lec-
tures on Light, delivered at the Royal
Institution, A.D. 1869. By Professor Tyn-
DALL. Crown &Svo. ls. sewed, or Is. 6d.
cloth.

Notes of a Course of Seven Lec-
tures on Electrical Phenomena and Theories,
delivered at the Royal Institution, A.p. 1870.
By Professor TynpDALL. Crown 8yvo. 1s.
sewed, or ls. 6d. cloth.

A Treatise on Electricity, in
Theory and Practice. By A. De La Rrvx,
Prof. in the Academy of Geneva. Trans-
lated by C. V. WALKER, F.R.S. 3 vols.
8vo. with Woodcuts, £3. 13s.

Fragments of Science.
TynDALL, LL.D. -F.RS.
8vo. price 14s.

Light Science for Leisure Hours;
a Series of Familiar Essays on Scientific
Subjects, Natural Phenomena, &c. By
R. A. Procror, B.A. F.R.A.S. Crown 8vo.
price 7s. 6d.

By Joun
Third Edition.

NEW WORKS pvsuisHeD By LONGMANS anv CO.

B

nee

Light: its Influence on Life and Health.

By Forses Winsiow, M.D. D.C.L. Oxon.
(Hon.) Fep. 8vo. 6s.

Van Der Hoeven’s Handbook of
ZooLtocy. Translated from the Second
Dutch Edition by the Rev. W. Cuark,
M.D. F.R.S. 2 vols. 8vo. with 24 Plates of
Figures, 60s.

Professor Owen’s Lectures on
the Comparative Anatomy and Physiology
of the Invertebrate Animals. Second
Edition, with 235 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

The Comparative Anatomy and
Physiology of the Vertebrate Animals. By
RicHaArp OweEN, F.R.S. D.C.L. With
1,472 Woodcuts. 3 vols. 8vo. £3 138s. 6d.

Kirby and Spence’s Introduction
to Entomology, or Elements of the Natural
History of Insects. Crown 8vo. 5s.

Homes without Hands; a Descrip-
tion of the Habitations of Animals, classed
according to their Principle of Construction.
By Rev. J. G. Woop, M.A. F.L.S. With
about 140 Vignettes on Wood. 8vo. 21s.

Strange Dwellings; a Description
of the Habitations of Animals, abridged
from ‘Homes without Hands.’ By J. G.
Woop, M.A, F.L.S. With a New Frontis-
piece and about 60 other Woodcut Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Bible Animals; a Description of every
Living Creature mentioned in the Scrip-
tures, from the Ape to the Coral. By
the Rev. J. G. Woop, M.A. F.L.S. With
about 100 Vignettes on Wood. 8vo., 21s.

The Harmonies of Nature and
Unity of Creation. By Dr. G. Hartwic.
8vo. with numerous Illustrations, 18s.

The Sea and its Living Wonders. By
the same Author. Third Edition, enlarged.
8vo. with many Illustrations, 21s.

The Tropical World. By the same Author.
With 8 Chromoxylographs and 172 Wood-

cuts. 8vo. 21s.

The Subterranean World. By the same
Author. With 3 Maps and about 80 Wood-
cut Illustrations, including 8 full size of
page. 8vo. price 21s.

The Polar World: a Popular Description of
Man and Nature in the Arctic and Antarctic
Regions of the Globe. By the same Author.
With 8 Chromoxylographs, 3 Maps, and 85
Woodeuts. 8yo. 21s.

Insects at Home; a Popular Ac
count of British Insects, their Structure,
Habits, and Transformations, By the
Rey. J. G. Woop, M.A. F.L.S. With
upwards of 700 Illustrations engraved on
Wood, 1 coloured and 21 full size of page.
8vo. 21s,

The Origin of Civilisation and
the Primitive Condition of Man; Mental
and Social Condition of Savages. By Sir
Joun Luspock, Bart. M.P. F.R.S. Secerd
Edition, revised, with 25 Woodcuts. Swe.
price 16s.

The Primitive Inhabitants of
Scandinavia. Containing a Description ef
the Implements, Dwellings, Tombs, and
Mode of Living of the Savages in the Nerth
of Europe during the Stone Age. By SyEx
Niusson. 8vo. Plates and Woodcuts, 18s.

A Familiar History of Birds.
By E. Sranuey, D.D. late Lord Bishop
Norwich. Fep. with Wocdcuts, 3s. 6d.

Maunder’s Treasury of Natural
History, or Popular Dictionary of Zoology.
Revised and corrected by T. 8S. Corsows,
M.D. Fep. with 900 Woodcuts, 6s.

The Elements of Botany fot
Families and Schools, Tenth Edition, re~
vised by Tuomas Moore, F.LS. cp.
with 154 Woodcuts, 2s. 6d.

The Treasury of Botany, or
Popular Dictionary of the Vegetable King~
dom ; with which is incorporated a Glos~
sary of Botanical Terms. Edited by
J. LiInDiey, F.R.S. and T. Moors, F.L&.
Pp. 1,274, with 274 Woodeuts and 20 Steel
Plates. Two Parts, fep. 8vo. 12s.

The Rose Amateur’s Guide. By

Tuomas Rivers. New Edition. Fep. 4s.

Loudon’s Encyclopsedia of Plants;
comprising the Specific Character, Descrip-
tion, Culture, History, &c. of all the Plants
found in Great Britain. With upwards of
12,000 Woodcuts. 8vo. 42s.

Maunder’s Scientific and .Lite«
rary Treasury; a Popular Encyclopaedia o€
Science, Literature, and Art. New Edition,
in part rewritten, with above 1,000 new
articles, by J. Y. Jonnson. ep. 6s.

A Dictionary of Science, Litera«
ture, and Art. Fourth Edition, re-edited
by the late W. T. Branpe (the Author)
and GrorGE W. Cox, M.A. 3 vols, mediuna
Svo. price 63s. cloth.

10 NEW WORKS pvupnuisHep py: LONGMANS anp CO.

bd

Chemistry, Medicine, Surgery, and the Allied Sciences.

A Dictionary of Chemistry and
the Allied Branches of other Sciences. By

’ Henry Watts, F.C.S. assisted by eminent
Scientific and Practical Chemists. 5 vols.
medium 8vo. price £7 3s.

Supplement; bringing the Record of Chemical

' Discovery down to the end of the year 1869 ;
including also several Additions to, and
Corrections of, former results which have
appeared in 1870 and 1871. By the same
Author, assisted by eminent Scientific and
Practical Chemists, Contributors to the
Original Work. 8vo. 31s. 6d.

Researches in Molecular Physics
by Means of Radiant Heat; a Series of
Memoirs collected from the Philosophical
Transactions. By Jonn Tynpau1, LL.D.
B.R:S. 1 vol. 8vo. [ In the press.

Elements of Chemistry, Theore-
tical and Practical By WitiiAm A,
Minuer, M.D. LL.D. Professor of Chemis-
try, King’s College, London. Fourth Edi-
tion. 5 vols. 8vo. £3.

Part I. Cuemicau Puysics, 15s.
Part II. INorGANIC CHEMISTRY, 21s.
Part III. Orcanic CHmmistry, 24s.

A Course of Practical Chemistry,
for the use of Medical Students. By
W. Opuinc, M.B.F.R.S. New Edition, with
70 new Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Outlines of Chemistry; or, Brief
Notes of Chemical Facts. By the same
Author. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Lectures on Animal Chemistry Delivered
at the Royal College of Physicians in 1865.
By the same Author. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d.

Select Methods in Chemical
Analysis, chiefly Inorganic. By WILLIAM
Crookes, F.R.S. With 22 Woodcuts.
Crown 8vo. price 12s. 6d.

Chemical Notes for the Lecture
Room. By Tuomas Woop, F.C.S, 2 vols.
erown 8vo. I. on Heat, &c. price 5s.
T¥. on the Metals, price ds.

The Diagnosis, Pathology, and
Treatment of Diseases of Women; including
the Diagnosis of Pregnancy. By GrarLy
Hewitt, M.D. &c. President of the Obste-
trical Society of London. Second Edition,
‘enlarged; with 116 Woodcuts. 8vo. 24s.

On the Surgical Treatment of
Children’s Diseases. By T. Hotmus, M.A.
&c. late Surgeon to the Hospital for Sick
Children. Second Edition, with 9 Plates
and 112 Woodcuts. 8vo. 21s.

Lectures on the Diseases of In-
fancy and Childhood. By CHArLes WEsT,
M.D. &c. Fifth Edition. 8vo. 16s.

On Some Disorders of the Ner-
vous System in Childhood. Being the
Lumleian Lectures delivered before the
Royal. College of Physicians in March 1871.
By CHaruEs West, M.D. Crown 8vo. 5s.

Lectures on the Principles and
Practice of Physic. By Sir Toomas WaAt-
son, Bart. M.D. Physician-in-Ordinary to
the Queen. Fifth Edition, thoroughly re-
vised. 2 vols. 8vo. price 36s.

Lectures on Surgical Pathology.
By Sir JAmMes PAGcEt, Bart. F.R.S. Third
Edition, revised and re-edited by the Author
and Professor W. TuRNER, M.B. 8vo. with
131 Woodcuts, 21s.

Cooper’s Dictionary of Practical
Surgery and Encyclopedia of Surgical
Science. New Edition, brought down to
the present time. By S. A. LANE, Surgeon to
St. Mary’s Hospital, &c. assisted by various
Eminent Surgeons. Vou. II. 8yo. com-
pleting the work. [ In the press.

On Chronic Bronchitis, especially
as connected with Gout, Emphysema, and
Diseases of the Heart. By E. HeEADLAM
GREENHOW, M.D. F.R.C.P. &c. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

The Climate of the South of
France as Suited to Invalids ; with Notices
of Mediterranean and other Winter Sta-
tions. By C. T. WiiutAms, M.A. M.D.
Oxon. Physician to the Hospital for Con-
sumption at Brompton. Second Edition.
Crown. 8vo. 6s.

Pulmonary Consumption; its
Nature, Varieties, and Treatment: with an
Analysis of One Thousand Cases to exem-
plify its Duration. By C. J. B. Wi~u1AMs,
M.D. F.R.S. and C. T. WiuurAMs, M.A.
M.D. Oxon. Physicians to the Hospital for
Consumption at Brompton. Post 8vo.
price 10s. 6d.

Anatomy, Descriptive and Sur-
gical By Henry Gray, F.R.S. With
about 410 Woodcuts from Dissections. Fifth
Edition, by T. Houmzs, M.A. Cantab. With
a New Introduction by the Editor. Royal
8vo. 28s.

The House I Live in; or, Popular
Illustrations of the Structure and Functions
of the Human Body. Edited by T. G. Girtin.
New Edition, with 25 Woodcuts, 16mo.
price 2s. 6d,

NEW WORKS pvus.isHeD sy LONGMANS anp CO. i

A System of Surgery, Theoretical
and Practical, in Treatises by Various
Authors. Edited by T. Hotes, M.A. &c.
Surgeon and Lecturer on Surgery at St.
George’s Hospital, and Surgeon-in-Chief to
the Metropolitan Police. Second Edition,
thoroughly revised, with numerous Illus-
trations. 5 vols. 8vo. £5 ds.

Clinical Lectures on Diseases of
the Liver, Jaundice, and Abdominal Dropsy.
By C. Murcuison, M.D. Physician to the
Middlesex Hospital. Post 8vo. with 25
Woodcuts, 10s. 6d.

Physiological Anatomy and Phy-
siology of Man. By the late R. B. Topp,
M.D. F.R.S. and W. Bowman, F.R.S. of
King’s College. With numerous Illustra-
tions. Vor. II. 8vo. 25s.

Vou. I. New Edition by Dr. Lionet S.
BEALE, F.R.S. in course of publication,
with numerous Illustrations. Parts I
and II. price 7s. 6d. each.

Outlines of Physiology, Human
and Comparative. By Jonn MarsHattr,
F.R.C.S. Professor of Surgery in University
College, London, and Surgeon to the Uni-
versity College Hospital. 2 vols. crown 8vo.
with 122 Woodcuts, 32s.

Copland’s Dictionary of Practical
Medicine, abridged from the larger work,
and throughout brought down to the pre-
sent state of Medical Science. 8vo. 36s.

Dr. Pereira’s Elements of Materia
Medica and Therapeutics, abridged and
adapted for the use of Medical and Phar-
maceutical Practitioners and Students; and
comprising all the Medicines of the British
Pharmacopeeia, with such others as are
frequently ordered in Prescriptions or re-
quired by the Physician, Edited by Pro-
fessor BentTLeEy, F.L.S. &e. and by Dr.
Repwoop, F.C.S. &e. With 125 Woodcut
Illustrations. 8vo. price 25s.

The Fine Arts, and Illustrated Hditions.

In Fairyland; Pictures from the EIf-
World. By Ricuarp DoyLr. With a
Poem by W. ALLINGHAM. With Sixteen
Plates, containing Thirty-six Designs
printed in Colours. Folio, 31s. 6d.

Albert Durer, his Life and
Works ; including Autobiographical Papers
and Complete Catalogues. By WILLIAM
B. Scorr. With Six Etchings by the
Author and other Illustrations. 8vo. 16s.

Half-Hour Lectures on the His-
tory and Practice of the Fine and Orna-
mental Arts. By. W. B. Scorr. Second
Edition. Crown 8yo. with 50 Woodcut
Illustrations, 8s. 6d.

The Chorale Book for England:
the Hymns Translated by Miss C. W1nK-
worTH; the Tunes arranged by Prof. W.
8. Bennett and Orro GoLpsonMipT.
Fep. 4to. 12s. 6d.

The New Testament, illustrated with
Wood Engravings after the Early Masters
chiefly of the Italian School. Crown 4to.
63s. cloth, gilt top ; or £5 5s. morocco.

The Life of Man Symbolised by
the Months of the Year in their Seasons
and Phases. Text selected by RicuHarp
Picot. 25 Illustrations on Wood from
Original Designs by Jonn LEIGHTON,
F.S.A. Quarto, 42s.

Cats’ and Farlie’s Moral Em-
blems; with Aphorisms, Adages, and Pro-
verbs of all Nations: comprising 121 Ilus-
trations on Wood by J. LeiaurTon, F.S.A.
with an appropriate Text by R. Picor.
Imperial 8yo. 31s. 6d.

Sacred and Legendary Art. By
Mrs. JAMESON. 6 vols. square crown §vo.
price £5 15s. 6d. as follows :—

Legends of the Saints and Martyrs.
New Edition, with 19 Etchings and 187
Woodcuts. 2 vols. price 51s. 6d.

Legends of the Monastic Orders. New
Edition, with 11 Etchings and 88 Woodcuts.
1. vol. price 21s,

Legends of the Madonna. New Edition,
with 27 Etchings and 165 Woodcuts. 1
vol. price 21s,

The History of Our Lord, with thaf of His
Types and Precursors. Completed by Lady
EASTLAKE. Revised Edition, with 13
Etchings and 281 Woodcuts. 2 vols.
price 42s.

Lyra Germanica, the Christian Year.
Translated by CATHERINE WINKWORTH,
with 125 Ilustrations on Wood drawn by
J. LEIGHTON, F.S.A. Quarto, 21s.

Lyra Germanica. the Christian Life.
Translated by CATHERINE WINKWORTH ;
with about 200 Woodcut Illustrations by
J. Leiauron, F.8.A. and other Artists,
Quarto, 21s.

12 NEW WORKS pvpsuisnED By LONGMANS anp CO.

The Useful Arts, Manufactures, §c.

Gwilt’s Encyclopedia of Archi-
tecture, with above 1,600 Woodcuts. Fifth
Idition, with Alterations and considerable
Additions, by Wyarr PApworrH. 8vo.
price 52s. 6d.

A Manual of Architecture: being
a Concise History and Explanation of the
principal Styles of European Architecture,
Ancient, Medieval, and Renaissance ; with
their Chief Variations and a Glossary of
Technical Terms. By Tuomas Mircnertr.
With 150 Woodcuts. Crown 8yo. 10s. 6d.

History of the Gothic Revival;
an Attempt to shew how far the taste for
Medieval Architecture was retained in
England during the last two centuries, and
has been re-developed in the present. By
C. L. EasruaAkr, Architect. With 48
Illustrations (86 full size of page). Im-
perial 8yo. price Sls. Gd.

Hints on Household Taste in
Furniture, Upholstery, and other Details.
By Cartes L. EaAstitaKxe, Architect.
Second Edition, with about 90 Illustrations.
Square crown 8vo. 18s,

Lathes and Turning, Simple, Me-
chanical, and Ornamental. By W. Henry
Norrucotr. With about 240 Mlustrations
on Steel and Wood. 8vo. 18s.

Principles of Mechanism, designed
for the use of Students in the Universities,
and for Engineering Students generally.
By R. Wits, M.A. F.R.S. &c. Jacksonian
Professor in the Univ. of Cambridge. Second
Edition ; with 374 Woodcuts. 8vo. 18s,

Handbook of Practical Tele-
graphy. By R. $8. Currey, Memb. Inst.
C.E. Engineer-in-Chief of Telegraphs to
the Post-Office. Fifth Edition, revised and
enlarged ; with 118 Woodcuts and 9 Plates.
8vo. price 14s.

Ure’s Dictionary of Arts, Manu-
factures, and Mines. Sixth Edition, re-
written and greatly enlarged by Robert
Hunt, F.R.S. assisted by numerous Con-
tributors. With 2,000 Woodcuts, 3 vols.
medium 8yo. £4 14s. 6d.

Catechism of the Steam Engine,
in its various Applications to Mines, Mills,
Steam Navigation, Railways, and Agricul-
ture. By Joun Dourne, C.E. New Edi-
tion, with 89 Woodcuts. Fep. 6s,

Encyclopedia of Civil Engineer-
ing, Historical, Theoretical, and Practical,
By E. Cresy, C.E. With above 3,000
Woodcuts. 8vo. 42s.

Treatise on Mills and Millwork.
By Sir W. Farrzarrey, Bart. F.R.S. New
Edition, with 18 Plates and 322 Woodcuts.
2 vols. 8vo. 32s.

Useful Information for Engineers. By
the same Author. Fist, Seconp, and
Tuirp SERIES, with many Plates and
Woodcuts. 3 vols. crown 8vo. 10s. 6d. each.

The Application of Cast and Wrought
Iron to Building Purposes. By the same
Author. Fourth Edition, with 6 Plates and
118 Woodcuts. 8vo. 16s.

Iron Ship Building, its History
and Progress, as comprised in a Series of
Experimental Researches. By Sir W. Fatr-
BAIRN, Bart. F.R.S. With 4 Plates and
130 Woodcuts, 8yo. 18s.

A Treatise on the Steam Engine,
in its various Applications to Mines, Mills,
Steam Navigation, Railways, and Agri-
culture. By J. Bourny, C.E. New Edition;
with Portrait, 37 Plates, and 546 Woodcuts.
Ato. 42s.

Recent Improvements in the
Steam-Engine. - By Joun Bourne, C.E.
New Edition, including many New Ex-
amples, with 124 Woodeuts. Fep, 8vo. 6s.

Bourne’s Examples of Modern
Steam, Air, and Gas Engines of the most
Approved Types, as employed for Pumping,
for Driving Machinery, for Locomotion,
and for Agriculture, minutely and prac-
tically described. In course of publication,
to be completed in Twenty-four Parts, price
2s. Gd. each, forming One Volume, with
about 50 Plates and 400 Woodcuts.

A Treatise on the Screw Pro-
peller, Screw Vessels, and Screw Engines,
as adapted for purposes of Peace and War.
By Joun Bourne, C.E. Third Edition,
with 54 Plates and 287 Woodeuts. Quarto,
price 63s.

Handbook of the Steam Engine.
By Joun Bourne, C.E. forming a Key to
the Author’s Catechism of the Steam Engine,
With 67 Woodcuts. Fep. 9s.

A History of the Machine-
Wronght Hosiery and Lace Manufactures.
By WittraM FELK, F.L.S. F.S.S. With
several Illustrations, Royal 8yo. 21s.

NEW WORKS pvus.isuEp br LONGMANS anp CO.

13

Mitchell’s Manual of Practical
Assaying. Third Edition for the most part
re-written, with all the recent Discoveries
incorporated. By W. Crooxrs, F.R.S.
With 188 Woodcuts. 8yvo. 28s.

The Art of Perfumery ; the History
and Theory of Odours, and the Methods of
Extracting the Aromas of Plants. By Dr.
Presse, F.C.S. Third Edition, with 53
Woodeuts. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Bayldon’s Art of Valuing Rents
and Tillages, and Claims of Tenants upon
Quitting Farms, both at Michaelmas and
Lady-Day. Eighth Edition, revised by
J.C. Morton. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

On the Manufacture of Beet-
toot Sugar in England and Ireland. By
WiLitAM Crookes, F.R.S. With 11 Wood-
cuts. 8yo. 8s. 6d.

|
|
|
|
|

Practical Treatise on Metallurgy,
adapted from the last German Edition ot

Professor Kuerw’s Metallurgy by W.
Crooxrs, F.R.S. &c. and E. Réurte,
Ph.D. M.E. 3 vols. 8vo. with 625 Wood-

cuts, price £4 19s.

Loudon’s Encyclopedia of Agri-
culture: comprising the Laying-out, Im-
provement, and Management of Landed
Property, and the Cultivation and Economy
of the Productions of Agriculture. With
1,100 Woodeuts. 8vo. 21s.

Loudon’s Encyclopedia of Gardening:
comprising the Theory and Practice of

Horticulture, Floriculture, Arboriculture,
and Landscape Gardening. With 1,000
Woodeuts. 8vo. 21s.

Religious and Moral Works.

Authority and Conscience; al'ree
Debate on the Tendency of Dogmatic
Theology and on the Characteristics of
Faith. Edited by Conway Monren. Post
Syo. 7s. 6d.

Reasons of Faith ; or, the Order of the
Christian Argument Developed and Ex-
plained. By the Rev. G.S. Drew, M.A.
Second Edition, revised and enlarged. Fep.
Svo. 6s.

Christ the Consoler; a Book of Com-
fort for the Sick. With a Preface by the
tight Rey. the Lord Bishop of Carlisle.
Small 8vo. 6s.

The True Doctrine of the Eucha-
rist. By Tuomas S. L. Vocay, D.D.
Canon and Prebendary of Chichester and
Rural Dean. 8vo. 18s.

The Student’s Compendium of
the Book of Common Prayer; being Notes
Histcrical and Explanatory of the Liturgy
of the Church of England. By the Rev. H.,
ALLDEN NAsH. Fep. 8vo. price 2s. 6d,

Synonyms of the Old Testament,
their Bearing on Christian Faith and Prac-
tice. By the Rey. Rosperr B. Gimp e-
stone, M.A. 8vo. price 15s.

Fundamentals; or, Bases of Belief
concerning Man and God: a Handbook of
Mental, Moral, and Religious Philosophy.
By the Rey. T. Grirrirn, M.A. 8vo.
price 10s. 6d.

An Introduction to the Theology
of the Church of England, in an Exposition
of the Thirty-nine Articles. By the Rey.
T. P. Bourrser, LL.D. Fep. 8vo. price 6s.

|

Christian Sacerdotalism, viewed
from a Layman’s standpoint or tried by
Holy Scripture and the Early Fathers;_.
with a short Sketch of the State of the
Church from the end of the Third to the
teformation in the beginning of the Six-
teenth Century. By Jonny Jarvine, M.A.
LL.D. 8vo. 8s. 6d.

Prayers Selected from the Col-
lection of the late Baron Bunsen, and
Translated by CATHERINE WINKWORTH.
Parr I. For the Family. Part II. Prayers

and Meditations for Private Use. I'cp.
8vo. price 3s. 6d.
Churches and their Creeds. By

the Rey. Sir Purtie Perrine, Bart. late
Scholar of Trin. Coll. Cambridge, and
University Medallist. Crown 8vo, 10s. 6d.

The Truth of the Bible; Evidence
from the Mosaic and other Records of
Creation; the Origin and Antiquity of
Man; the Science of Scripture; and from
the Archeology of Different Nations of the
Earth. By the Rev. B. W. Savitz, M.A.
Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Considerations on the Revision.
of the English New Testament. By C. J.
Exvuicorr, D.D. Lord Bishop of Gloucester
and Bristol. Post 8vo. price 5s.6d,

An Exposition of the 39 Articles,
Historical and Doctrinal. By E. HAroLp
Browne, D.D. Lord Bishop of Ely. Ninth
Edition. 8vo. 16s.

Examination-Questions on
Browne’s Exposition of the Articles.
the Rev. J. Gorter, M.A. Fep. 3s. 6d.

Bishop
By’

14 NEW WORKS pusuisurp ny LONGMANS aAnp CO.

The Voyage and Shipwreck of
St. Paul; with Dissertations on the Ships
and Navigation of the Ancients. By JAmEs
Smiru, F.R.S. Crown 8yo. Charts, 10s. 6d.

The Life and Epistles of St.
Paul. By the Rev. W. J. ConyBEARE,
M.A. and the Very Rev. J. 8. Howson,
D.D. Dean of Chester. Three Editions :—

LipraAry Eprrion, with all the Original
Tilustrations, Maps, Landscapes on Steel,
Woodeuts, &e. 2 vols. 4to. 48s.

INTERMEDIATE EpITIon, with a Selection
of Maps, Plates, and Woodcuts. 2 vols.
square crown 8yvo. 31s. 6d.

SruDENT’s Epirron, revised and con-
densed, with 46 Illustrations and Maps. 1
vol. crown 8vo. 9s.

Hividence of the Truth of the
Christian Religion derived from the Literal
Fulfilment of Prophecy. By ALEXANDER
Keiru, D.D. 87th Edition, with numerous
Plates, in square 8vo. 12s. 6d.; also the
39th Edition, in post 8vo. with 5 Plates, 6s.

‘The History and Destiny of the World
and of the Church, according to Scripture.
By the same Author. Square 8vo. with 40
Illustrations, 10s.

The History and Literature of
the Israelites, according to the Old Testa-
ment and the Apocrypha. By C. Dr
Rotruscuitp and A, DE RorTHscHILp.
Second Edition. 2 vols. crown 8vo. 12s. 6d.

Vou. I. The Historical Books, 7s. 6d.
Vou. Il. The Prophetic and Poetical Writings,
price 5s.

Abridged Edition, in 1 vol. fep. 8vo. 5s. 6d,

Ewald’s History of Israel to the
Death of Moses. ‘Translated from the Ger-
man. Edited, with a Preface and an Ap-
pendix, by RussELL MARTINEAU, M.A.
Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo. 24s. Vols. ILI.
and IV. edited by J. E. CARPENTER, M.A.
price 21s.

The See of Rome in the Middle
Ages. By the Rey. OswALp J. REICHEL,
B.C.L. and M.A. 8vo. 18s.

The Pontificate of Pius the Ninth;
being the Third Edition, enlarged and
continued, of ‘Rome and its Ruler.’ By
J. F. MAcuire, M.P. Post 8vo. Portrait,
price 12s. 6d.

Ignatius Loyola and the Early
Jesuits. By SrewArt Rose New Edition,
revised. 8vo. with Portrait, 16s.

An Introduction to the Study of
the New Testament, Critical, Exegetical,
and Theological. By the Rev. 8S. Davrpson,
D.D. LL.D. 2 vols. 8vo. 30s.

A Critical and Grammatical Com-
mentary on St. Paul’s Epistles. By C. J.
Exuicort, D.D. Lord Bishop of Gloucester
and Bristol. 8vo.

Galatians, Fourth Edition, 8s. 6d.

Ephesians, Fourth Edition, 8s. 6d.

Pastoral Epistles, Fourth Edition, 10s. 6d.

Philippians, Colossians, and Philemon,
Third Edition, 10s. 6d.

Thessalonians, Third Edition, 7s. 6d.

Historical Lectures on the Life of
Our Lord Jesus Christ: being the Hulsean
Lectures for 1859. By C.J. Exxircorr, D.D.
Lord Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol.
Fifth Edition. 8vo. 12s.

TheGreek Testament; with Notes,
Grammatical and Exegetical. By the Rey.
W. WesstTErR, M.A. and the Rev. W, F.
Wixkinson, M.A. 2 vols. 8vo. £2. 4s.

Horne’s Introduction to the Cri-
tical Study and Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures. Twelfth Edition ; with 4 Maps
and 22 Woodcuts. 4 vols. 8vo. 42s.

The Treasury of Bible Know-
ledge; being a Dictionary of the Books,
Persons, Places, Events, and other Matters
of which mention is made in Holy Scrip-
ture. By Rev. J. Ayre, M.A. With
Maps, 15 Plates, and numerous Woodcuts.
Fep. 8vo. 6s.

Every-day Scripture Difficulties
explained and illustrated. By J. E. Pres-
coTt, M.A. I. Matthew and Mark; Il. Luke
and John. 2 vols. 8vo. price 9s. each.

The Pentateuch and Book of
Joshua Critically Examined. By the Right
Rev. J. W. Cotenso, D.D. Lord Bishop of
Natal. Crown 8vo. price 6s.

Part VI. The Later Legislation of the
Pentateuch. 8vo. 24s.

The Formation of Christendom.
By T. W. Auuies. Parts I. and II. 8vo.
price 12s. each.

Four Discourses of Chrysostom,
chiefly on the parable of the Rich Man and
Lazarus. Translated by F. Atuen, B.A.
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d.

Bishop Jeremy Taylor’s Entire
Works; with Life by Bishop HEBER.
Revised and corrected by the Rey. C. P.
EpEN. 10 vols. £5. 5s.

England and Christendom. By
ARcHBISHOP MAnnine, D.D. Post 8vo.
price 10s. 6d.

NEW WORKS pus.iisHep sy LONGMANS anp CO. 15

Thoughts for the Age. By Exwasreru
M. Sewer, Author of ‘Amy Herbert.’
New Edition. Fcp. 8vo. price 5s.

Passing Thoughts on Religion. By the
same Author. Fep. 3s. 6d.

Self-examination before Confirmation.
By the same Author. 32mo. Is. 6d.

Thoughts for the Holy Week, for Young
Persons. By the same Author. New
Edition. Fep. 8vo. 2s.

Readings for a Month Preparatory to
Confirmation from Writers of the Early and
English Church. By the same. Fep. 4s.

Readings for Every Day in Lent, com-
piled from the Writings of Bishop JeErEMyY
Taytor. By the same Author. Fep. 5s.

Preparation for the Holy Communion;
the Devotions chiefly from the works of
JEREMY TAYLOR. Bythesame. 32mo. 3s.

Principles of Education drawn from

Nature and Revelation, and Applied to |

Female Education in the Upper Classes.
By the same Author. 2 vols. fep. 12s. 6d.

Singers and Songs of the Church,
being Biographical Sketches of the Hymn-
Writers in all the principal Collections;
with Notes on their Psalms and Hymns.
By JostAu Mruuer, M.A. Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.

‘Spiritual Songs’ for the Sundays
and Holidays throughout the Year. By
J. S. B. Monsetx, LL.D. Vicar of Egham
and Rural Dean. Fourth Edition, Sixth
Thousand. Fep. price 4s. 6d.

The Beatitudes. By the same Author.
Third Edition, revised. Fep. 3s. 6d.

His Presence not his Memory, 1855.
By the same Author, in memory of his Son.
Sixth Edition. 16mo. 1s.

Lyra Germanica, translated from the
German by Miss C. WinkwortH. First
SERIES, the Christian Year, Hymns for the
Sundays and Chief Festivals of the Church;
SeconD Series, the Christian Life. Fcp.
8vo. price 3s. 6d. each SERIES.

Endeavours after the Christian
Life; Discourses. By JAMES MARTINEAU.
Fourth Edition. Post 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Travels, Voyages, Sc.

How to See Norway. By Captain
J. R. CAMPBELL. With Mapand 5 Wood-
cuts. Fep. 8vo. price 5s.

Pau and the Pyrenees. By Count
Henry RusseEtt, Member of the Alpine
Club. With 2 Maps. Fcp. 8vo. price 5s.

Scenes in the Sunny South; In-
cluding the Atlas Mountains and the Oases
of the Sahara in Algeria. By Lieut.-Col.
the Hon. C. 8. VreREKER, M.A. Com-
mandant of the Limerick Artillery Militia.
2 vols. post 8vo. price 21s.

Hours of Exercise in the Alps.
By Joun TynpDAt1, LL.D., F.R.S. Second
Edition, with Seven Woodcuts by E. Whym-
per. Crown 8vo. price 12s. 6d.

‘Travels in the Central Caucasus
and Bashan, including Visits to Ararat and
Tabreez and Ascents of Kazbek and Elbruz.
By Doveras W. FRESUFIELD. Square
crown 8vo. with Maps, &c., 18s.

Cadore or Titian’s Country. By
JOSIAH GILBERT, one of the Authors of the
‘Dolomite Mountains.’ With Map, Fac-
simile, and 40 Illustrations. Imp.8vo. 351s. 6d

The Playground of Europe. By
LESLIE STEPHEN, late President of the
Alpine Club, With 4 Illustrations on Wood
by E. Whymper. Crown 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Westward by Rail; the New Route
to the East. By W. F. Rar. Second Edition,
Post 8vo, with Map, price 10s. 6d.

Zigzagging amongst Dolomites;
with more than 300 Illustrations by the
Author. By the Author of ‘ How we Spent
the Summer.’ Oblong 4to. price 15s.

The Dolomite Mountains, Excur-
sions through Tyrol, Carinthia, Carniola,
and Friuli, By J. Ginpert and G. C.
CuurcHityt, F.R.G.S. With numerous
Illustrations. Square crown 8vo. 21s.

How we Spent the Summer; or,
a Voyage en Zigzag in Switzerland and
Tyrol with some Members of the ALPINE
Crus. Third Edition, re-drawn. In oblong
4to. with about 300 Illustrations, 15s.

in Tyrol and Elsewhere.
By the
4to. with

Pictures
From a Family Sketch-Book.

same Author. Second Edition,
many Illustrations, 21s,

16 NEW WORKS pusuisnep By LONGMANS anp CO.

Beaten Tracks; or, Pen and Pencil
Sketches in Italy. By the Author of ‘ How
we spent the Summer.’ With 42 Plates of
Sketches. 8vo. 16s.

The Alpine Club Map of the Chain
of Mont Blanc, from an actual Survey in
1863 — 1864. By A. ApAms- REILLY,
F.R.G.S. M.A.C. In Chromolithography on
extra stout drawing paper 28in. x 17in.
price 10s. or mounted on canvas in a folding
‘case, 12s. 6d.

History of Discovery in our
Australasian Colonies, Australia, Tasmania,
and New Zealand, from the Earliest Date to
the Present Day. By Witi1Am Howirr.
2 vols. 8vo. with 8 Maps, 20s.

Visits to Remarkable Places:
Old Halls, Battle-Fields, and Scenes illus-
trative of striking Passages in English
History and Poetry. By the same Author.
2 vols. square crown 8vo. with Wood En-
gravings, 25s,

Guide to the Pyrenees, for the use
of Mountaineers. By CHARLES PACKE.
Second Edition, with Maps, &c. and Appenr-
dix. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

The Alpine Guide. By Joun Bait,
M.R.I.A. late President of the Alpine Club.
Post 8vo. with Maps and other Lilustrations.

Guide to the Eastern Alps, price 10s.Cd,

Guide to the Western Alps, including
Mont Blanc, Monte Rosa, Zermatt, &c.
price 6s. 6d

Guide to the Central Alps, including
all the Oberland District, price 7s. 6d.

Introduction on Alpine Travelling in
general, and on the Geology of the Alps,
price ls. Either of-the Three Volumes or
Parts of the Alpine Guide may be had with
this InrropuctTion prefixed, price 1s. extra

The Rural Life of England.
By WiturAm Howitt. Woodcuts by
Bewick and Williams. Medium 8yo. 12s. 6d.

Works of Fiction.

Popular Romances of the Middle
Ages, By Grorce W. Cox, M.A. Author
of ‘The Mythology of the Aryan Nations’
&e. and Eustace Hinton Jones, Crown
8vo. 10s. 6d.

Hartland Forest; a Legend of North
Devon. By Mrs. Bray, Author of ‘The
White Hoods,’ ‘ Life of Stothard,’ &c. Post
8yvo. with Frontispiece, 4s. 6d.

Novels and Tales. By the Right
Hon. Bexsamin Disraevi, M.P. Cabinet
Editions, complete in Ten Volumes, crown
8yvo. price 6s. each, as follows :—

| VENETIA, 6s.

Auroy, [xton, &e. 6s.
SyBit, 6s. Youne Dukpr, &e. 6s,
TANCRED, 6s, | VIVIAN GREY, 6s.

CONTARINI FLEMING, «ec. 6s.
HENRIETTA TEMPLE, 6s,

Loriratr, 6s.
ConrInGSBY, 6s.

A Visit to my Discontented Cou-
sin. Reprinted, with some Additions, from
Fraser's Magazine. Crown 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

Stories and Tales. By E. M. Sewe rt.
Comprising Amy Herbert; Gertrude; the
Earl’s Daughter ; the Experience of Life ;
Cleve Hall; Ivors; Katharine Ashton; Mar-
garet Percival; Laneton Parsonage; and
Ursula. The Ten,Works complete in Hight
Volumes, crown 8vo. bound in leather and
contained in a Box, price Two GUINEAS.

Our Children’s Story. By One of
their Gossips. By,the Author of ‘ Voyage
en Zigzag, &c. Small 4to. with Sixty
Illustrations by the Author, price 10s. 6d.

Cabinet Edition, in crown 8vo. of
Stories and Tales by Miss SrwELu :—

Amy HERBERT, 2s. 6d. | KATHARINE ASHTON,

GERTRUDE, 2s. 6d. 3s. 6d.
EARL’s DAUGHTER, | MARGARET PERCTI-
2s. 6d. NAL, 5s.

EXPERIENCE of Lirze,; LANETON PARSON-
2s. 6d. AGE, 3s. 6d.

CLEVE HALL, 38s. 6d. | Ursvwa, 4s. 6d.

Ivors, 3s. 6d.

A Glimpse of the World. Fep. 7s. 6d.

Journal of a Home Life. Post 8vo. 9s. 6.

After Life; aScequel to the ‘Journal of a Home
Life.’ Post 8vo. 10s. 6d.

The Giant ; a Witch’s Story for English
Boys. Edited by Miss Sewexu, Author of
‘Amy Herbert,’ &c. Fep. 8vo. price 5s.

Uncle Peter’s Fairy Tale for the XIXth
Century. By the same Author and Editor.

Fep. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Wonderful Stories from Norway,
Sweden, and Iceland. Adaptedand arranged
by Jut1a GoppArD. With an Introductory
Essay by the Rev. G. W. Cox, M.A, and
Six Illustrations, Square post 8vo. 6s.

NEW WORKS pvuslLisHED BY LONGMANS anp CO.

17

The Modern Novelist’s Library.
Each Work, in crown 8vo. complete in a
Single Volume :—

MELVILLE’s GLADIATORS, 2s. boards; 2s. 6d.
cloth.

———— Goon ror NorTHIne, 2s. boards;
2s. 6d. cloth.

—§—  Hormpy Hovse, 2s.
2s. 6d. cloth.

INTERPRETER, 2s. boards; 2s. 6d.

boards ;

cloth.

oe

KATE CovENTRY,
2s. 6d. cloth.

————— QUEEN’S MARIEs,
2s. 6d. cloth.

TROLLOPE’S WARDEN, ls. 6d.
cloth.

2s. boards ;

2s. boards;

boards; 2s.

———— BarcuHeEster Towers, 2s. boards;
2s. 6d. cloth.

BramMLEy-Moore’s Six SISTERS OF
VALLEYS, 2s. boards; 2s. 6d. cloth.

THE

Terne ; a Tale. By W.Srevart Trencu,
Author of ‘ Realities of Irish Life.’ Second
Edition. 2 vols. post 8vo, price 21s.

The Home at Heatherbrass; a
Tale. By the Author of ‘Everley.’? Fcp.
8vo. price 5s.

Becker’s Gallus ; or, Roman Scenes of
the Time of Augustus. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.
Becker’s Charicles: Illustrative of
Private Life of the Ancient Greeks. Post

8vo. 7s. 6d.

Talesof Ancient Greece. By Grorcr
W. Cox, M.A. late Scholar of Trin. Coll.
Oxford. Crown 8vo. price 6s. 5¢.

Cabinet Edition of Novels and
Tales by G. J. WHYTE MELVILLE :—

Diepy GRAND, 5s. Hormpy Hovss, 5s.

KATE COVENTRY, 5s \QUEEN’s MARIEs, 6s.

GENERAL BOwUNCE, 5s. THE INTERPRETER, dS.

Goop FoR Noriine, price 6s.

Poetry and The Drama.

A Vision of Creation; a Poem.
With an Introduction, Geological and Cri-
tical. By CutuBert Co_itixeGwoop, M.A.
end B.M. Oxon. F.L.S. &c. Author of
‘Rambles of a Naturalist on the Shores and
Waters of the China Seas’ &¢. Crown 8ve.
price 7s. 6d.

The Story of Gautama Buddha
and his Creed; an Epic. By Riciarp
Puitiips. Square fep. 8vo. 6s.

Ballads and Lyrics of Old France;
with other Poems.
Merton College, Oxford.
price 5s.

Songs of the Sierras.
Mitter. New Edition, revised by the
Author, Fep. 8vo. 6s.

Thomas Moore’s Poetical Works,
with the Author’s last Copyright Addi-
tions :— :

Shamrock Edition, price 3s. 6d.
People’s Edition, square cr. 8vo. 10s. 6d.
Library Edition, Portrait & Vignette, 14s.

Moore’s Lalla Rookh, Tenniel’s Edi-
tion, with 68 Wood Engravings from
Original Drawings and other Illustrations.
Fep. 4to. 21s.

Moore’s Irish Melodies, Maclise’s
Edition, with 161 Steel Plates from Original
Drawings. Super-royal 8vo. 51s. 6d.

Miniature Edition of Moore’s Irish
Melodies, with Maclise’s Illustrations (as

above), reduced in Lithography.
16mo. 10s. 6d.

Square fep. 8vo.

By Joaquin

By A. Lane, Fellow of |

| Southey’s Poetical Works, with

Imp. |

the Author’s last Corrections and copyright
Additions. Library Edition. Medium 8vo.
with Portrait and Vignette, 14s.

Lays of Ancient Rome; with Jury
and the Armada. By the Right Hon. Lorp
MAcAULAY. 16mo. 4s. 6d.

Lord Macaulay’s hays of Ancient
Rome. With 90 Illustrations on Wood,
Original and from the Antique, from
Drawings by G.Scnarr. Fep. 4to. 21s.

Miniature Edition of Lord Macaulay’s
Lays of Ancient Rome, with Scharf’s
Illustrations (as above) reduced in Litho-
graphy. Imp. 16mo. 10s. 6d.

Goldsmith’s Poetical Works, Hlus-
trated with Wood Engravings from Designs
by Members of the Ercuixe Cries. Imp.
16mo. 7s. 6d.

John Jerningham’s Journal. Fep.
8vo. price 3s. 6d,

The Mad War Planet, and other
Poems. By Wii~i1Am Howrrr, Author of
‘Visits to Remarkable Places,’ &c. Fep.
Svo. price 5s.

Eucharis; @ Poem. By I’. Recinatp
STATHAM (Francis Reynolds), Author of
‘Alice Rushton, and other Poems’ and
‘Glaphyra, and other Poems.’ Fep, 8vo.
price 3s. 6d.

Poems of Bygone Years. Edited
by the Author of ‘Amy Herbert.’ Fep.
8vo. 5s.

c

*

18 NEW WORKS rusuisuap By LONGMANS ann CO.

Poems, By Juan Incetow. Fifteenth

Edition. Fep. 8vo. ds.

Poems by Jean Ingelow. With
nearly 100 Illustrations by Eminent
Artists, engraved on Wood by DAwzreu
Brothers. Fep. 4to. 21s.

A Story of Doom, and other Poems.
By Juan InceLow. Third Edition, Fep.
price 5s.

Bowdler’s Family Shakspeare,
cheaper Genuine Edition, complete in 1 vol.
large type, with 86 Woodcut Illustrations,
price 14s. or in 6 pocket vols. 3s. 6d. each.

Horatii Opera, Library Edition, with
Copious English Notes, Marginal References.
and Various Readings. Edited by the Rev.
J. E. YoncEe, M.A. 8vo. 21s.

The Aineid of Virgil Translated into
English Verse. By Joun Contyeton, M.A.
Corpus Professor of Latin in the University
of Oxford. New Edition. Crown 8vo. 9s.

Works by Edward Yardley :—
FANTASTIC STORIES, fep. 3s. 6d.
MELUSINE and other PoEMs, fep. 5s.
Horace’s Opes translated into ENGLISH

VERSE, crown 8yo. 6s.
SUPPLEMENTARY STORIES and PoEMs,
fep. 3s, 6d.

Rural Sports &e.

Encyclopedia of Rural Sports ;
a Complete Account, Historical, Practical,
and Descriptive, of Hunting, Shooting,
Fishing, Racing, &c. By D. P. BLAINE.
With above 600 Woodcuts (20 from Designs
by Joun LEECH). $8vo. 21s.

The Dead Shot, or Sportsman’s Com-
plete Guide; a Treatise on the Use of the
Gun, Dog-breaking, Pigeon-shooting, &c.
By Marssman. Fep. with Plates, 5s.

A Book on Angling: being a Com-
plete Treatise on the Art of Angling in
every branch, including full Mlustrated
Lists of Salmon Flies. By FRANcis FRANCIS.
New Edition, with Portrait and 15 other
Plates, plain and coloured. Post 8vo. 1ds.

Wilcocks’s Sea-Fisherman: com-
prising the Chief Methods of Hook and Line
Fishing in the British and other Seas, a
glance at Nets, and remarks on Boats and
Boating. Second Edition, enlarged, with
80 Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 12s. 6d.

The Fly-Fisher’s Entomology.
By AurrepD Ronaups. With coloured
Representations of the Natural and Artifi-
cial Insect. Sixth Edition, with 20 coloured
Plates. 8vo. 14s.

The Book of the Roach. By Grr-

VILLE FENNELL, of ‘ The Field.’ Fep. 8vo.
price 2s. 6d,
Horses and Stables. By Colonel

F. Firzwyeram, XV. the King’s Hussars.
With 24 Plates of Woodcut Illustrations,
containing very numerous Figures. 8vo.15s.

The Ox, his Diseases and their Treat-
ment; with an Essay on Parturition in the
Cow. By J. R. Dosson, M.R.C.V.S. Crown
8vo. with Illustrations, 7s. 6d.

A Treatise on Horse-shoeing and
Laméness. By JoseEpH GAMGEE, Veteri-
nary Surgeon, formerly Lecturer on the
Principles and Practice of Farriery in the
New Veterinary College, Edinburgh. 8vo.,

_ with 55 Woodcuts, 15s.

Blaine’s Veterinary Art: a Treatise
on the Anatomy, Physiology, and Curative
Treatment of the Diseases of the Horse,
Neat Cattle, and Sheep. Seventh Edition,
revised and enlarged by C. Srezn. 8yo.
with Plates and Woodcuts, 18s.

Youatt on the Horse. Revised and
enlarged by W. Watson, M.R.C.V.S. 8vo.
with numerous Woodcuts, 12s. 6d.

Youatt on the Dog. (By the same Author.)
8vo. with numerous Woodcuts, 6s.

The Dog in Health and Disease
By Sronrnence. With 70 Wood En-
gravings. New Edition. Square crown.
Svo. 10s, 6d.

The Greyhound. By the same Authozs.
Revised Edition, with 24 Portraits of Grey—
hounds. Square crown 8vo. 10s. 6d;

The Horse’s Foot,and how to keep:
it Sound. By W. Mites, Esq. Ninth Edi+-
tion, with Illustrations. Imp. 8vo. 12s. 6d..

A Plain Treatise on Horse-shoeing. By
the same Author. Sixth Edition, post 8yvo..
with Iliustrations, 2s. 6d.

Stables and Stable Fittings. By the same. .
Imp. 8vo. with 13 Plates, 15s...

Remarks on Horses’ Teeth, addressed to
Purchasers. By the.same. Post 8xo. 1s. 6d.

NEW WORKS pvusuisurp py LOXNGMANS anp CO. 19

Works of Utility and General Information.

The Law of Nations Considered
as Independent Political Communities. By
Sir Travers Twiss, D.C.L. 2 vols. 8vo.
30s. or separately, PArr I. Peace, 12s.
Part II. War, 18s.

The Theory and Practice of
Banking. By Henry Dunnrxe MAcLEop,
M.A. Barrister-at-Law. Second IHdition.
entirely remodelled. 2 vols. 8vo. 30s.

M‘Culloch’s Dictionary, Prac-
tical, Theoretical, and Historical, of Com-
merce and Commercial Navigation. New
Edition, revised throughout and corrected
to the Present Time; with a Biographical
Notice of the Author. Edited by H. G.
RED, Secretary to Mr. M‘Culloch for many
years. 8vo. price 63s. cloth.

Modern Cookery for Private
Families, reduced to a System of Easy
Practice in a Series of carefully-tested Re-
ceipts. By ExizA Acton. Newly revised
and enlarged; with 8 Plates, Figures, and
150 Woodcuts. Fep. 6s.

A Practical Treatise on Brewing;
with Formule for Public Brewers, and In-
structions for Private Families. By W.
Buack. Fifth Edition. 8vo. 10s. 6d.

Maunder’s Treasury of Know-
ledge and Library of Reference: comprising
an English Dictionary and Grammar, Uni-
versal Gazetteer, Classical Dictionary,
Chronology, Law Dictionary, Synopsis of
the Peerage, Useful Tables, &c. Fep. 6s.

Chess Openings. By F. W. Lonemay,
Balliol College, Oxford. Fep. 8vo. 2s. 6d.

Hints to Mothers on the Manage-
ment of their Health during the Period of
Pregnancy and in the Lying-in Room. By
Tuomas Butt, M.D. » Fep. ds.

The Maternal Management of
Children in Health and Disease. By THomaAs
Buti, M.D. Fep..-5s.

Periodical
The Edinburgh Review, or Cri-

tical Journal, published Quarterly in Janu-
ary, April, July, and October. S8vo. price
6s. each Number.

Notes on Books: An Analysis of the
Works published during each Quarter by
Messrs. Lonemans & Co. The object is to
enable Bookbuyers to obtain such informa-
tion regarding the various works as is usu-
ally afforded by tables of contents and ex-
planatory prefaces. 4to. Quarterly. Gratis.

The Cabinet Lawyer; a Popular
Digest of the Laws of England, Civil,
Criminal, and Constitutional. Twenty-third
Edition, corrected and brought up to the
Present Date. Fep. 8vo. price 7s. 6d.

How to Nurse Sick Children;
containing Directions which may be found
of service to all who have charge of the
Young. By CHartes West, M.D. Second
Edition. Fcp. 8vo. 1s. 6d.

Wotes on Lying-In Institutions;
with a Proposal for Organising an Institu-
tion for Training Midwives and Midwifery
Nurses. By Fiorence NIGHTINGALE.
With 5 Plans. Square crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Wotes on Hospitais. By Frorence
NIGHTINGALE. Third Edition, enlarged ;
with 13 Plans. Post 4to. 18s.

Collieries and Colliers: a Handbook
of the Law and Leading Cases relating
thereto. By J. C. Fow.er, Barrister.
Second Edition. Fep. 8vo. 7s. 6d.

Coulthart’s Decimal Interest
Tables at Twenty-four Different Rates not
exceeding Five per Cent. Calculated for the
use of Bankers. To which are added Com-
mission Tables at One-eighth and One-
fourth per Cent. S8vo. 1ds.

Willich’s Popular Tables for As-
certaining the Value of Lifehold, Leasehold,
and Church Property, Renewal Fines, &c. ;
the Public Funds; Annual Average Price
and Interest on Consols from 1731 to 1867 ;
Chemical, Geographical, Astronomical,
Trigonometrical Tables, &c. Post 8vo. 10s.

Pewtner’s Comprehensive Speci-
fier; a Guide to the Practical Specification
of every kind of Building-Artificer’s Work :
with Forms of Building Conditions and
Agreements, an Appendix, Foot-Notes, and
Index. Edited by W. Youne, Architect.
Crown 8vo. 6s.

Publications.

Fraser’s Magazine. Edited by James
AntTHONY FrRoupE, M.A. New Series,
published on the Ist of each Month. 8vo.
price 2s. 6d. each Number.

The Alpine Journal; A Record of
Mountain Adventure and Scientific Obser-
vation. By Members of the Alpine Club.
Edited by Lestie STEPHEN. Published
Quarterly, May 31, Aug. 31, Nov. 30, Feb.
28. S8vo. price 1s. 6d. each Number.

20 NEW WORKS rvuntisnep nr LONGMANS anv CO.

ies.
when
fh

a

~ Knowledge for the Young.

TheStepping StonetoKnowledge:
Containing upwards of Seven Hundred
Questions and Answers on Miscellaneous
Subjects, adapted to the capacity of Infant
Minds. By a Morner. New Edition,
enlarged and improved. 18mo. price Is.

The Stepping Stone to Geography:
Containing several Hundred Questions and
Answers on Geographical Subjects. 18mo. 1s.

The Stepping Stone to English History:
Containing several Hundred Questions and
Answers on the History of England. 1s.

The Stepping Stone to Bible Know-
ledge: Containing several Hundred Ques-
tions and Answers on the Old and New
Testaments. 18mo. 1s.

The Stepping Stone to Biography:
Containing several Hundred Questions and
Answers on the Lives of Eminent Men and
Women. 18mo, 1s.

| Second Series of the Stepping

Stone to Knowledge: containing upwards
of Eight Hundred Questions and Answers
on Miscellaneous Subjects net contained in
the First Serres. 18mo. ls.

~ The Stepping Stoneto French Pronun-

ciation and Conversation : Containing seve-
ral Hundred Questions and Answers. By
Mr. P. SADLER. 18mo. 1s.

The Stepping Stone to English Gram-
mar: Containing several Hundred Questions
and Answers on English Grammar. By
Mr. P. SapLer. 18mo. 1s.

The Stepping Stoneto Natural History:
VERTEBRATE or BACKBONED ANIMALS.
Part I. Mammalia; Parv II. Birds, Rep-
tiles, Fishes. 18mo, 1s. each Part.

feNeD EX.

ActTon’s Modern Cookery....... SOC ODHEAC
ALLIES on Formation of Christendom ......
ALLEN’S Discourses of Chrysostom ......4.
PNIDING UO CIULUC) cece css cs crccerescesne :

RIGIIRTIAEEM recs Gos cere ccccccce seas
ARNOLD’s Manual of Enelish eierabure Ae
Authority and Conscience ........seee. ote

Autumn Holidays of a Country Parson ....
Ayke’s Treasury of Bible Knowledge......

Bacon's Essays by WHATELY ........0.. ‘
Life and Letters, by SPEDDING ..
emer OS closes scccs ss cece Stele css alee
Bain’s Mental and Moral Science ........
on the Senses and Intellect ..........

Batx’s Guide to the Central Alps..........
— Guide to the Western Alps ........

—— Guide to the Eastern Alps ........
BAYLpon’s Rents and Tillages .......eeee.
Beaten Tracks ....... MOG ae 6 a6 Riviere ea cists Se 6
BECKER’S Charicles and Gallus ..cceseuee :

BrnFeEy’s Sanskrit-English Dictionary ..
BERNARD on British Neutrality ...
PsteGm OU SISLOFICal Truth........sccccvees
BuAck’s Treatise on Brewing....... Se
BLACKLEY’s German-English Dictionar 7 Ac
BLAINE’s Rural Sports .. avoie atetenere
—— Veterinary Art 5 OUCH AEIOAIG
EMER BE SDIOUR IS cian gs eres ce’s chase oak wale
Bootn’s Saint-Simon..... HSRC nOOC
BOULTBEE on 89 Articles ........
BouRNE on Screw Propeller .........ssee0e
—— —’s Catechism of the Steam Engine..
Examples of Modern Engines ..
———— Handbook of Steam Engine ....
Treatise on the Steam Engine....
Improvements in the same..
BowD.LeEr’s Family SHAKSPEARE...
Boyrnp’s Reminiscences ......... saowbas eves
BraMiLey-Moore’s Six Sisters of the Valley
BRANDE’S Dictionary of Science, Literature,
FOCI RUE reie sii vic esis cesecg esos aces
BRAY’s Manual of Anthropology ...
——Philosophy of Necessity ....

eeeeene

eeeeee

MTIMELOEC Oar nic clc'sloisiere vleinie's 6. c.0.0 BAe
———(Mrs.) Hartland Forest meteors Scene
BRowNneE’s Exposition of the 39 Articles....
BRUNEL’S Life of BRUNEL ..... Rretereiete state’ ;

BUCKLE’S History of Civilisation .........
BULL’s Hints to Mothers...........
Maternal Management of Children.
BUNSEN’S God in History.........00.
SeeMIDEAVOES tics aisle cicleses oes ee
BURKE’S Vicissitudes of Families . ;
Buxrton’s Christian Church ...

Papiieh GAWYET: 5 ccriince sass yeasts. coe ssc
CAMPBREESINONWaVircsceseistets ccc seueieaces es
Carnota’s Memoirs of Pombal ........... 3
CATES’S Biographical Dictionary
— and Woopwarp’s Encyclopoedia
Cats and Faruir’s Moral Emblems ......
Changed Aspects of Unchanged Truths ....
CHESNEY’S Indian Polity .............00
Waterloo Campaign ..........
Chorale Book for England
Ghristit he OousOlelae es sie veers steerer ties es
CLOUGH S lives fromeb Utarches.. selene es
CoLENsO (Bishop) on Pentateuch and Book

OL JOSHUA tccesncieaaien ee cicesee serene
CoLLINGWooDb’s Vision of Creation ..... eee

Commonplace Philosopher in Town and
CountrYiny ces cede viens ts decissee dicts ye
CoNINGTON’S Translation of Virgil’s Aineid
CoNTANSEAU’S Two French Dictionaries ..
CoNYBEARE and)Howson’s Life and Epistles
Of. Sts Parlite eitieas coewinws etre vewteesees
CoopPEr’s Surgical Dictionary...........006
CoPpLannd’s Dictionary of Practical Medicine
CoUuLTHARTI’s Decimal Interest Tables ....
Counsel and Comfort from a City Pulpit ..
Cox’s (G. W.) Aryan Mythology ..........
— Talc of the Great Persian War
Tales of Ancient Greece ....
—-———and Jonus’s Popular Ro-
WAMCGS an ducnacetesennees ss aaeee ithe ts
Cresy’s Encyclopedia of Civil Engineering
Critical Essays of a Country Parson.

eeesee

CROOKES on Bect-Root Sugar..........06. -
—-—’s Chemical Analysis........ calsens’e
CuLLeEy’s Handbook of Telegraphy..... TAL

Cusack’s Student’s History of Ireland ....

D AvUBIGNE’s History of the Reformation in
the time Of CAT VING. «<<... cca ccceutessireet
Davipson’s Introdretion to New Testament
Dead Shot (The), by MARKSMAN
DE LA RIVE’s Treatise on Electricity ..... P
DeEnison’s Vice-Regal Life
DisRaELi’s Lord George Bentinck
INfevelsiande Tales cic seldecn ec ce ‘
DOBSONPOM CNG DO Xoerre cinicie:clelsieisieinieicters« ae, cale.c
Dove’s Law of Storms
DOV Ee PRIVY IBOG ms eosin ued cswtcastactes
Drew’s Reasons for Faith
Dyers City or Romes . ces csseanucounts Aceee

BAstracn's Gothic Revival o. vc ccscscsscan
Hints on Houschold Taste ...,
Edinburgh Review

Elements of Botany

Cees ereetececesreer ss ened o,

BO 6502650 (6. 61.8) .0, 3/60" 0 6:6°5 arae

i)
bo

NEW WORKS pusiisHeD ny LONGMANS anv CO.

ELLICOTT on New Testament Revision..
— ~’S Commentary on Ephesians ....
Galatians ~~...
——_—__—_—_——_—__——_-—— Pastoral Epist.
——_—_—_—_—_—__——- Philippians,&c.
—_____—_ Thessalonians
———_——’s Lectures on Life of Christ ....
EwALp’s History of Israel

— —_——_—__—_

FAITRBAIRN’s Application of Cast and
Wrought Iron to Building
—-——_——-_ Information for Engineers....
— Treatise on Mills and Millwork
Tron Shipbuilding ..
Farapay’s Life and Letters ..
FARRAR’S Chapters on Language ......++..
Families of Speech ....

FELKIN on Hosiery & Lace Manufactures...

eeeenecnees eeeeve

eeeeeeeonee

FENNEL’S Book of the Roach ..........065 A
FirTzwyGRAM on Horses and Stables ......
FowLeEr’s Collieries and Colliers .........
Francis’s Fishing: Bookiwsosseseers snas0cs
RRRASER'S Marazines. ccna onkle acscunan aa
FRESHFIELD’s Travels in the Caucasus ....
FROUDE’S History of England ..... ina

Short Studies

GAMGEE on Horse-Shoeing ...e.cssccvreece
Ganov’s Elementary Physics......... s tisiate
— Natural Spee aes ene
GIAWT (The) ...ceeceees
Girgent’s Cadore ra ork ehatebe eistahebaes Ratt
- and CHURCHILL’S Dothwvibes aa
GIRDLESTONE’S Bible Synonyms ....
GiETIn’s House I Live In
GLEDSTONE’S Life of WHITEFIELD .....
GopDARD’s Wonderful Stories ..
GOLDSMITH’S Poems, Illustrated .
Gooprve’s Mechanism..... sine
GrauaAm’s Autobiography of Minton. wees
— View of Literatureand Art ....
GRANT'S Ethics of Aristotle.......+eecseee :
Home, BO] tices 2% score siee tu ors e aces
Graver Thoughts of a Country Parson......
Gray’ SANAtOMY:...eccvcecvevesvevecsevesvecs
GREENHOW ON Bronchitis ....sssecvveseee
GrRiFrin’s Algebra and Trigonometry ....
GRIFFITH'S Fundamentals .
GROVE on Correlation of Physical Forces ..
GuRNEY’s Chapters of French History ....
Gwitt’s Encyclopedia of Architecture ....

aeas2e> 00080

eoeoeod

eeeeee

eooeeresesoe

HAMPDEN’s (Bishop) Memorials ....
Hare on Election of Representatives ......
Harrwie’s Harmonies of Nature..

Polar*World <.....< Mite cemicia ss
Sea and its Living Wonders....
— Subterranean World....... reais
Tropical” W Orla si... s s0.0 0.0 ee

HeERScHEL’s Outlines of Astronomy........
Hewitt on the Diseases of Women ..

Hopeson’s Time and Space.......... Rte store
Theory of Practice .......:0ce»
Hounann’s Recollections...... sate catentle —

Hourmes’s Surgical Treatment of Children..
————- System of Surgery ........eeee08
Home (The) at Heatherbrae

am alll el
NNOAWwWrMKOOCOAQnwahb

ex]

Horne’s Introduction to the Scriptures ..
How we Spent the Summer..... + oes alg al
Howitr’s Australian Discovery.........+++
Mad War Planet.....seseee.
Rural Life of England ..........
Visits to Remarkable Places ....
HUBNER'S Pope Sixtus ...¢.esyeeeneeeeneae
HUGHES’s Manual of Geography ........+5
ELUBER'S Hissaye vc is avesceness ae een oie sitesate

Treatise on Human Nature..

———.

——

InNE’s History of Rome enescnoes aun
INGELOW’S Poems ...... oe 0 obe-es alan
i aaa acer Story. of Doomis s:.\tsa¢senkineen

JAMESON’s Legends of Saintsand Martyrs..

Legends of the Madonna......
—— Legends of the Monastic Orders

Legends of the Saviour........
JARDINE’S Christian Sacredotalism
JOHN JERNINGHAM’S Journal ...seecesees
JOHNSTON’s Geographical Dictionary ......
JONES’S Royal Institution .....

—

eeerereeees

KAtLiscnH’s Commentary on the Bible......
Hebrew Grammar...... eisiplaeivints

KEITH on Destiny of the World......+sse0s
Fulfilment of Prophecy..........
Metallurgy, by CrookEs and
RGIRIGH ames sistas
KiIRsBy and SPENCE’ § Entomology.......

KERUL’S

eos
’

LANG’S Ballads and Lyrics ...ccscessevvses
LATHAM’S English Dictionary........
LEckKy’s History of European Morals......
——~———-—— Rationalism.......seee.
——— Leaders of Public’Opinion.. ......
Leisure Hours in Town..........
Lessons of. Middle Age ..cevscscssscsscess
LEWEs’s Biographical History of Philosophy
LIDDELLand ScoTtT’s Greek-English Lexicon
a Abridged ditto ......
Life of Man Symbolised...... Aa LIA «Bipot
LINDLEY and Moore’s Treasury of Botany
LONGMAN’S Edward the Third .
—— Lectures on History of ‘England
——_——_——- Chess Openings...
Lovupon’s Encyclopedia of Agriculture ....
———————-—-——_——_. Gardening ......
——_—_—_—__——————— Plants ..........
LUBBOCK’s Origin of Civilisation ..........
Lyra. Germanica: «29 0esseess cca sedans ea ile

eeneee

eee eeeeeeeeas

MACAULAY’S (Lord) Essays'...+..cccseseces
——_—————— History of England ..
———_———-_—_——_ Lays of Ancient Rome
—_——_—_—_—— Miscellaneous Writings
Speeches vio vevccccnes
$$$ - Wor oc. sescvcccccces
MActeEop’s Elements of Political Economy
Dictionary of Political Economy
——— Theory and Practice of Banking
McCvuLtocn’s Dictionary of Commerce .,,,

5
5
14
14

13
9

eH
~T

=
KH DEH AOWADrA WwW

ht
wv

13
9
9

15

1

Ber oS “TH Co

19
19

NEW WORKS rvunuisuep ny LONGMANS np CO.

~

MAGUIRE’S Life of Father Mathew ........
= PIVS IX... cc cccesceee naroare 8
MALET’s Overthrow of the Germanic Con-
federation ........ Beetsrs a diae
MALLESON’S Recreations of an
Official sieiste
MANNING’S England and Christendom ....
MARSHALL’s Physiology . deletes cydiblevere «
MARSHMAN’S History of India. eerneetey Tt
Life of Havelock ........ Sri
MARTINEAU’S Endeayours after the Chris-
RIANELREGMER GAT ve Caceres cceverees petweuees
MASSINGBERD’S History ef the Reformation
MATHEW’S on Colonial Questions.......++.
MAUNDER’s Biographical Treasury ........
Geographical Treasury ......++.
— Historical Treasury ....
— Scientific and Literary Treasury
Treasury of Knowledge....
Treasury of Natural History ..
MAXWELL’S Theory of Heat........sseeeees
May’s Constitutional History of England..
MELVILLE’S Digby Grand.......csscovccees
General*Bounce ..........0008
Te ee
Good for Nothing ..
Holmby House........
MMVOPDTCUCY Cocssccsseccees
—— Kate Coventry.......
Queen’s Maries .....c..eee0. :
MENDELSSOHN’S Letters ..... MEETS teeeees ;
MERIVALE’S Fall of the Roman Republic ..
~ Romans under the Empire
Mawarerkity’s Arithmetic and Mensuration
and Evrrs’s Navigation ..
METEYARD’s Group of Englishmen........
Muitzs on Horse’s Foot and Horse Shoeing.
on Horses’ Teeth and Stables ......
Mriut (J.) on the Mind ........6.

Indian

ee ee ee eeneesee

eee

eeeeeeseas

eeeeseooes

LEAN (Ge tS. MOR EADETLY 00. cctv ce stot evenes
Subjection of Women .....eeees
ree on Representative Government

on Utilitarianism ...
—’s Dissertations and Discussions......
Political HCcOMOMY .csscocesecsvses
SVSCCIN OL LOPIC I. cscs secre veeseees

os
eeeeesnee

— Hamilton’s Philosophy ........... ;
MILLER’sS Hlements of Chemistry ..........
——-— Inorganic Chemistry ..........
——-—— Hymn WYiters ......ceeveeceeees
—-— Songs of the Sierras .........04.

MitTcHELL’s Manual of Architecture
——-— Manual of Assaying ..........
MONSELL’S Beatitudes ...... ccc ccenee wie
His Presence not his Memory. .

——_——_—— ‘Spiritual.Songs’
Moore’s Irish Melodies........ Metereisiete cicisiers
ME AMEROOK Ei cicie sie svesisie oaeoree ce 06
PIOCLICAIIWVOLES «< c0s0 ce csicscscsiee
MoRELL’s Elements of Psychology ........
MoREtL’s Mental Philosophy ...........00.
MULuER’s (Max) Chips from a German
Workshop ........ Siceatier sss ieee ap
Lectures on the Science of Lan-

We Be. ) Fiterature of Ancient

PREDCOPM Tea E es sis ceccccese
MvRcHISON on Liver Complaints...
Mvre’s Language and Literature of Greece

guage..

4
14

2

— HS
bo we po

et 000 Od C9 CO HB Or OO OF

et jt
PERRPROORWIMONNB

nopos. eS

23
NasuH’s Compendium of the Prayer-Book.. 1%
New Testament Illustrated with Wood En-
gravings from the Old Masters .......... UL
NEWMAN’S History ofhis Religious Opinions 4
NIGHTINGALE’s Notes on Hospitals ...... Ig
———_——_-——— Lying-In fnstitu-
GUIe a eek ca ene tcl sarees sislereateere sve sees 49
NILsson's Scandinavia .......iesccccccecce &
NortTascorr on Lathes and Turning ...... 12
Notes on Books.........0- sieletcieh¥ sletelels ce ele eee
ODLING’s Animal Chemistry .......csceees 16
Course of Practical Chemistry . 16
Outlines of Chemistry ......... ie
O’DRISCOLL’s Memoir of Maclise . Aner chy: |
Cor CHINES tory ces ces cee vee geen eee 1é
OWEN’s Comparative Anatomy and Physio-
logy of Vertebrate Animals ........ SCOODT at
—-—— Lectures on the Invertebrata..... . @
PACKE’sS Guide to the Pyrenees ..... niga aaigaseael
PAGEt’s Lectures on Surgical Pathology .. 10
PEREIRA’S Elements of Materia Medica.... 11
PERRING’s Churches and Creeds ....... ee ak
PEWTNER’s Comprehensive Specifier ...... 19
PHILLIPS’s Story of Buddha ..... ai Alen
Righures EVO! .icabcas on bacon kaneas's 15
PressE’s Art of Perfumery ......ccccedeee 5 1k:
PRENDERGAST’s Mastery of Languages.... 6
PRESCOTT’S Scripture Difficulties.......... 14
Present-Day Thoughts, by A. K.H. B. .... -6
PROCTOR’s Astromomical Essays ......000. &
— NewsStar-Aflas 20s... eseecese 7
——-—— Plurality of Worlds ..... a semesters ae
DAG WI, chic delwisled vw aliceeee spines wt
—- Scientific Essays ....... Ptok ke 8
ae Suis acetahes tm ankgealas.s eens
ME DLIGSS GHOGISZA LIAS: is cia.c1s 0.010 boasts aeenraes on
RAzE’s Westward by Rail ........ peinia é stain Re
Recreations of a Country Parson .....s.... &
REEVE’S Royal and Republican France.... 2
REICHEL’S See Of Bawme. «..020s.000b0s sachs « 1s
REILLY’s Map.of- Mont-Blanc... sw s162 sss 16
RIVERS’S Rose Amateur’s Guide ......6.- oe
RoGERs’s Correspondence of Greyson...... 6
— Eclipse of Baith .....s0c0xecsces  &
Defence of Faith....s.2%.s0cases §
Roget’s Thesaurus of English Words and
PHrases: sc ces cshiphetsls'>\anpe'eiciontenercetcels ae. G
RONALDS’sS Fly-Fisher’ s “Entomology rae. 1S
ROSH GUOVGMEE wc cantenasssassresccanwentss) 1%
ROTHSCHIULD'S Israelites .....ccccscrceees . 4
RUSSELL’s Pau and the Pyrenees’......+02. 15
SANDARS’s Justinian’s Institutes ......00.6. 5
SAVILE on Truth of the Bible........ sre: Grete stl
SCHELLEN’S Spectrum Analysis.....e.seow. 7%
Scort’s Lectures on the Fine Arts ........ 11
——_——- A] bert Durer. .sccccescsesevscceces IL
S£EBOHM’s Oxford Reformers of 1498 ...... 2
SEW hia s Alter Life oi cess nceee tenn es ve as 1S
Glimpse of the World ......c00 16
History of the Early Churéh.... 3$

Journal of a Home Life ........

ex NEW WORKS rvususnep gy LONGMANS anp CO.

SEWELL s Passing Thoughts on Religion ..
Poems of Bygone Years ...+eeee

————— Preparation for Communion ....
Principles of Education ..... ae
Readings for Confirmation ......

————- —— Regdings forPocnt .....cccceenes

Examination for Confirmation ..
Stories and Tales ..
———--—— Thoughts for the Age ...
——-~——— Thoughts for the Holy Week ....
Ssont’s Church History ..... Mines telsiere ee
Sreart’s WALKER’S English Dictionaries ee
%2rre’s Paul’s Voyage and Shipwreck....

(SyDNEY) Life and Letters .....,
—- Miscellaneous Works ..
— Witand Wisdom®......
RouTHEY’s Doctor ......... cements moisie state's

Poetical Works.. as mate

STANLEY’s History of British Bir ds. saltere ote
SFATHAM’S Eucharis......seceeee Sy:
STEPHEN’s Ecclesiastical Biography ....+.
ground of Europe «esses

Stepping-Stone to Knowledge, &. wees
STIREING'S: Sccretiol PHegeliccssnecs. ss es cs
——- Sir WILLIAM HAMI:TON......
RTONEHENGE 0n the Dog....cccccesceceves
on the Greyhound ..........
STRICKLAND’s Queens of England ........
Sunday Afternoons at the Parish Church of
a Scottish University City ...... sare eFs aac

Paytor’s History of India.
—— (Jeremy) Works, baited by EDEx
Text-Books of Science ........ :

THIRLWALIZ’s History of Greece ..........
VHousON’s Laws of Thought .....esseeeees
—New World of Being ......
fon» (A.) on Parliamentary Government ..
. and BowMaAn’s Anatomy and Phy-

eeee

siclogy of Man ..... Riis si sfeteraletsists Sninannsdo
RENCH SHernOb cases sceee cs Sereda stare ne
_—— Realities of Irish Life eee ne nent

TROLLOPE’S Rarchester Towers..... faim eae’
: WArdelviin sae.
Twiss's Law of. Nations’: ...+eeesestsssterss
TYNDATLIS Diawiarnetisny v..16sseedeeses
—— Faraday as a Discovercr.......+
Fragments of Science....
——-———- Hours of Exercise in the Alps..
Lectures on Electricity ........
——-— Lectures on Light .........50
-—— Lectures on Sound ..
—~-———- Heat a Mode of Motion ..
Molecular Physics

eeeeeeereeeeeees

@eeereer7.@

ed

SPOTTISWOCDE AND CO., PRINTERS,

et

bet ke
Orem TO Or Oe OOO

rt

2

i
cont sy

18

- ~~+

UEBERWEG’S System of Logic ......ses50

Uncle PETER’s Fairy Tale ...... and said

Urr’s Dictionary of Arts, Manufactures, an
Mines

ee eeoe

Van DER HOEVEN’s Handbook of Zoology..
VEREKER’S Sunny South...... Ae cc
Visit to my Discontented Cousin ...
VoGan’s Doctrine of the Euchrist

eeeeere

WaALcott’s Traditions of Cathedrals

eeesen

WATSON’S Geometry ...0000ss0 sceeeesieeen
— Principles and Practice of Physic
Wartts’s Dictionary of Chemistry..... opeay

WEBB’s Objects for Common Telescopes....
WEBSTER & WILKINSON’S Greek Testament
WELLINGTON’S Life, by GLEIG ...... seeibide
WEsrT on Children’s Diseases
on Children’s Nervous Disorders ....
on Nursing Sick Children
WuHATELY’s English Synonymes ....
LO IC .:.5 sin-«ajsdleieteluleutelsr eel eae
Rhetoric: sateen a. als Germans tees
WHITE and RIDDLE’s Latin Dictionaries ..
Witcocxs’s Sea Fisherman..........
WiuraAms’s Aristotle’s Ethics ....... Ao ee
WILLIAMS on Climate of South of France..
Consumption «+. + «sssesee

WILLICH's Popular Tables .......... saa
Wittis’s Principles of Mechanism ........
WINSLOW. On Light...<.s.ave as este unennnt imei
Woopn’s (J. G.) Bible Animals.......... Stier

Homes without Hands ....
—_—-- Insects at Home ........ ron
————_-———- Strange Dwellimgs ........
—— (T.) Chemical Notes ...... vwlaheaa

YARDLEY’S Poctical Works.

~-
enoreaeereeeeee

YonGeE’s History of England .......... A
ee English-Greek Lexicons) <<. «0s Gong
Horace. | stesso. esvelereietseieioteetera eee we

—— Three Centuries of English Lite-
PEAR UNYS) Saeidoe Wace = siadewitieis'e to mmlan eens Be
—— Three Centuries of Modern His-
GON sings dis, «ce 03s caer i cle oui kla le aie quate aaa
YovuaAtTrT on the Dog Saleen foie esa + aichasaet
—— ON the Horse...csseccsccecceccvess
ZEGURR 8 Socrates: <a asc.s%pa vd cansuuinerene at

- Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics. ;
Zigzagging amongst Dolomites .......seee.

NEW-STREET SQUARE, LONDON.

roar

Gal fcd’ ad pea
OComooornwow

rede a eens kentagh wate:

APUPDELST PERE pe enon

bL

»

eta
pe |
aS
ee
aes
: =
Sees
Snes
he

»
Sattemk pe
agtyatedey

ebddeied ee ee
ee ae ey eee

‘ . - at st a ss
Bie ee Yerta sinter ron ged >

Anat 3

ae Bie Fo h 4 ae
St Aaa ae ee de
chia Ae rate y Od tet,

<* . os eS
4: SR eR tae inte? heh ere es a ‘ ; eu = eS etn e oak re hat: SY
ae / Aen oil oe a ¥ SkgSae Sor teante — rs < % >
an Rreskbis tees: s Re paienteey ies site — A tess fmt oe eters
Spee oa euir wanaatess tine curate eek - peer me rere tee hel See ae
Se ae Se ele : Sete — Sain ten eaten) tests ‘ 2a aot ee TES ae Sheet taiataeaces
ERE pO NE POAT EE SIN ge ea ce ae) ae AER BEB eck of Dang oom! oie bottena ft tim adh Eee”
