*isi  2  p

0/5

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

VOL.  II.

J

LONDON  :  PRINTED  BY

SPOTTISWOODE  AND  CO.,  NEW-STREET  SQUARE
AND  PARLIAMENT  STREET

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND

IN  THE

EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

BY

JAMES  ANTHONY  FEOUDE,  M.A.

IN  THREE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  II.

LONDON :

LONGMANS,  GEEEN,  AND  CO.

1874.

All  rights  reserved.

I

_

\

\

J

\

CONTENTS.

+o

BOOK  V.

CHAPTER  I.

THE  REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

SECTION

PAGE

I.  Effects  of  English  institutions  in  Ireland

Irish  finance  ........

The  Oligarchy  and  its  motives  ....

The  Septennial  Bill .......

II.  Growth  of  the  Catholic  population  .

Revival  of  national  spirit  .....

Dr.  Curry’s  history  ......

Apparent  Catholic  loyalty  .....

Irish  Catholic  regiments  raised  for  service  in  Portugal

III.  The  landlords  and  the  peasantry  ....

Absenteeism  ........

Whiteboys  ........

Father  Sheehy  .......

Connection  of  the  Whiteboys  with  the  Pretender
IY.  Condition  of  the  people  ......

The  Pension  List  .......

Scheme  of  George  the  Third  for  the  better  govern¬
ment  of  Ireland  .......

Viceroy alty  of  Lord  Townshend  ....

Y.  Parties  and  persons  .......

Henry  Flood  ........

Grattan  and  Fitzgibbon  ......

2

4

6

8

11

12

13

15

18

20

22

23

20

32

35

30

40

44

46

48

50

\

i

A

VI

CONTENTS.

CHAPTER  II.

LORD  TO WN SHERD 'S  ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION  PAGE

I.  Irish  views  on  Reform  .  .  .  .  .  .56

Parliamentary  intrigues  .  .  .  .  .  .58

Principles  of  Irish  politicians  .....  62

Dissolution  of  Parliament  .....  69

II.  Material  improvement  of  Ireland  ....  71

Townshend’s  difficulties  ......  *73

Revenue  frauds  .  .  .  .  .  .  .75

Rejection  of  Supply  Bill  .....  78

Thoughts  of  governing  Ireland  without  Parliament  80

Dismissals  from  the  Council  .....  85

Prorogation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .87

III.  Alternatives  before  Lord  Townshend  ...  89

Purgation  of  the  Board  of  Revenue  and  defeat  of  the
Oligarchy  ........  91

Justice  to  Ireland  .......  95

Indiscipline  of  the  army  ......  98

IY.  Price  of  Townshend’s  victory  ....  100

Resignation  of  the  Speaker  .....  103

Justice  to  Ireland  again  .....  104

Y.  Corruption  and  its  effects  .....  107

Fresh  difficulties  .  .  .  .  .  .  .Ill

Government  relieved  by  Lord  Shannon  .  .  .114

YI.  Irish  grand  juries  .......  116

The  Oak  Boys  .......  116

The  Donegal  evictions  and  the  Hearts  of  Steel  .  119

Emigration  to  America  .  .  .  .  .  .125

Irishmen  out  of  Ireland  .  .  .  .  .127

CHAPTER  III.

LORD  IIARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQTJIERE.

I.  Irish  Presbyterians  ......  129

English  Colonial  policy  .  .  .  .  .  .132

American  complaints  .  .  .  .  .  .134

Resolution  of  the  English  Parliament  .  .  .137

Lexington  ........  139

Bunker’s  Hill  ........  141

CONTENTS.

Yll

SECTION

II.  Lord  Harcourt  as  Viceroy  .....
Introduction  to  Irish  public  life  ....
Responsibilities  of  an  Irish  Secretary
Proposed  Absentee  Tax  ......

III.  Parliamentary  manoeuvres  .....
Breach  of  the  woollen  compact  ....
English  injustice  and  its  effects  on  Irish  character

IV.  Mr.  Henry  Flood  .......

Lord  Harcourt’ s  difficulties  .

Sympathy  between  the  Irish  Protestants  and  America
Loyalty  of  the  Irish  Catholics  .

American  tendencies  of  the  Irish  Parliament  .
Demands  for  justice  ......

English  perversity  .......

New  Parliament  .......

PAGE

145

147

148
150
159
162
164
170
172

175

176
179

183

184
187

BOOK  VI.

CHAPTER  I.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

I.  Effects  of  misgovernment ......  190

Irish  landlords  .......  192

The  Irish  Church  .  .  .  .  .  .  .195

England  to  be  brought  to  a  reckoning  .  .  .  199

II.  The  American  War .  .  .  .  .  .  .  201

'  *

Surrender  of  General  Burgoyne  ....  204

War  with  France  and  Spain  .....  205

III.  American  privateers  in  St.  George’s  Channel  .  .  208

Mr.  Grattan  in  the  Irish  Parliament  ,  .  .  209

Catholic  relief  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .210

The  Volunteer  movement  .  .  .  .  .211

Paul  Jones  ........  212

Relaxation  of  the  Trade  Laws  .  .  .  .214

Modification  of  the  Penal  Laws  .  .  .  .216

Privateers  .  .......  219

Debates  on  Ireland  in  the  English  Parliament .  .221

Woollen  restrictions  maintained  ....  222

Vlll

CONTENTS.

SECTION

IV.

V.

VI.

Opinions  of  leading  Irishmen  on  the
distress  .....

causes

of  Irish

•  •

PAGE

224

Lord  Lifford’s  opinion

•

225

Mr.  Pery ......

•

226

Mr.  Hussey  Burgh  ....

\

•

227

Mr.  Hely  Hutchinson

•

228

Ireland  undefended  ....

•

232

Formation  of  Volunteer  Companies  .

«

234

Paul  Jones  again  ....

•

235

The  Irish  Parliament  demands  Free  Trade

•

238

Volunteer  demonstration

•

241

Riot  in  Dublin .....

242

Speech  of  Hussey  Burgh  .

•

244

Acknowledged  wrongs  of  Ireland

*

247

Relief  of  the  Presbyterians

•

249

The  embargo  .....

•

253

The  Black  Prince  and  Princess

•

255

Grattan’s  resolutions

•

259

The  Mutiny  Act  ....

•

261

The  Patriot  army  ....

•

264

Demand  for  protection

•

267

The  houghers  .....

•

268

Non-importation  agreement

•

270

The  Viceroy’s  difficulties .

•

272

CHAPTER  II.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

I.  League  against  England  .

The  Protestant  Colony  of  Ireland
Grattan  and  Catholic  Emancipation

II.  Progress  of  the  war  in  America

Lord  Cornwallis  in  the  Southern  States  .
Surrender  at  York  Town  .  .  .  .

III.  Progress  of  revolutionary  sentiment  in  Ireland
Difficulties  in  managing  the  Irish  Parliament  .

The  Volunteers .

Session  of  1781  ......

Mr.  Flood  ...  .

Siege  of  Gibraltar  ......

Attack  on  Poynings’  Act  .  .  .  .

.  274
.  276
.  278
.  281
.  283
.  286
.  288
.  289
.  292
.  293
.  296
.  298
.  301

SECTION

IV.

V.

VI.

CONTENTS.

The  6th  of  George  I.

•  •

IX

PAGE

302

Concessions  to  the  Catholics  .

•  •

304

Effects  of  the  Penal  Laws

#  \

•  •

306

The  Dungannon  Resolutions  .

•  •

309

Catholic  education  ....

•  •

312

Proposed  policy  of  Hely  Hutchinson

•  •

313

Mr.  Grattan  .

c  •

317

Change  of  Ministry  in  England

•  ■

319

The  Rockingham  Administration

•  •

320

Duke  of  Portland  Viceroy  of  Ireland

•  •

321

Errors  of  the  English  Liberal  party  in

Irish  policy  .

324

Demands  of  the  Patriots

#  #

325

Declaration  of  Rights

328

Ultimatum  of  Mr.  Grattan

•  •

331

Public  principle  of  Elood  .

•  «

333

Correspondence  of  Portland  with  Lord  Shelburne  .

336

Alternative  of  the  abandonment  of  Ireland

•  •

337

England  concedes  Grattan’s  demands

•  •

341

Constitution  of  ’82  .

•  •

342

Honours  paid  to  Grattan  .

•  •

344

Dissatisfaction  of  Elood  .

•  .

347

General  Reform  ....

•  •

350

Character  of  Elood  ....

•  •

352

BOOK  VII.

CHAPTER  I.

THE  CONVENTION.

Anomalies  in  the  Hew  Constitution  .

.  355

The  Volunteers

•  •  •

.  356

Scene  at  Dunleckny

•  •  •

.  359

Eresh  alarms  of  danger  to  Irish  liberty  .

.  361

Effects  of  the  revolution  .

•  •  •

.  363

The  Irish  Parliament

•  •  •

.  365

Two  kinds  of  liberty

•  •  •

.  367

The  Volunteer  delegates  .

•  •  •

.  369

Opinion  of  Eox

.  •  •

CO

CO

•

•

vol.  ii.  a

X  CONTENTS.

SECTION  PAGE

Grattan  supports  the  Government  .  .  .  .376

Grattan  and  Flood  .  .  .  .  .  .  .377

IV.  The  Convention  .......  380

George  Robert  Fitzgerald  .....  381

The  Bishop  of  Derry  ......  382

The  Convention  Reform  Bill  .....  386

Speech  of  Fitzgibbon  ......  389

The  Convention  dissolves  .....  392

V.  Changes  in  the  Administration  ....  395

Houghing  of  soldiers  .  .  .  .  .  .397

Defeat  of  Reform  Bill  in  Parliament  .  .  .  399

An  appeal  before  the  Irish  House  of  Lords  .  .  401

Necessary  increase  of  English  influence  .  .  .  403

Political  morality  of  the  Irish  Peers  .  .  .  404

VI.  Difficulty  of  Government  in  Ireland  .  .  .  407

Violence  of  the  Dublin  mob  .....  409

Tarring  and  Feathering  Committee  .  .  .  .411

Irish  patriots  and  Government  detectives ;  Father
O’Leary  ........  413

VII.  Fitzgibbon  and  the  Sheriff  of  Dublin  .  .  .417

Pitt’s  views  on  Reform  .  .  .  .  .  .420

VIII.  Project  for  the  improvement  of  Irish  trade  .  .422

The  Commercial  propositions  ill  received  .  .  424

IX.  Speech  of  Fitzgibbon  on  the  Volunteers  .  .  .  429

Debate  in  Parliament  .  .  .  .  .  .433

Fresh  schemes  of  Reform  .....  436

X.  The  Commercial  propositions  re-introduced  .  .  438

Political  tempest  . '  .  .  .  .  .  441

Fitzgibbon  on  Ireland  and  Great  Britain  .  .  .  443

CHAPTER  II.

WHITED  OYS ,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

I.  Social  state  of  Ireland  ......  447

The  Bishops  of  the  Establishment  ....  449

Failure  of  the  Charter  Schools  .  .  .  .451

Tithe  proctors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .453

Whiteboys  ........  454

II.  The  Pension  List . 462

A  Police  Bill  . . 464

Opposed  by  the  Patriots  ......  466

The  Tithe  question  .  470

i

CONTENTS.

XI

SECTION

Repression  of  Whiteboys.  Sir  Richard  Musgrave  .

III.  Conspiracy  Bill  .......

Debate  on  the  state  of  Munster  .  .  .  .

Measures  for  the  preservation  of  peace  .

IV.  General  corruption  of  public  life  .  .  .  .

Peep-of-day  Boys  .......

V.  Grattan  and  the  Prince  of  Wales  .  .  .  .

Illness  of  George  the  Third  .  .  .  .  .

Irish  and  English  views  on  the  Regency  .

Expected  change  in  the  Irish  Government
Irish  views  of  Independence  .  .  .  .  .

Speech  of  Eitzgibbon  on  the  Regency  question
Address  of  the  Irish  Houses  to  the  Prince  of  Wales
Second  speech  of  Eitzgibbon  .  .  .  .  .

VI.  The  Round  Robin  .......

The  King  recovers  .......

Quarrels  in  the  Irish  Parliament  .

Victory  of  the  Government  .

The  Duke  of  Leinster  and  the  Ponsonbies  deprived
of  office  ........

Political  scandal  and  the  formation  of  the  Whig
Club  .........

PAGE

473

47G

479

484

486

489

491

492

494

495

496
498
503
506
509

511

512
515

517

519

—

!

/

k

.

.

.

\

I

\

—

_

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND

IN  THE

EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY.

BOOK  V.

- K» -

CHAPTER  L

THE  REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

SECTION  I.

A  free  government  depends  for  its  successful  work¬
ing  on  the  loyal  co-operation  of  the  people.  Where
the  people  do  not  co-operate,  the  forms  of  liberty  are
either  a  mockery,  or  an  instrument  of  disunion  and
anarchy.  Had  the  Irish  been  regarded  from  the  out¬
set  as  a  conquered  people  whom  a  stronger  neighbour
had  forced,  for  its  own  convenience,  into  reluctant
submission,  Ireland  would  have  escaped  the  worst  of
her  calamities.  Her  clans  would  have  been  held  in  awe
by  an  army ;  public  order  would  have  been  preserved
by  a  police  :  but  her  lands  would  have  been  left  to
their  native  owners ;  her  customs  and  her  laws  might
have  been  untouched,  and  her  religion  need  not  have
been  interfered  with.  The  nature  of  the  English
VOL.  II.  b

CHAP.

I.

2

BOOK

V.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

j

constitution  forbade  an  experiment  which  might  have
been  dangerous  to  our  own  liberties.  Ireland  was  in
fact  a  foreign  country ;  we  preferred  to  assume  that
she  was  an  integral  part  of  the  empire.  We  imposed
upon  her  our  own  modes  of  self-government  ;  we
gave  her  a  parliament,  we  gave  her  our  trial  by  jury
and  our  common  law ;  we  assimilated  the  Irish  Church
to  our  own ;  and  these  magnificent  institutions  refused
to  root  themselves  in  an  uncongenial  soil.  The  Par¬
liament  was  forbidden  to  legislate  till  its  decisions
had  been  shaped  for  it  beforehand.  The  rule  of
feudal  tenure  inflicted  forfeiture  on  rebellion ;  the
native  owners  were  therefore  dispossessed  for  assert¬
ing  the  liberties  of  their  country  ;  and  their  estates
were  bestowed  upon  aliens.  The  Irish  preferred
their  own  laws  to  ours.  They  became  in  conse¬
quence  4  Irish  enemies  ’  and  outlaws,  and  might
be  wronged  and  killed  with  impunity.  When  we'
forced  them  at  last  to  submit  to  our  laws,  trial  by
jury  made  the  execution  of  them  impossible  ;  and  with
equal  impunity  the  colonists  could  then  be  murdered,
their  cattle  houghed,  and  their  daughters  ravished
by  the  natives.  The  Church  being  an  estate  of  the
realm  and  a  governing  section  of  the  constitution,  the
Church  in  the  two  countries  had  to  be  shaped  on  the
same  pattern.  At  the  conquest  we  forced  the  Irish
Church  into  submission  to  the  Papacy.  At  the  Re¬
formation  we  forced  it  to  apostatise.  As  the  Reforma¬
tion  pursued  its  course,  the  theory  of  our  Church
Establishment  split  the  garrison  of  Protestants,  whom
we  had  planted  in  the  island,  into  hostile  camps.  A
free  representative  legislature  which  yet  was  not  free
and  was  not  representative — a  gentry  who  could  not
rule — a  Church  which  could  not  teach — laws  which

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

could  not  be  enforced — these  were  the  consequences
which  resulted  from  the  preference  of  unreality  to  fact.
They  might  all  have  been  avoided  had  the  truth  been
acknowledged  and  acted  on ;  but  England  was  unable
to  recognise  that  constitutional  liberty  in  our  country
might  be  constitutional  slavery  in  another.

If  the  object  was  to  absorb  and  extinguish  the
spirit  of  Irish  nationality,  it  singularly  failed  of  at¬
tainment.  Had  the  union  been  conceded  for  which
the  presentiments  of  the  Irish  Parliament  led  them  to
petition*  in  1704  ;  had  trade  and  manufactures  been
allowed  to  develop,  and  the  stream  of  British  Pro¬
testant  emigration  been  directed  continuously  into  all
parts  of  the  island,  the  native  population  might  have
been  overborne  or  driven  out,  and  the  mother  countrv
might  have  retained  the  affections  of  a  people  with
whom  she  would  then  have  been  identified  in  interest
and  sentiment.  By  a  contemptible  jealousy  she
flung  them  back  upon  themselves,  a  minority  amidst  a
hostile  population,  and  condemned  them  to  idleness
and  impoverishment ;  she  left  them  to  add  their  own
grievances  to  the  accumulated  wrongs  of  the  entire
country ;  while  she  left  them  at  the  same  time  their
own  Parliament,  in  which  the  national  discontent
could  find  a  voice ;  and  taught  them  to  look  for  allies
among  her  own  enemies.

The  Protestant  revolt  will  form  the  subject  of  the
present  volume.  It  was  an  act  of  madness — madness
in  the  colony  which  revolted — madness  in  the  mother
country  which  provoked  the  quarrel.  The  colonists
were  an  army  of  occupation  amidst  a  spoliated  nation
who  were  sullenly  brooding  over  their  wrongs.  By
England’s  help  alone  they  could  hope  to  retain  their
ascendency.  It  was  England’s  highest  interest  to

B  2

3

CHAP.

I.

4

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

y.

keep  the  garrison  strong,  if  she  was  to  escape  a  recur¬
rence  of  the  dangers  which  had  already  cost  her  so
dear.  The  colonists  in  their  own  vanity  and  exas¬
peration  forgot  or  despised  the  peril  from  a  race  whom
they  regarded  as  slaves.  England,  half  conscious  of
an  injustice  which  she  was  too  proud  or  too  negligent
to  redress,  attempted  to  hold  the  colony  in  check  by
patronising  and  elevating  the  Catholic  Celts.  Before
the  story  can  proceed,  the  events  mentioned  at  the
close  of  the  last  chapter  require  to  be  described  more
particularly.

Poisonous  as  were  the  laws  in  restraint  of  trade,
unequal  as  was  the  executive  government  to  the
repression  of  the  most  vulgar  crimes,  the  administra¬
tion  of  Ireland  possessed  a  single  merit.  If  it  did
nothing,  it  cost  little.  The  taxation  was  light,  and
the  finances,  notwithstanding  the  infamy  of  the  Pension
List,  were  economically  managed.  At  the  middle  of
the  century  the  annual  revenue  averaged  eight  hundred
thousand  pounds.  Of  the  entire  sum,  the  fixed  excise
and  customs  duties,  the  quit  rents,  and  the  hearth  money
which  had  been  settled  upon  the  Crown,  and  were  be¬
yond  control  of  Parliament,  produced  three  quarters,
which  were  supplemented  by  a  biennial  grant.  A  debt
of  a  million  incurred  in  the  Spanish  succession  war
was  materially  reduced  on  the  re-establishment  of  peace.
In  1749  the  income  exceeded  the  expenditure,  and
it  was  agreed  on  all  hands  that  the  surplus  should  be
appropriated  to  the  discharge  of  the  little  that  re¬
mained.  On  the  principle  there  was  no  difference.
But  whether  the  Irish  House  of  Commons  was  to  have
the  honour  of  suggesting  the  appropriation  in  com¬
pliance  with  their  asserted  privilege  of  originating
their  own  money  bills,  or  whether  it  was  to  be  recom-

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

5

mended  from  England,  according  to  the  English
construction  of  Poynings’  Act,  which  forbade  the  in¬
troduction  of  bills  into  the  Irish  Parliament  that  had
not  been  first  submitted  to  the  English  Council,  became
a  burning  question.  The  self-respect  of  Ireland  was
held  to  depend  on  the  right  solution  of  it,  and  the
two  countries  flung  themselves  into  the  struggle  with
a  passion  of  political  desperation  during  three
biennial  sessions.  In  1749,  in  1751,  and  in  1753  the
Viceroys  informed  the  Commons  in  the  speech  from  the
throne  that  his  majesty  would  recommend  the  appli¬
cation  of  the  surplus  to  the  payment  of  debt.  The
Commons  took  no  notice  of  the  recommendation,  drew
the  heads  of  their  bills  on  their  own  initiation,  and
forwarded  them  to  England.  In  England  the  heads
were  altered  by  the  Council,  and  the  King’s  previous
consent  was  re-introduced.  Twice  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  submitted  with  murmurs.  In  1753,  under  the
viceroyalty  of  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  they  threw  out  the
altered  bill  by  a  majority  of  five.  The  additional
duties  were  refused  and  the  business  of  the  country
was  brought  to  a  standstill.

A  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons  was  at  this
time  returned  by  four  great  families.  The  Fitz¬
geralds  of  Kildare,  the  Boyles,  the  Ponsonbys,  and
the  Beresfords,  by  their  county  influence  and  their
private  boroughs,  were  the  political  sovereigns  of
Ireland.  The  government  was  carried  on  by  their  as¬
sistance,  and  they  received  in  return  the  patronage  of  the
State.  The  Viceroy  understood  the  meaning  of  the
vote.  The  great  houses  were  affecting  patriotism  for
objects  of  their  own,  and  he  found  it  necessary  to
capitulate.  The  terms  were  privately  arranged  ;
Boyle,  the  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,  was

CHAP.

i.

1753.

6

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

made  Earl  of  Shannon,  with  a  pension  of  2,000Z.  a
year.  John  Ponsonby  succeeded  Boyle  as  Speaker.
The  patriot  orators  were  silenced  by  promotions.
Anthony  Malone  became  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer ;
Stannard,  Recorder  of  Dublin,  another  eloquent  ex¬
ponent  of  the  wrongs  of  Ireland,  was  made  Prime
Sergeant.  The  opposition  to  England’s  initiation  of
money  bills  was  suspended  till  the  great  families  were
again  hungry,  and  fresh  expectants  of  promotion  were
in  a  position  to  be  troublesome.

The  Parliament  determined  with  the  Sovereign.
On  the  death  of  George  the  Second  the  House,  which
had  been  elected  at  his  accession,  came  to  its  mature
end,  and  in  October,  1761,  the  first  session  was  to
open  of  the  new  representation.

Anticipating  a  demand  for  a  fine  on  the  renewal  of
the  lease,  and  resolved  to  resist  at  the  outset  the
patriotic  affectations  which  were  used  as  a  pretext  for
agitation,  the  English  Council  inserted  in  the  first  bill,
which  was  sent  over  to  be  laid  before  the  new  Parlia¬
ment,  a  clause  for  the  application  of  a  sum  of  money.
The  Earl  of  Halifax,  who  was  now  viceroy,  was
deafened  with  the  clamours  of  the  Irish  servants  of  the
Crown,  and  doubted  the  wisdom  of  his  chiefs.  The
supporters  of  Government  threatened  apostacy.  The
ministers,  Halifax  thought,  might  be  right  in  the
abstract,  but  they  were  pressing  an  invidious  claim
in  the  face  of  a  notorious  prejudice.  The  supplies
might  be  again  challenged,  and  at  the  opening  of  a  new
reign  it  might  be  unwise  to  commence  with  a  quarrel.1
The  Secretary  of  State 2  gave  the  Yiceroy  to  under-

1  1  Halifax  to  the  Earl  of  Egre-  who  took  office  with  Newcastle  in

mont,  October  11,  1761.’  S.  P.  0.  1761.

2  Wyndham,  Earl  of  Egremont,

F

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

7

stand  that  the  insertion  of  the  clause  had  been  made  chap.
deliberately,  and  was  to  be  insisted  on.  The  right  of  - — —
Great  Britain  was  indubitable.  The  assertion  of  it
was  considered  indispensably  necessary  to  the  King’s
honour  and  the  vindication  of  the  prerogative.  The
bill  must  be  laid  before  Parliament  in  the  form  in
which  it  had  been  sent  over.  If  it  failed,  Halifax
would  not  be  held  responsible.1

The  storm  which  Halifax  anticipated  would  have
certainly  risen  but  for  peculiar  conditions  under
which  the  new  members  had  been  returned.  The
corruption  with  which  the  Government  had  secured  a
majority  on  the  appropriation  of  the  surplus  had  sug¬
gested  to  the  constituencies  that  they  might  them¬
selves  obtain  a  share  in  the  plunder.  Seats  in
Parliament  had  been  hitherto  virtually  for  life.  More
frequent  elections  would  compel  the  representatives
to  divide  their  spoils  with  their  supporters.  At  the
elections,  to  their  general  surprise,  the  candidates  had
been  called  on  for  a  promise  to  support  a  Septennial
Act ;  pledges  to  that  effect  having  been  especially
exacted  from  the  servants  of  the  Crown  as  the  price
of  their  return.2

Embarrassed  with  the  prospect  of  a  change  which
they  secretly  disliked,  while  they  were  themselves
afraid  to  oppose  it,  to  the  surprise  of  Halifax  they
declined  the  challenge  on  the  money  bill.  They  passed
the  supplies  by  a  large  majority.  They  ventured  a
resolution  that  the  Pension  List  had  been  increased
without  sufficient  reason,3  and  seemed  to  threaten  an

1  1  Egremont  to  Halifax,  Octo-  3  The  Civil  Pension  List  had

her  20.’  S.  P.  0.  grown  from  54,497/.  in  1759,  to

2  ‘  Halifax  to  Egremont,  Octo-  64,127/.  in  1761.  Commons’  Jour -

her  1761,  and  December  4,  1761.’  nals}  Ireland ,  1761.

8

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

attack  upon  it.  The  Viceroy  lectured  the  Lords
Justices.  Egremont  wrote  that  the  King  was  amazed
and  offended  at  so  extraordinary  a  demonstration,
and  insisted  that  there  should  be  no  repetition  of  it.1
The  excitement  was  unnecessary;  the  real  attention
of  the  Commons  was  absorbed  in  the  Septennial  Bill.
Dr.  Lucas,  the  patriot  member  for  Dublin,  introduced
the  heads  at  the  opening  of  the  session.  In  December,
when  the  Pension  storm  had  abated,  the  subject  came
forward  for  discussion.  Halifax  had  received  no  in¬
structions.  He  expressed  no  opinion  and  offered  no
opposition.  If  the  ministry  considered  the  measure
objectionable,  he  said  he  could  stop  it  in  Council,  but
he  was  evidently  uncertain  in  what  light  it  would  be
regarded.

Could  the  Commons  have  been  assured  that  the
bill  would  be  rejected  in  England  they  would  have
passed  it  with  acclamations.  The  neutral  attitude  of
the  Viceroy  alarmed  them.  They  were  afraid  to  turn
it  out.  They  were  afraid  that  if  sent  over  it  might
be  returned  unopposed.  They  escaped  from  the  dif¬
ficulty  by  attaching  to  it  a  property  qualification  as  a
condition  of  eligibility  so  heavy,  that  so  encumbered
the  most  ardent  patriot  could  only  desire  that  the
bill  might  fail.2  It  was  presented  to  the  Viceroy,  but
without  the  forms  which  were  observed  usually  with
popular  measures.  When  the  House  desired  to  sig¬
nify  a  special  desire  that  a  bill  should  be  returned  to
them,  the  heads  were  carried  to  the  Castle  by  the
Speaker,  attended  by  the  entire  body  of  members.
A  motion  that  the  heads  of  the  Septennial  Act  should

1  1  Halifax  and  Egremont  Oorre-  cation  was  to  be  an  estate  of  600/.
spondence,  November  1761.’  S.P.O.  a  year,  for  a  borough  seat  300/.

2  For  a  county  seat  the  qualifi-

$

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

9

be  so  presented  was  defeated  by  a  majority  of  two  to
one,  and  no  sooner  had  a  private  member  placed  the
heads  in  Halifax’s  hands,  than  its  authors  manoeuvred
in  secret  to  stop  it  in  the  Irish  Council.  Halifax
reported  that  the  change  was  4  uniformly  disliked  by
the  most  unprejudiced  people  of  rank,  influence,  and
fortune.’  4  They  were  alarmed  by  secret,  and,  as  they
thought,  authentic  information,  that  if  transmitted  it
would  certainly  be  returned  to  them;’1  and  Shannon,
Ponsonby,  and  the  other  prominent  members  of  the
Council  of  State,  requested  an  assurance  that  their
alarms  were  unfounded  before  they  would  consent  to
let  it  go.

The  ministry,  playing  with  their  fears,  replied  that
the  King  could  make  no  engagements  beforehand.
The  Dublin  merchants  held  a  meeting  to  protest
against  4  the  clandestine  arts  ’  by  which  an  important
reform  was  obstructed.  The  heads  were  at  last  trans¬
mitted,  passing  the  Council  only,  however,  by  a  majo¬
rity  of  one.  4  The  popularity  of  the  Bill  has  dimin¬
ished,’  wrote  Halifax,  4  as  the  probability  of  its  being
carried  into  law  has  increased.  Nobody  wishes  for  it.
It  is  unacceptable  to  those  who  seemed  most  sanguine
in  its  favour.  Unanimous  as  they  were  at  first,  they
will  now  throw  it  out  rather  than  pass  it.’  With  a
curious  consciousness  that  if  the  Irish  Parliament
became  a  reality  it  would  cease  to  exist,  the  patriot
members  began  to  fear  that  the  agitation  had  been  set
on  foot  by  English  treachery,  1  as  a  preliminary  step
towards  a  Union.’ 2

They  might  have  spared  their  terrors.  Either  by

1  1  Halifax  to  Egremont,  Decern-  2  ‘Halifax  to  Egremont,  Feb-
ber  11  and  December  23,  1761.7  ruary  18,  1762.’

S.  P.  0.

CHAP.

I.

10

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

design  or  accident,  the  draftsman  had  added  a  con¬
dition  which  made  the  bill  into  an  absurdity,  and
relieved  the  government  of  the  necessity  of  bestow¬
ing  the  most  transient  consideration  on  the  subject.
The  heads  of  the  Septennial  Act  were  submitted  as
usual  to  the  English  law  officers  of  the  Crown.  They
returned  it  to  the  Lords  of  the  Council  with  the
following  report : —

4  We  have  examined  the  Act  for  limiting  the  dura¬
tion  of  Parliament  transmitted  from  Ireland.  So
much  thereof  as  limits  the  duration  to  a  term  of
seven  years,  imports  a  most  essential  alteration  in  the
constitution  of  Ireland.  The  fitness  or  unfitness  of
this  provision  is  a  matter  of  State  of  so  high  a  nature
that  we  submit  the  same  entirely  to  the  wisdom  of
your  lordships.

4  For  the  qualification  of  members  we  doubt  how
far  such  provisions  are  expedient  for  Ireland  —
whether  the  qualification  be  not  too  high,  and  the
exceptions  too  few.

4  An  amendment,  however,  is  absolutely  necessary.
No  member  is  to  sit,  according  to  the  Act,  till  his
qualification  is  proved,  while  a  full  House  is  sitting,
with  the  Speaker  in  the  chair.  The  law,  therefore,
can  never  be  executed,  nor  any  business  at  all,  be¬
cause  no  Speaker  can  be  chosen  before  the  members
have  a  right  to  vote ;  and  no  member  can  exercise  his
right  of  voting  till  such  Speaker  is  chosen.’ 1

1  1  Report  of  the  Attorney-  and  of  a  Committee  of  the  Privy  Coun-
Solicitor-General  of  England  to  cil  Appointed  to  Consider  the
the  Right  Honourable  the  Lords  Irish  Bills.  March  5, 1762.’  S.  P.  0.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

11

SECTION  II.

The  penal  laws  had  failed  to  coerce  the  Catholics
into  conformity.  The  Charter  schools  had  failed  to
convert  them.  The  penal  laws  had  failed  because
the  English  Government  had  interposed  to  protect
the  Catholic  clergy.  The  Charter  schools  had  failed,
having  been  choked  in  Irish  society,  as  wholesome
vegetables  are  choked  in  a  garden  when  the  weeds  are
allowed  scope  to  spring.1  Celtic  Ireland  was  reviving
from  the  stupor  into  which  she  had  been  thrown  by
the  Revolution.  Exclusion  from  the  land  had  driven
the  more  energetic  of  the  Catholics  into  trade.  Pro¬
testants  who  had  to  seek  their  fortunes  had  gone  to
countries  where  they  were  more  fairly  dealt  with,  and
had  left  the  field  open.  A  commercial  Catholic  popu¬
lation,  ambitious  and  wealthy,  was  springing  up  in
Dublin,  Limerick,  and  Cork  ;  and  a  time  was  visibly
approaching  when  their  relations  to  the  soil  would
have  to  be  reconsidered.  Liberal  English  politicians
were  already  looking  to  the  Catholics  as  a  convenient
counterpoise  to  the  Protestant  colonists,  whom  ill-

1  Within  a  few  years  of  their
establishment  the  Charter  schools
had  ceased  to  grow.  Private  bene¬
factions  fell  off ;  and  though  Par¬
liament  made  no  difficulty  in  voting
money,  the  annual  grants  were
swallowed  up  by  peculation.  The
industrial  training,  so  excellent  in
conception,  degenerated  by  negli¬
gence  into  a  system  in  which  the
children  became  the  slaves  of  the
masters,  and  grew  up  in  rags  and
starvation.  As  the  numbers  fell

off’,  infant  nurseries  were  esta¬
blished,  the  society  observing  that
parents  were  more  willing  to  part
with  their  children  when  very
young.  These  nurseries,  from  a
report  of  one  of  the  managers  to
the  House  of  Commons,  appear  at
last  to  have  been  merely  foundling
asylums,  twenty  infants  having
been  found*  at  one  of  them  1  exposed
among  the  carpenters’  shavings.’
Commons'  Journals,  November  10,
1761.

CHAP.

I.

12

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

»?

usage  was  exasperating  into  disaffection.  A  section
of  the  Catholics,  in  return — the  educated  men  of
business,  the  more  temperate  of  the  bishops,  the  noble¬
men  of  Norman- English  blood,  the  Fingals,  the  Ken-
mares,  the  Trimlestons,  who  had  preserved  their  estates
and  were  allowed  their  titles  by  courtesy — were  wil¬
ling  enough  to  meet  advances  to  them  with  cordiality
and  gratitude.

By  the  side  of  these,  within  the  same  communion,
were  the  irreconcilable  spirits  who  inherited  the  past
traditions  —  the  representatives  of  the  dispossessed
chiefs — who  nursed  in  secret  their  unappeased  resent¬
ment,  and  revenged  their  wrongs  when  opportunity
offered,  as  ravishers  of  w^oinen,  cattle-lioughers,  in¬
cendiaries,  and  agrarian  assassins.  To  them  England
was  the  cause  of  all  the  woes  which  they  suffered,
and  was  and  should  be  to  the  end  a  loathed  and  exe¬
crated  enemy.  They  were  themselves  the  descend¬
ants  of  the  men  who  had  fought  at  Aghrim,  and  been
cheated  at  Limerick.  In  the  French  brigade  they
had  still  an  army  on  the  Continent,  wTiich  they  re¬
cruited  annually  from  their  own  ranks,  and  to  which
they  looked  as  their  future  avenger.

The  first  section  accepted  their  situation,  and  made
the  best  of  it.  The  second  brooded  over  their  wrongs,
and  fed  themselves  with  dreams  of  vengeance.  Both,
perhaps,  were  at  bottom  of  the  same  nature,  and
were  working  towards  the  same  end  ;  but  their  out¬
ward  attitude  was  markedly  different.  The  English
Government,  accepting  the  distinction  as  real,  made
it  the  basis  of  its  Irish  policy,  and  the  rule  of  the
Castle  statesmanship  was  to  conciliate  the  more  repu¬
table  Catholics,  and  to  assume  that  the  Catholic  creed,
as  such,  no  longer  forbade  or  interfered  with  alle-

REVIVAL  OF  TIIE  CELTS.

13

giance  to  a  Protestant  sovereign.  The  first  open  sign
of  the  approaching  change  was  in  the  viceroyalty  of
the  Duke  of  Bedford,  who,  while  in  office  in  1757,
spoke  in  terms  so  unambiguous  of  a  relaxation  of  the
penal  laws,  that  public  thanks  were  bestowed  on  him
from  the  altars  of  the  Catholic  chapels.  It  might
have  been  well  to  relax  the  penal  laws  had  the  causes
for  which  they  were  imposed  been  clearly  asserted
and  admitted.  Unhappily  the  desire  of  conciliation
was  pressed  so  far  as  to  disfigure  and  conceal  the  facts
of  history.  An  annual  sermon,  preached  before  the
House  of  Commons  on  the  23rd  of  October,  was  de¬
signed  to  keep  alive  the  memory  of  the  rebellion  and
massacres  of  1641.  Dr.  Curry,  a  Catholic  physician
of  eminence,  ventured  boldly  on  the  same  ground.  In
a  memoir  of  the  period  he  revived  the  plea  which  was
alleged  to  Charles  the  Second  in  bar  of  the  Act  of
Settlement,  that  the  rebellion  was  no  rebellion,  but
the  innocent  and  cruelly  misrepresented  effort  of  a
loyal  people  to  defend  the  Crown  against  Puritan
usurpation ;  that  half  of  the  alleged  cruelties  were  the
invention  of  fanatical  bigots  ;  that  the  rest  were  enor¬
mously  exaggerated ;  and  that  so  far  as  blood  had
been  shed  at  all,  it  was  only  in  self-defence  against  a
deliberate  design  to  exterminate  the  Catholic  popu¬
lation.

Dr.  Curry’s  story  will  not  bear  examination,  but  it
was  well  contrived  to  fall  in  with  the  growing  senti¬
ment  that  the  past  had  better  be  forgotten  ;  and  thus
a  legend  was  allowed  to  re-establish  itself  unreproved,
which  teaches  the  Irish  Catholics  to  regard  themselves
as  victims  of  an  atrocious  conspiracy — a  conspiracy  to
rob  them  of  their  lands,  and  to  justify  it  by  blacken¬
ing  their  reputation.

I

CHAP.

I.

14

BOOK

V.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

Bedford  proposed  to  repeal  the  bill  against  the
clergy,  and  to  allow  an  adequate  supply  of  priests,
ordained  abroad,  to  be  systematically  introduced  and
registered.  The  Catholics  declined  an  offer  which,
in  legalising  the  presence  of  their  clergy,  would  have
deprived  them  of  their  bishops  but  they  were  too
shrewd  to  refuse  to  recognise  the  good  intentions  of
the  Government,  and  they  made  haste  to  display  in
other  ways  their  willingness  to  meet  them.  The
splendid  triumphs  of  Chatham’s  foreign  policy — the
conquest  of  India,  the  expulsion  of  the  French  from
the  Canadas,  and  the  victories  of  the  English  every¬
where,  as  unexpected  as  they  were  brilliant,  pro¬
voked  Louis  XV.  to  aim  a  blow  in  return  at  Eng¬
land’s  vulnerable  side.  The  officers  of  the  Irish
brigade  held  out  the  usual  hope  that  an  invasion  of
Munster  would  be  followed  by  a  rising  of  the  people.
The  intention  becoming  known,  the  Dublin  Catholics
came  forward  with  a  demonstration  of  loyalty.
Under  Dr.  Curry’s  guidance  a  declaration  of  allegi¬
ance,  signed  by  three  hundred  Catholic  merchants,
was  presented  to  the  Viceroy,  received  graciously,
and  published  in  the  4  Gazette.’  The  supineness  of  the
Protestants  played  into  their  hands.  The  French

1  It  seems,  from  a  letter  of  Dr.
O’Connor  to  Dr.  Curry,  that  the
offer  was  not  refused  without  hesi¬
tation.  ‘  They  offer  us  a  Registry
Bill/  he  writes,  ‘  which  is  calcu¬
lated  to  extirpate  our  very  remains.
Nothing  can  he  better  known  than
that  our  spiritual  economy  cannot
be  exercised  without  the  spiritual
jurisdiction  of  our  bishops.  Yet
the  jurisdiction  of  Catholic  bishops
is  totally  overturned  by  this  blessed
boon  which  is  to  destroy  Popery

by  Popery  itself.  .  .  I  see  now

there  is  no  remedy  but  emigration.
I  can  never  think  of  this  legal
annihilation  of  episcopal  authority
without  alternate  emotions  of
anger  and  dejection.  I  am  told
that  after  this  Bill  passes,  the  penal
clauses  shall  be  as  little  enforced
as  those  already  existing.  Vain
presumption !  This  penal  law  is
calculated  to  execute  itself;  and
ourselves  shall  be  the  executioners.’
Ploicden }  Appendix ,  No.  Gl.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

15

fleet  sailed.  It  was  destroyed  by  Hawke  at  Belleisle,1 2  chap.
and  the  opportunity  of  proving  the  sincerity  of  their  — —
professions  was  not  afforded  them;  but  their  outward
conduct  contrasted  not  a  little  to  their  advantage
with  the  languor  of  the  Lords  and  Commons  and  the
Irish  Executive.

The  Catholics,  though  disarmed,  were  at  least  out¬
wardly  zealous.  The  colonists  were  snarling  over
the  initiation  of  money  bills,  or  dishonestly  ma¬
noeuvring  with  Septennial  Acts.  Dr.  Curry  pursued
his  advantage.  He  established  a  permanent  com¬
mittee  in  Dublin  to  watch  over  Catholic  interests  in
communication  with  the  Government.  For  some
unexplained  reason,  Spanish  influence  was  thought
more  powerful  for  evil  in  Ireland  than  the  French,
and  when,  in  1761,  Spain  was  added  to  the  number  of  1761.
England’s  enemies,  the  committee  thought  the  time
was  come  to  sue  for  distinct  recognition.

L  The  conduct,’  wrote  Lord  Halifax,  in  explaining
the  overture  which  was  made  to  him,2  1  which  the
Roman  Catholics  of  this  country  are  likely  to  observe
in  the  course  of  the  war  with  France  and  Spain  is  of
great  consequence.  The  French  interest  would,  I
believe,  never  have  found  any  essential  support ;  but
a  different  effect  might  be  apprehended  from  the
Spanish  connection.  I  have,  therefore,  watched  the
Catholics  carefully,  and  I  have  now  the  pleasure  of
transmitting  professions  which  I  trust  will  give  as
much  satisfaction  to  you  as  to  me.  Lord  Trimleston3
is  the  most  sensible  man  belonging  to  the  Catholics
in  this  country.  His  weight  with  them  is  great,  and

1  November  20,  1759.  3  Robert  Bamewalle,  descended

2  ‘  Halifax  and  Egremont  Corre-  from  Sir  Robert  Barnewalle,  cre-

spondence,  1762/  S.  P.  0.  ated  Lord  Trimleston  byEd ward  IV.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

16

BOOK

V.

he  is  most  to  be  depended  on.  He  assures  me  that
all  impressions  in  favour  of  the  Stuart  family  are
worn  out  with  gentlemen  of  consequence  and  fortune
in  this  country.  The  present  war,  he  says,  has  oc¬
casioned  such  a  strain  on  England,  as  has  suggested
to  his  majesty’s  Roman  Catholic  subjects  here,  that
means  may  possibly  now  be  struck  out  whereby  they
may  give  proof  of  their  loyalty.  They  have  nothing
so  much  at  heart.

‘ 1  reminded  him  that  no  Roman  Catholic  officer,
without  which  he  seemed  to  think  that  no  consider¬
able  body  of  men  could  be  raised,  could  by  law  be
admitted  into  his  majesty’s  service.  He  answered
that  their  best  endeavours  should  be  exerted  for  the
King’s  service  in  any  way  he  should  be  pleased  to
direct.  On  so  general  an  opening  many  ideas  crowded
on  me ;  we  are  engaged  in  two  wars  when  we  were
almost  exhausted  bv  one  :  what  men  will  be  wanted
your  lordship  best  knows.  I  asked  whether,  if  his
majesty’s  allies,  Prussia,  Hesse,  Portugal,  or  any
other  friendly  powers  wanted  troops,  they  could  be
raised.  He  said  that  what  the  Roman  Catholics  of
Ireland  most  wished,  as  they  could  not  by  law  serve
under  his  majesty  as  king,  was  that  they  might  be
taken  into  his  service  as  Elector  of  Hanover.  He
added,  the  Irish  brigade  in  France  are  so  disgusted
with  that  service,  that  if  a  door  was  opened  to  them
by  his  majesty  they  would  crowd  to  it.  An  offer  of
this  sort,  and  at  such  a  time,  would  be  suspicious  if
those  who  made  it  were  not  ready  to  give  every
pledge  of  their  sincerity.  Such  as  it  is  I  lay  it  before
your  lordship.’

Enclosed  in  this  letter  was  an  address  signed  c  by
the  principal  Catholic  noblemen  and  gentlemen,  pro-

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

17

fessing  to  contain  the  sentiments  of  all  Papists  of  chap.
consequence/  and  a  circular  4  sent  by  the  Catholic  - — T/ —
bishops  to  the  priests  of  every  parish  in  the  kingdom/

The  address  expressed  gratitude  for  past  4  clemency/

It  declared  the  eagerness  of  the  Catholics  of  Ireland
to  exert  themselves  in  their  country’s  cause  wherever
they  should  be  thought  worthy  to  be  employed  ;  and
it  dwelt  on  the  regret  felt  by  them  that  hitherto  they
had  been  unable  to  give  more  than  passive  proofs  of
the  goodness  of  their  disposition.  The  circular  was
to  remind  the  congregations  of  the  duty  of  obedience
to  the  Government,  and  of  the  lenity  and  indulgence
with  which  they  had  been  lately  treated.  It  bade  them
recollect  that  the  penal  laws  had  been  enacted  in
reigns  anterior  to  the  accession  of  the  House  of
Hanover.

The  petition  was  well  timed.  It  was  modest  in
conception.  It  found  England  in  a  state  of  just  and
growing  irritation  with  the  Protestant  Parliament
and  gentry.

4  His  majesty/  Egremont  replied,  4  receives  with
confidence  and  pleasure  the  assurances  which  Lord
Trimleston  has  given,  and  you  may  signify  as  much
to  his  lordship.  Difficulties  have  been  started  as  to
the  legality  of  the  King’s  raising  a  body  of  Koman
Catholics  though  for  the  service  of  the  Elector  of
Hanover,  but  his  majesty  is  desirous  to  give  them
an  opportunity  of  exerting  their  loyalty.  His  ma¬
jesty  is  about  to  send  help  to  Portugal.  It  might  be
possible  to  induce  a  certain  number  of  Catholics  of
Ireland  to  engage  for  a  limited  period  in  the  Portu¬
guese  service.  His  majesty  would  count  it  as  an
effectual  assistance  and  an  agreeable  mark  of  zeal.’  1

1  ‘  Egremont  to  Halifax,  February  23,  1762/  S.  P.  0.

VOL.  II.  C

18

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

The  negotiation  once  opened  ripened  rapidly.
Trimleston  went  to  England  to  speak  with  the
ministers.  Lord  Kenmare  undertook  the  raising  of
the  troops.  Seven  regiments  were  to  be  collected,
drilled,  and  armed  in  Ireland.  They  were  to  retain
their  privileges  as  British  subjects.  They  were  to  be
under  the  protection  and  virtually  under  the  command
of  their  own  sovereign.  The  time  of  service  was  ten
years,  at  the  end  of  which  they  were  to  return  to  their
country.1

The  people  were  enthusiastic  ;  recruits  poured
in.  In  a  few  weeks  an  Irish  Catholic  army  would
have  been  once  more  on  foot.  Unhappily  the  consent
was  needed  of  the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  and  a
feeling,  which  Halifax  regarded  as  ill-bred  bigotry,
blighted  the  promising  experiment.  Objections  were
raised  that  so  many  hands  could  not  be  spared  from
labour,  objections  of  a  hundred  kinds,  and  from  every
party  combined.  The  unexpressed  but  real  ground
of  opposition  was  an  obstinate  and  fanatical  dislike  to
see  c  favour  or  confidence  shown  to  the  Catholics/  2
Whether  Irish  Protestant  bigotry  or  English
liberalism  had  formed  the  more  correct  view  of  the
situation  will  be  immediately  seen.

1  Proposals  for  the  Catholic  regiments,  March  14.  S.  P.  0.

2  1  Halifax  to  Egremont,  April  17,  1762.’  S.  P.  O.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

19

SECTION  III.

Lord  Trimleston  and  the  Dublin  Committee  in-  chap.
•sisted  that  the  Catholics  of  Ireland  had  been  loyal  to  -- — r —
the  British  Government.  Had  the  fact  been  as  they
represented  it,  Catholic  loyalty  would  have  furnished
an  unanswerable  proof  of  the  wisdom  of  the  penal
laws.  The  inveterate  turbulence  of  the  Irish  race
would  have  at  last  yielded,  and  the  rude  assertion  of
authority  and  the  demonstrated  hopelessness  of  re¬
sistance  would  have  broken  a  spirit  which  for  six
centuries  had  baffled  any  previous  effort  either  to
conciliate  or  subdue  it.  That  the  Catholic  gentry
who  had  retained  part  of  their  estates,  and  the  leading
Catholic  clergy  who  understood  the  relative  strength
of  the  two  countries,  were  unwilling  to  renew  a
struggle  which,  if  unsuccessful,  would  entail  fresh  for¬
feitures  and  the  execution  of  laws  at  present  suspended,
is  doubtless  perfectly  true.  That  the  other  section  of
the  Catholics,  the  heirs  of  the  land  which  had  been
torn  from  their  ancestors,  and  the  dependents  of  the
ruined  families  whose  interests  were  the  interests  of
their  chiefs  ;  that  the  poorer  priests  who  identified
their  faith  with  their  country,  who  looked  to  the  un¬
broken  spirit  of  the  old  race  to  reconquer  for  them
the  supremacy  of  their  Church,  that  these  were  either
disheartened  or  reconciled,  that  under  any  circum¬
stances,  short  of  full  restoration  and  expiation,  these
men  would  cease  to  regard  England  and  the  English
•connection  with  any  feelings  short  of  inveterate
hatred,  could  be  believed  only  by  persons  who  were
wilfully  blind  to  the  unchangeableness  of  the  Irish

c  2

20

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

disposition.  Had  the  new  owners  of  the  soil  resided
^  on  their  estates,  had  they  taught  their  unwilling
tenants  that  the  rule  of  England  meant  the  rule  of
justice,  had  colonies  of  Scots  and  Englishmen  been
scattered  over  the  land,  had  the  Irish  been  able
to  learn  by  the  contrast  the  material  advantages  of
industry  and  energy,  had  they  found  in  their  con¬
querors  beneficent  masters  who  would  have  put  down
wrong  doing  and  oppression  of  man  by  man,  who
would  have  erected  schools  for  their  children,  who
would  have  treated  them  as  human  beings  and  helped
them  to  live  in  decency,  they  were  not  framed  so
differently  from  the  common  posterity  of  Adam
but  that  in  time  their  prejudices  would  have  given
way.  But  to  four-fifths  of  the  Irish  peasantry  the
change  of  masters  meant  only  a  grinding  tyranny,
and  tyranny  the  more  unbearable  because  inflicted  by
aliens  in  blood  and  creed.  Under  their  own  chiefs
they  had  been  miserable,  but  they  were  suffering  at
least  at  the  hands  of  their  natural  sovereigns  ;  and  the
clansman  who  bore  his  lord’s  name,  and  if  harshly
used  by  his  own  master,  was  protected  by  him  against
others,  could  not  feel  himself  utterly  without  a
friend.  But  the  oppression  of  the  peasantry  in  the
last  century  was  not  even  the  oppression  of  a  living
man — it  was  the  oppression  of  a  system.  The  peasant
of  Tipperary  was  in  the  grasp  of  a  dead  hand.  The
will  of  a  master  whom  he  never  saw  was  enforced
against  him  by  a  law  irresistible  as  destiny.  The
absentee  landlords  of  Ireland  had  neither  community
of  interest  with  the  people  nor  sympathy  of  race.
They  had  no  fear  of  provoking  their  resentment,  for
they  lived  beyond  their  reach.  They  had  no  desire
for  their  welfare,  for  as  individuals  they  were  ignorant

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

21

of  their  existence.  They  regarded  their  Irish  estates
ns  the  sources  of  their  income;  their  only  desire  was
to  extract  the  most  out  of  them  which  the  soil  could
be  made  to  yield;  and  they  cared  no  more  for  the
souls  and  bodies  of  those  who  were  in  fact  committed
to  their  charge  than  the  owners  of  a  West  Indian
plantation  for  the  herds  of  slaves  whose  backs  were
blistering  in  the  cane  fields.

Thus  universally  through  the  southern  provinces
there  was  settled  and  sullen  discontent.  The  pea¬
santry  continued  to  regard  the  land  as  their  own;
and  with  the  general  faith  that  wrong  cannot  last
for  ever,  they  waited  for  the  time  when  they  would
once  more  have  possession  of  it.  1  The  lineal
descendants  of  the  old  families/  wrote  Arthur
Young,  in  1774,  ‘are  now  to  be  found  all  over  the
kingdom,  working  as  cottiers  on  the  lands  which
were  once  their  own.  In  such  great  revolutions  of
property  the  ruined  proprietors  have  usually  been
extirpated  or  banished.  In  Ireland  the  case  was
otherwise,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  in  most  parts  of  the
kingdom  the  descendants  of  the  old  land -owners
regularly  transmit  by  testamentary  deed  the  memorial
of  their  right  to  those  estates  which  once  belonged
to  their  families.’ 1  Acts  of  savage  ferocity  which
burst  out  from  time  to  time  showed  that  the  volcanic
fires  were  unextinguished,  and  might  at  any  moment
break  out  once  more ;  and  all  along  there  was  a  secret
connection  between  local  agrarian  passion  and  political
disaffection.  The  Irish  brigade  served  as  an  escape
valve  for  the  fiercer  enthusiasts.  The  clergy  had
been  directed  from  Rome  to  support  the  claims  of
the  Pretender,  and  the  Pretender’s  cause  was  never
popular  with  the  indigenous  Irish.  They  had  not

CHAP.

i.

Tour  in  Ireland ,  vol.  ii.,  p.  133.

22

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

forgiven  the  Act  of  Settlement  or  the  cowardice
which  had  betrayed  them  on  the  Boyne.  They
were  ready,  however,  if  a  chance  offered  itself,  and
if  there  was  no  better  outlook,  to  take  arms  in
his  favour  ;  and  although  Lord  Trimleston  might
have  said  truly  that  the  Catholic  gentry  had  ceased
to  take  an  interest  in  the  Stuart  cause,  he  was  de¬
ceiving  himself  or  deceiving  the  Viceroy  when  he
undertook  to  speak  for  the  Catholics  as  a  whole.
Coincidently  with  the  intended  invasion  and  the
appearance  on  the  coast  of  M.  Thurot,  began  the
celebrated  Whiteboy  disturbances  in  Tipperary.
Many  causes  had  combined  at  that  moment  to  exas¬
perate  the  normal  irritation  of  the  southern  peasantry..
With  the  growth  of  what  was  called  civilisation,  ab¬
senteeism,  the  worst  disorder  of  the  country,  had
increased.  In  Charles  the  Second’s  time  the  absentees
were  few  or  none.  But  the  better  Irish  gentlemen
were  educated,  and  the  more  they  knew  of  the  rest  of
the  world,  the  less  agreeable  they  found  Ireland  and
Irish  manners  ;  while  the  more  they  separated  them¬
selves  from  their  estates,  the  more  they  increased  their
rents  to  support  the  cost  of  living  elsewhere.  The
rise  in  prices,  the  demand  for  salt  beef  and  salt  butter
for  exportation  and  for  the  fleets,1  were  revolutionising
the  agriculture  of  Munster.  The  great  limestone  pas¬
tures  of  Limerick  and  Tipperary,  the  fertile  meadow
land  universally,  was  falling  into  the  hands  of  capi¬
talist  graziers,  in  whose  favour  the  landlords,  or  the  >
landlords’  agents,  were  evicting  the  smaller  tenants.2 3

1  The  war  gave  an  enormous
stimulus  to  the  salt  beef  trade.
Not  only  were  the  English  fleets
supplied  from  Cork,  but  the  French

and  Spanish  as  well.

3  In  Limerick,  Tipperary,  Clare,

Meath,  and  Waterford  there  are  to
be  found  the  greatest  graziers  and
cowkeepers,  perhaps,  in  the  world  :
some  who  rent  and  occupy  from
3.000/.  to  10,000/.  a  year. — Arthur
Young,  vol.  ii.,  p.  102.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

I

They  had  the  aims  of  English  men  of  business  with¬
out  the  redeeming  features  of  the  English  character.
Their  object  was  to  make  money,  and  they  cared  not
at  what  cost  to  the  people  that  object  was  attained;
while  they  combined  with  their  unscrupulousness  the
worst  vices  of  the  worst  class  of  the  lower  Irish
gentry,  and  were  slovenly,  extravagant,  and  dissi¬
pated.1  To  the  peasantry  these  men  were  a  curse.
Common  lands,  where  their  own  cows  had  been  fed,
were  enclosed  and  taken  from  them.  The  change  from
tillage  to  grazing  destroyed  their  employment.  Their
sole  subsistence  was  from  their  potato  gardens,  the
rents  of  which  were  heavily  raised,  while,  by  a  curious
mockery  of  justice,  the  grass  lands  were  exempt  from
tythe,  and  the  burden  of  maintaining  the  rectors  and
vicars  of  the  Established  Church  was  cast  exclusively
on  the  Catholic  poor.

Among  a  people  who  are  suffering  under  a  common
wrong  there  is  a  sympathy  of  resentment  which  links
them  together  without  visible  or  discoverable  bond.
In  the  spring  of  1760  Tipperary  was  suddenly  over¬
run  by  bands  of  midnight  marauders.  Who  they  were
was  a  mystery.  Rumours  reached  England  of  insur¬
gent  regiments  drilling  in  the  moonlight ;  of  French
officers  observed  passing  and  repassing  the  Channel ;
but  no  French  officer  could  be  detected  in  Munster.
The  most  rigid  search  discovered  no  stands  of  arms,
such  as  soldiers  use  or  could  use.  This  only  was  cer¬
tain,  that  white  figures  were  seen  in  vast  numbers,  like
moving  clouds,  flitting  silently  at  night  over  field  and

>

1  These  graziers  are  too  apt  to  nine-tenths  of  the  year  without
attend  to  their  claret  as  much  any  exertion  of  industry,  contract
as  to  their  bullocks  ;  they  live  ex-  such  a  habit  of  ease  that  works  of
pensively ;  and  being  enabled  from  improvement  would  be  mortifying
the  nature  of  their  business  to  pass  to  their  sloth. — Ibid.

23

CHAP.

I.

24

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

y.

moor,  leaving  behind  them  the  tracks  of  where  they  had
passed  in  levelled  fences  and  houghed  and  moaning
cattle;  where  the  owners  were  specially  hateful,  in
blazing  homesteads,  and  the  inmates’  bodies  blacken¬
ing  in  the  ashes.  Arrests  were  generally  useless.  The
country  was  sworn  to  secrecy.  Through  the  entire
central  plains  of  Ireland  the  people  were  bound  by
the  most  solemn  oaths  never  to  reveal  the  name  of
a  confederate,  or  give  evidence  in  a  court  of  justice.
When  subpoenaed,  forced  to  appear,  and  thus  to  per¬
jure  themselves  on  one  side  or  the  other,  they  preferred
to  keep  the  oath  to  their  friends.  Thus  it  was  long
uncertain  how  the  movement  originated,  who  were
its  leaders,  and  whether  there  was  one  or  many.
Letters  signed  by  Captain  Dwyer  or  Joanna  Meskell
were  left  at  the  doors  of  obnoxious  persons,  ordering
lands  to  be  abandoned  under  penalties.  If  the  com¬
mands  were  uncomplied  with,  the  penalties  were
inexorably  inflicted.  In  one  fortnight  four  innocent
girls,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be  the  children  of
wealthy  parents  on  Captain  Dwyer’s  black  list,  were
carried  off,  violated,  and  forced  into  marriage  with
the  ceremonies  which  have  been  described  elsewhere.
Torture  usually  being  preferred  to  murder,  male
offenders  against  the  Whiteboys  were  houghed  like
their  cattle,  or  their  tongues  were  torn  out  by  the
roots.  Another  favourite  amusement  was  to  seize
some  poor  wretch  in  his  bed,  carry  him  naked  to  a
hill  side,  fling  him  into  a  pit  lined  with  thorns,  and
filling  in.  the  earth  to  his  chin,  leave  him  to  live  or
die.1

1  Many  Whiteboy  letters  are  Harden  had  taken  the  lands  of  a
preserved  in  Dublin  Castle.  On  worthy  gentleman  .  ,  He  had
March  11,  1760,  Captain  Dwyer  promised  on  the  Evangelists  to
gave  notice  that  a  certain  John  restore  them,  and  the  promise  was

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

25

♦

It  was  necessary  to  repress  tliese  atrocities.  In
a  country  which  is  unfortunately  governed  by  a

still  unfulfilled .  John  Harden  was
informed  that  unless  the  deed  of
surrender  was  signed  by  a  particu¬
lar  day,  his  house  should  be  burnt,
his  cattle  and  his  children  should
be  houghed,  his  own  tongue  should
be  cut  out,  and  he  should  then  be
shot  dead  and  be  1  sent  to  the
shades  below.’

Samuel  Geylin,  doubly  obnoxi¬
ous  as  a  grazier  and  a  revenue
officer,  who  had  been  rash  enough,
like  a  notorious  villain,  to  make  a
seizure  of  tobacco,  was  cautioned
to  behave  with  more  lenitv  and
mildness,  or  he  should  have  a
brace  of  bullets  in  his  body,  &c.
Other  manifestoes  were  more  tem¬
perate,  and  are  instructive,  as
showing  the  real  grievances  of
which  the  people  had  to  complain.
Here  is  one  of  them  for  the  year
1762

1  We,  levellers  and  avengers  for
the  wrongs  done  to  the  poor,  have
unanimously  assembled  to  raze
walls  and  ditches  that  have  been
made  to  enclose  the  commons.
Gentlemen  now  of  late  have  learned
to  grind  the  face  of  the  poor  so
that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to
live.  They  cannot  even  keep  a
pig  or  a  hen  at  their  doors.  We
warn  them  not  to  raise  again  either
walls  or  ditches  in  the  place  of
those  we  destroy,  nor  even  to  en¬
quire  about  the  destroyers  of  them.
If  they  do,  their  cattle  shall  be
houghed  and  their  sheep  laid  open
in  the  fields.  Gentlemen,  we  beg
you  will  consider  the  case  of  the
poor  now-a-days.  You  that  live
on  the  fat  of  the  land  consider  poor
creatures  whom  you  harass  with¬
out  means  of  proper  subsistence.
Use  them  better  for  the  future,

and  do  not  imagine  it  is  with  a
view  of  creating  trouble  for  the
Government  we  do  this  thing,  for
we  are  as  loyal  to  our  king  and
country  as  you  are.’

The  most  interesting  of  all  the
Whiteboy  papers  is  a  letter  from
Joanna  Meskell  to  a  gentleman
who  had  called  a  county  meeting
to  concert  measures  for  restoring
order,  or,  as  Joanna  expressed  it,
i  for  defeating  the  method  I  have
taken  to  ward  off  an  impending
famine  from  my  poor  people  which
some  persons  erroneously  call  a
rebellion.’

i  Your  Honour  is  sensible,’  she
says,  ‘  that  while  of  the  land  which
their  ancestors  held  at  four  or
five  shillings  an  acre  they  got
a  few  acres  at  four  pounds,  to  set
potatoes  in,  they  behaved  peace¬
ably  and  quietly.  Your  Honour
is  also  sensible  that  the  laws  of  the
land  have  made  no  provision  for
them,  and  that  the  customs  of  the
country  seem  to  have  been  ap¬
pointed  for  their  to'tal  destruction
and  desolation  j  upstarts  supplant¬
ing  my  poor  people  on  expira¬
tion  of  their  leases,  and  stocking
their  lands  with  bullocks,  a  practice
not  known  in  any  part  of  the
world,  Ireland  only  excepted.  I
have  thought  it  incumbent  on  me
to  provide  for  the  support  of  my
people  as  inoffensively  as  I  could,
by  ordering  them  to  dig  up  a  few
fields,  offering  to  occupiers  treble
rent  for  the  same.  As  to  the  kill¬
ing  of  cattle  on  a  late  occasion,  it
was  intended  as  a  scheme  to  awe
some  obstinate  and  uncharitable
stock-jobbers  into  compliance  with
the  just  and  necessary  demands  of
my  poor  afflicted  people.  The

CHAP.

L

26

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

Parliament  representing  only  the  holders  of  property,
the  crimes  of  the  poor  receive  more  attention  than,
the  causes  of  them.  The  Irish  gentry  regarded  the
Whiteboy  movement  as  an  insurrection  against  the
rights  of  property  and  the  Protestant  religion.  The
English  Government,  caring  little  for  landlord  or
tenant,  and  less  for  Protestant  ascendency,  enquired
only  whether  the  leaders  were  in  correspondence
with  France.  Egremont  declared,  on  information  of
his  own,  that  4  the  grievances  of  the  poor  were  a  pre¬
tence.’  4  The  inveterate  enemies  of  England,  driven
to  despair  elsewhere,  were  taking  to  Ireland  as  a  last
resource.’1  Halifax,  under  the  influence  of  Trimleston

,  '  i

and  the  Dublin  committee,  persuaded  himself  that
the  disturbances  had  been  encouraged  by  the  ultra-
Protestant  faction  to  revive  the  terrors  of  Popery,  and
prevent  the  formation  of  the  Irish  Catholic  regiments.
Tipperary  was  proclaimed.  Troops  were  sent  to  the
baronies  where  the  disorders  had  been  most  violent.
Sir  William  Aston,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common
Pleas,  went  with  a  special  commission  to  Clonmel,  to
try  the  prisoners  with  which  the  gaols  were  crowded.
The  result  was  the  almost  universal  acquittal,  which
Halifax  anticipated  and  desired.  The  prosecution

premises  considered,  I  flatter  my¬
self  you  will  please  to  commiserate
the  deplorable  state  of  the  poor  by
putting  the  Tillage  Act*  in  force  for
them,  for  my  army,  which  consists
of  no  less  than  500,000  effective
men  in  this  kingdom  ready  to  take
the  field  at  a  few  hours’  notice,
cannot  live  on  air.  They  shall  be
all  entirely  devoted  to  his  majesty’s

*  Act  ordering  all  landholders
to  keep  five  acres  in  tillage  out  of
every  hundred  which  they  occupied.

service,,  provided  they  are  used
with  lenity  ;  but  if  at  the  instance
of  a  few  self-interested  persons  you  •
shall  take  any  violent  or  rigorous
steps  against  them,  no  gentleman
having  been  hitherto  molested,  you
may  blame  yourselves  for  the  con¬
sequence.

‘  Your  Honour’s  obedient  servant,

‘  Joanna  Meskell.’

MSS.  Dublin  Castle.

1  1  Egremont  to  Halifax,  April
13,1762/  S.  P.  0.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

27

broke  down  for  want  of  evidence.  The  House  of  chap.
Commons  had  appointed  a  committee  to  enquire  into  - — r —
the  causes  of  4  the  Popish  insurrection  of  Munster.’ 1
Halifax  insisted  that  the  most  careful  scrutiny  had
failed  to  discover  any  traces  either  of  political  or  reli¬
gious  disaffection ;  that  the  riots  had  been  purposely
exaggerated,  and  were  completely  at  an  end.2  Five
Whiteboys  were  executed  at  Waterford,  whose  guilt,
after  all,  was  but  half  proved.  A  few  more  were  sent
on  board  the  fleet.  The  rest  of  the  prisoners  were
dismissed;  and  so  well  pleased  Avere  the  peasantry
with  the  Chief  Justice,  that  when  the  commission
was  over,  and  he  left  Clonmel,  the  road  was  lined
with  women  and  children,  imploring  blessings  on
him,  upon  their  knees.

Yet  Egremont,  after  all,  had  been  partially  right,
and  the  House  of  Commons  partially  right ;  and  of
the  three  interpretations  given  of  the  Whiteboy  rising,
that  of  Halifax  and  Aston  was  the  furthest  from  the
truth.  The  acquittal  might  have  been  right  if  op¬
pression  be  an  excuse  for  crime.  Yet,  as  in  1797,
behind  the  defenders  lay  the  schemes  of  the  United
Irishmen,  so  in  1762,  behind  the  agrarian  riots  lay
treason,  political  and  religious  ;  and  the  wrongs  of
the  exasperated  peasantry  were  only  the  instruments
of  intriguing  and  more  dangerous  incendiaries.  The
most  remarkable  feature  in  the  story  is  the  suc¬
cess  with  which,  though  thousands  were  acquainted
with  the  secret,  an  organised  scheme  of  revolt,

1  Commons'  Journals ,  April  12,
1762.

2  1 1  can  assure  you, if  his  majesty
should  accidentally  lay  aside  the
plan  of  the  Roman  Catholic  corps,
he  will  hear  nothing  further  of  the

rioters,  who  will  be  considered
again  what  they  always  were,  a
rabble  destitute  of  employment
and  wretched  in  their  circum¬
stances.’ — ‘  Halifax  to  Egremont.
April  17,  1762.’

28

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

encouraged  by  some  at  least  of  the  highest  persons  in
the  Catholic  Church,  was  concealed  from  the  strictest
investigation.  Halifax,  at  the  close  of  the  session  of
1762,  congratulated  Parliament  on  the  restoration  of
order ;  yet  order  was  not  restored.  The  nightly
orgies  of  the  Whiteboys,  after  Aston’s  return  to
Dublin,  continued  precisely  as  before.  Emboldened
by  impunity,  they  became  at  length  so  terrible,  that
for  three  years  they  were  the  lawgivers  and  masters
of  Tipperary.  The  police  had  no  existence.  The
parish  constables  were  no  match  for  the  secret  socie¬
ties,  and  the  scanty  garrisons  of  soldiers  were  not
allowed  to  be  too  active.  The  large  landowners
were  absentees.  The  magistrates  were  the  smaller
gentry,  the  clergy,  and  the  middlemen.  They  lived
at  a  distance  from  each  other,  and  with  few  servants ;
and  exposed  to  vengeance  in  detail,  they  were  too
prudent  to  bring  Captain  Dwyer’s  and  Joanna’s
armies  on  them.  Occasional  arrests  were  attempted
after  some  unusually  audacious  outrage;  but  the  signal
vengeance  always  taken  upon  informers  made  legal
convictions  impossible.  Prisoners  were  rescued  from
their  escorts  by  armed  and  disciplined  bodies,  who
attacked  them  on  the  roads,  and  from  1762  to  1765
the  central  plain  of  Ireland,  from  Mallow  to  West¬
meath,  was  under  Captain  Dwyer’s  dictatorship.  His
rule  had  its  merits.  The  graziers  were  brought  to
their  bearings.  The  landlords,  in  fear  of  him,  lowered
their  rents.  Unfortunately  he  had  less  innocent  aims,
on  which  the  Whiteboy  fortunes  were  shipwrecked.
Presuming  on  impunity,  they  attacked  a  village  in
Waterford,  which  was  armed  and  prepared  to  receive
them.  They  were  beaten  back,  with  a  loss  of  thirty
or  forty  men.  The  gentry  recovered  courage.  Lord

EEVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

Carrick  and  Lord  Drogheda  set  themselves  at  the
head  of  an  active  combination  to  restore  the  regular
authority.  Bodies  were  formed  of  armed  volunteers.
Where  property  was  destroyed,  the  baronies  were
assessed  for  compensation,  and  were  compelled  to  pay.
High  rewards  were  offered  for  information,  and  as
law  re-asserted  itself,  the  terrors  by  degrees  wore
away.  It  had  been  evident  from  the  first,  to  those
who  knew  the  country,  that  more  was  at  work  than
peasant  discontent.  As  the  dread  of  vengeance  was
removed,  the  mystery  was  at  length  revealed.

Suspicion  had  many  times  been  directed  to  the
parish  priest  of  Clogheen,  in  Tipperary,  Father  Nicholas
Sheehy.  In  patriotic  histories  this  reverend  person  is
described  as  of  4  Quixotic  turn  of  mind,’  with  a  quick
resentment  against  wrong,  and  eagerness  to  redress  it.
He  had  made  himself  conspicuous  in  the  defence  of
prisoners.  His  parish  was  notorious  as  a  Whiteboy
centre.  It  was  assumed  that  he  could  not  be  ignorant
of  the  secrets  of  his  flock.  More  than  once  he  was  ar¬
rested  and  indicted  under  the  Registration  Act ;  but
the  prosecution  failed,  and  Father  Nicholas  was  still
at  large.  At  length,  after  the  affair  in  Waterford,
when  active  measures  were  resumed,  an  informer
named  Bridges  disappeared  under  circumstances  which
made  it  certain  that  he  had  been  murdered.  An  escort
of  troops,  carrying  a  prisoner  to  Clonmel  gaol,  was  set
upon  near  Sheehy’s  house,  and  several  soldiers  were
killed.  He  was  suspected  of  being  concerned  in  the
rescue.  He  was  charged  with  high  treason,  and  a
reward  of  300?.  was  offered  for  his  capture.  Secure
of  the  fidelity  of  those  whose  evidence  could  alone
convict  him,  Father  Nicholas  wrote  to  the  Secretary,
offering  to  surrender,  if  he  could  be  tried,  not  at

2<>

CHAP.

I.

/

4

30

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Clonmel,  but  in  Dublin.  The  condition  was  accepted.

— T- — *  He  was  brought  to  the  bar.  The  evidence  was  insuf¬
ficient,  and  he  was  triumphantly  acquitted.  The
Lords  Justices  were  certain  of  his  guilt,  though,  as
often  happens  in  Ireland,  they  could  not  produce  their
proofs.  There  was  a  second  charge,  which  they  be¬
lieved  that  they  could  bring  home  to  him.  He  was
charged  with  his  brother  Edmund — Buck  Sheehy  as
the  brother  was  called — with  being  concerned  in  the
informer’s  murder.  The  promise  made  to  him  had
been  observed  in  the  letter,  it  was,  perhaps,  broken
in  the  spirit  when  he  was  sent  back,  to  be  tried  for
murder,  from  Dublin  to  Clonmel.

So  great  was  the  excitement,  that  at  the  time  of
the  trial  the  court-house  was  surrounded  by  a  party
of  cavalry.  The  body  of  Bridges  had  not  been  found,
and  witnesses  came  forward  to  swear  that  he  had  left
the  country.  It  was  proved,  however,  that  there  had
been  a  conspiracy  to  murder  him,  and  that  the  Sheehies
knew  it.  A  Mr.  Keating,  described  as  a  gentleman
of  property  in  the  county,  offered  to  prove  that  Father
Nicholas  was  at  his  house  on  the  night  when,  if  ever,
the  murder  was  committed  ;  but  Mr.  Hewetson,  a
clergyman  and  an  active  magistrate,  rose  in  court,
and  said  that  he  had  a  charge  against  Keating  for
having  been  present  at  the  killing  of  the  soldiers.
Keating’s  evidence  was  refused,  and  he  was  committed
to  the  gaol  at  Kilkenny.  The  Sheehies  were  found
guilty,  and  were  both  hanged.  It  was  an  extreme
measure.  The  breach  of  faith  in  returning  him  to
Tipperary,  the  military  occupation  of  the  town,  the
non-discovery  of  the  body,  and  the  refusal  to  hear
his  witness,  led  to  an  impression,  even  with  moderate
persons,  that  he  had  been  unfairly  dealt  with.  Both

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

31

lie  and  his  brother  protested  their  innocence  on  the
scaffold.  The  Crown  counsel,  acting  on  secret  infor¬
mation,  asked  him  if  the  Whiteboys  ivere  connected
with  France  or  the  Pretender.  He  declared  that  he  had
never  heard  of  any  such  connection,  and  disbelieved
in  its  existence.  Then  and  afterwards,  therefore,
the  Irish  Catholics  insisted  that  Father  Sheehy  was  a
murdered  man.  With  a  curious  paralogism  they  re¬
garded  him  as  the  victim  of  his  love  for  Ireland,  and,
at  the  same  time,  as  guiltless  of  having  shown  it ;  and
he  was  raised  on  the  spot  to  an  honoured  place  in
the  Irish  martyrology.  His  tomb  became  a  place  of
pilgrimage — a  scene  at  which  the  Catholic  Celt  could
renew  annually  his  vow  of  vengeance  against  the
assassins  of  Ireland’s  saints.  The  stone  which  lay
above  his  body  was  chipped  in  pieces  by  enthusiastic
relic  hunters.  The  execution  is  among  the  stereo¬
typed  enormities  which  justify  an  undying  hatred
against  the  English  rule  and  connection.

Yet  the  Government  essentially  was  right ;  and  if
treason  and  murder  are  crimes  at  all  in  Ireland,
Father  Sheehy  was  as  deep  a  criminal  as  ever  swung
from  crossbeam.  He  died  as  others  had  died,  keep¬
ing  the  oath  of  secrecy  which  he  had  sworn  as  a
Whiteboy,  and  going  out  of  the  world  with  a  lie  upon
his  lips,  to  leave  a  doubt  of  the  justice  of  his  sentence
as  a  stain  upon  the  law  which  had  condemned  him.
Either  to  set  at  rest  the  misgivings  which  Sheehy’s
words  had  caused,  or  relieved  of  their  fears  by  the
restored  energy  of  the  law,  Father  O’Brien,  the  co¬
adjutor  of  the  Archbishop  of  Cashel,  and  four  other
Catholic  gentlemen,  came  forward  and  revealed,  under
oath,  the  inner  history  of  Whiteboyism.  Father
O’Brien  swore  to  having  been  told  by  the  Archbishop

CHAP.

i.

32

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  of  Cashel  that  the  rising  of  the  Whiteboys  was  for
— — -  the  advancement  of  the  Catholic  faith  and  the  extir¬
pation  of  heresy  ;  that  as  there  was  but  one  God,
there  would  soon  be  but  one  religion;  and  that  with
the  help  of  France  the  Vetus  Hibernia  should  be  re¬
stored.  A  fund  had  been  regularly  collected  by  the
Catholic  priests  in  the  diocese  in  support  of  the  move¬
ment.  The  person  by  whom  the  money  was  distributed
was  Father  Nicholas  Sheehy.  David  Landregan  swore
that  he  had  been  made  a  Whiteboy  in  1762;  that
at  his  initiation  he  had  sworn  to  be  faithful  to  the
King  of  France  and  Prince  Charles.  Many  times  he
had  gone  on  night  expeditions  with  the  Sheehies  and
their  friend  Keating.  They  had  meant  to  murder
Lord  Carrick,  Sir  Thomas  Maude,  and  Mr.  Hewetson,
and  had  been  prevented  only  by  the  Sheetses’  arrest.
Five  hundred  of  them  had  met  one  night  on  the  race¬
course  at  Clogheen.  Lord  Drogheda  with  a  detach¬
ment  of  troops  was  in  the  town.  Father  Sheehy  had
proposed  to  set  it  on  fire,  and  destroy  them.  The
priest  of  Ardfinnan,  as  they  were  about  to  do  it,  fell
on  his  knees,  and  gave  them  his  curse  if  they  moved.

6  For,’  he  said,  c  we  are  not  yet  ripe  for  such  a  blow,
nor  can  we,  till  Prince  Charles  and  his  friends  from
France  land  for  our  assistance.  If  we  attempt  it  be¬
fore  that  time,  every  Protestant  in  Ireland  will  be  in
arms,  and  give  no  quarter  to  man,  woman,  or  child
of  us.’

Mr.  Rawley,  of  Tipperary,  professed  to  have  been
sworn  a  Whiteboy  by  the  Archbishop  himself.  Again
his  oath  had  been  to  be  faithful  to  France  and  Prince
Charles.  The  French  were  coming,  with  the  Prince
at  their  head,  and  then  Ireland  was  to  rise.

James  French  had  been  enlisted  by  Father  Sheehy.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

33

He  had  a  commission  as  major  in  the  Pretender’s  chat.
service,  and  had  received  his  pay  regularly  from  > — !' —
Father  Sheehy ’s  hands.  Their  principal  leaders  were
four  Catholic  prelates — the  Archbishops  of  Cashel
and  Dublin,  and  the  Bishops  of  Waterford  and  Cork.

At  a  great  meeting  at  Drumlannon  he  saw  Father
Sheehy  produce  a  Bull,  which  came,  as  he  said,  from
the  Pope,  granting  pardon  and  indulgence  to  any
Catholic  who  might  pretend  to  be  a  Protestant,  4  the
better  to  carry  on  their  enterprise,  and  restore  the
Catholic  religion.’

Finally,  a  woman  named  Mary  Butler  described
the  attack  on  the  soldiers.  Father  Sheehy,  she  said,
though  the  Dublin  jury  had  acquitted  him,  was  the
contriver  of  the  plot  and  the  deviser  of  its  method.

The  Whiteboys  had  collected  on  the  road,  under
pretence  of  a  sham  funeral.  A  sham  coffin  had  been
made  for  them  to  follow.  Sheehy  saw  them  in  their
places,  and  then  left  them  to  their  work,  hurrying  off
to  say  mass  at  his  own  chapel,  that  he  might  be  able
to  prove  an  alibi.

These  depositions  were  sworn  to  with  the  usual
formalities  before  the  Mayor  of  Kilkenny  and  other
magistrates.1  They  proved  nothing  against  the  sin¬
cerity  of  the  Catholic  press  and  the  Catholic  merchants
of  Dublin;  but  they  proved  indisputably  that  there
was  a  second  Catholic  Ireland,  unreconciled  and  unre-
concileable,  of  the  existence  of  which  they  were  uncon¬
scious,  and  that  to  trust  to  these  gentlemen  as  the
exponents  of  the  feelings  of  their  countrymen  was
fond  and  infatuated  credulity.2

1  See  them  in  the  First  Appendix  story  at  some  length,  on  account  of

to  Musgrave’s  History  of  the  Irish  the  prominence  given  to  it  by  Irish
Rebellion.  historians.  The  celebrated  Father

2  I  have  told  Father  Sheehy ’s  O’Leary — the  most  plausible,  and,

VOL.  II.  D

34

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  IV.

BOOK

y.

The  war  which  was  closed  by  the  Peace  of  Paris,  in
February,  1763,  had  cost  England  more  than  a  hun¬
dred  millions.  Ireland  had  contributed  in  proportion
to  her  resources.  She  had  increased  her  debt  by  five
hundred  thousand  pounds.  She  had  added  fifty  thou¬
sand  a  year  while  the  fighting  lasted  to  the  half  million
which  was  annually  expended  on  her  military  esta¬
blishment.  So  great,  and  not  greater,  was  the  value
of  Ireland  to  the  empire  after  six  centuries  of  occu¬
pation.  The  Irish  brigade  which  turned  the  scale  at
Fontenoy  furnished  more  than  an  equivalent  on  the
other  side,  and  reduced  her  weight  to  zero.  England
came  out  of  the  conflict  with  singular  glory.  Though
Pitt  resigned  before  it  was  over,  his  genius,  as  Horace
Walpole  said,  shone  still  4  like  an  annihilated  star.’
The  work  had  been  too  completely  done  for  Bute  and
Grenville  to  spoil  it.  Ireland  lay  the  while  like  some
ill-kept  back  premises  in  the  rear  of  the  Imperial
mansion,  fit  only  to  be  concealed,  and  as  far  as  pos¬
sible  forgotten.  She  had  been  in  distinct  danger  of

O  O

perhaps,  essentially  the  falsest  of
all  Irish  writers — asserted  twenty
years  later  that  Bridges,  for  whose
murder  Sheehy  had  been  hanged,
was  still  alive.  Mr.  Daniel  Toler
brought  O’Leary’s  statement  before
the  House  of  Commons.  ‘  He  was
himself/  he  said,  1  High  Sheriff  of
Tipperary  when  Sheehy  suffered.

.  .  He  had  empanelled  a  most

respectable  jury.  Sheehy  had  been
convicted  on  the  fullest  and  clearest

evidence.  .  .  He  had  visited  him

afterwards  in  the  gaol,  when  he  con¬
fessed  that  Bridges  had  been  mur¬
dered,  though  he  denied  that  he
had  himself  a  hand  in  it.  He  had
drawn  attention  to  the  matter/  Mr.
Toler  said,  ‘  to  detect  such  agitators
as  Mr.  O’Leary  in  their  falsehood.
A  cause  that  required  such  advo¬
cates  and  such  means  of  defence
must  be  desperate  indeed.’ — Irish
Debates ,  vol.  via.  p.  342.

BEVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

35

invasion,  yet  she  was  left  undefended.  Forty-two
regiments  furnished  her  nominal  army  contingent.
There  were  not  troops  enough  in  the  island  to  keep
the  peace  of  Tipperary.  The  charge  for  the  Ord¬
nance  Department  was  45,000/.  The  whole  artillery
in  the  kingdom  would  not  furnish  out  a  thirty-gun
frigate.1  The  linen  trade  had  been  crippled  by  French
cruisers.  The  Dublin  woollen  weavers,  once  decent
and  well  disposed,  had  taken  to  drink  and  oratory.
They  dropped  their  work  on  Saturday  afternoon  ;
they  were  unfit  to  resume  it  till  Tuesday  morning,
and  they  had  formed  unions  to  raise  the  wages  rate
to  make  good  the  lost  day.  4  Decency  in  dwelling  and
apparel,  which  formerly  obtained  among  them,  was
almost  eradicated.  In  place  of  it  were  idleness,  filth,
nastiness,  with  unbounded  licentiousness  of  manners,’ 2
The  profits  of  smuggling  had  declined,  through  the
substitution  of  horned  cattle  for  sheep.  The  salt  beef
and  salt  butter  trade  alone  flourished,  and  in  flourish¬
ing  drove  the  peasantry  into  rebellion.  The  Viceroys
so  detested  their  occupation,  that  for  six  months  only
in  alternate  years  they  could  be  induced  to  reside  at
the  Castle.  In  the  interval  the  country  was  governed
by  the  Lords  Justices,  usually  from  the  same  families :
a  Boyle,  a  Beresford,  a  Ponsonby,  and  perhaps  the
Primate.  The  Lords  Justices’  object  was  to  dis¬
tribute  the  patronage  among  their  relations,  while
England’s  chief  concern  appeared  to  be  to  quarter  on
the  Irish  Pension  List  such  scandalous  persons  as
could  not  decently  be  provided  for  at  home.

Such  was  the  beautiful  condition  of  unlucky  Ire¬
land  when  Halifax  left  it  to  take  his  place  in  Lord

1  Commons'  Journals ,  December  3,  1763.

2  Ibid.,  February  28,  1764.

d  2

CHAP.

L

36

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

Bute’s  administration.  The  Earl  of  Northumberland
was  sent  to  Dublin  instead  of  him.  The  Pension
List  was  likely  to  be  assailed  as  soon  as  Parliament
met;  and  the  Cabinet  thought  it  prudent  to  affect  to
intend  concession.  Northumberland  was  directed  to
inform  4  the  principal  persons  of  both  Houses  that
except  in  cases  of  a  particular  nature,  of  which  the
King  could  be  the  only  judge,  his  majesty  did  not
intend  to  grant  any  more  pensions  either  for  life  or  a
term  of  years,  and  that  the  King’s  servants  in  Eng¬
land  did  not  mean  for  the  future  to  recommend  such
grants.’'  The  intimation  was  designed  to  anticipate
the  intemperate  action  of  Parliament.  But  the  Vice¬
roy  was  not  to  allow  interference.  If  the  Commons
brought  addresses  to  him  on  the  subject,  he  was  not
to  notice  them.  The  prerogative  must  not  be  en¬
croached  upon,  nor  any  step  be  taken  4  which  would
cast  a  public  reflexion  on  the  past.’ 1

Thus  instructed,  Northumberland  arrived  in  Dublin
in  the  autumn  of  1763.  In  the  speech  from  the
throne  he  announced  the  Peace,  a  reduction  of  the  ex¬
penditure  and  a  probable  surplus  in  the  revenue.  The
address  in  reply  was  cold,  dictated,  so  Halifax  believed,
by  the  malevolence  of  Speaker  Ponsonby.  On  the
second  day  of  the  session  the  anticipated  attack  was
made.  A  motion  was  introduced  for  an  examination  of
the  list  of  persons  in  receipt  of  his  majesty’s  bounty.
Northumberland,  supposing  that  he  was  carrying  out
his  orders,  met  it  by  the  communication  which  he  had
been  told  to  convey.  He  spoke  warmly  of  the  King’s
desire  to  comply  with  Ireland’s  wishes  ;  and  the
Council,  supposing  the  Cabinet  was  in  earnest,  never

1  1  Halifax  to  Northumberland,  October  22,  1763.’  S.  P.  0.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

dreaming;  that  Bute  and  his  fellow-ministers  would  con-
descend  to  trifle  with  them,  sketched  a  form  of  grateful
acknowledgment  in  which  the  House  of  Commons
was  to  return  its  thanks.1  Prepared  as  he  must  be
for  any  extremity  of  folly  in  the  dealings  of  English
Cabinets  with  the  interests  of  Ireland,  the  reader  will
learn  without  surprise  that  Bute  and  his  fellow-mi-
nisters  had  never  seriously  thought  of  surrendering
the  pensions  at  all.

The  Viceroy  sent  over  the  draft  for  approval:  he
was  informed  in  return  that  he  had  misconceived  his
directions.  He  had  received  a  message  which  he  was
to  have  delivered  in  private  to  a  few  persons  whose
influence  might  have  prevented  discussion  in  the
House  of  Commons.  In  making  it  public  he  had
committed  a  fatal  indiscretion.  Angry  with  North¬
umberland,  angry  with  the  Irish  Council,  angry  with
everything  but  their  own  scandalous  and  dishonest
purpose,  the  Cabinet  treated  the  proposed  address
as  an  insult  to  the  Crown,  4  disgraceful  to  the  chief
governor  of  the  kingdom,  disrespectful  and  undutiful
to  his  majesty.’  ‘  The  King’s  goodness,’  Halifax
wrote,  4  required  a  more  grateful  return  than  that  he
should  be  compelled  to  pare  and  abridge  the  rights  of
the  Crown  by  a  declaration  almost  equivalent  to  an
Act  of  Parliament.’  2

The  childish  trifling  irritated  the  growing  discon¬
tent.  The  manoeuvering  with  the  Catholics  assumed

1  The  Irish  Parliament  was  to
describe  itself  1  as  full  of  gratitude
for  those  gracious  intentions  re¬
lating  to  grants  of  offices  and  pen¬
sions  signified  by  your  majesty  to
the  Lord  Lieutenant.  Thus  anti¬
cipating  our  desire  by  a  provident
and  watchful  care  over  the  inte¬

rests  of  your  people,  your  majesty
will,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  distin¬
guish  your  reign/  &c.

Form  enclosed  by  the  Viceroy
to  Lord  Halifax  for  approval.
S.  P.  0.

2  ‘  Halifax  to  Northumberland,
October  27,  1763/  S.  P.  0.

38

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  a  more  sinister  complexion  when  accompanied  with
— ^ — -  so  evident  a  purpose  of  misappropriating  the  Irish
1763.  revenues.  The  Parliament  was  unable  to  perceive  in
what  the  4  goodness/  which  they  were  asked  to  ad¬
mire,  consisted,  and  the  session  was  spent  in  a  series  of
violent  motions  which  the  utmost  efforts  of  Govern-
ment  were  required  to  defeat.  A  resolution  was
passed  in  November  condemning  the  increase  of  the
Civil  List.  A  committee  was  appointed  to  examine  the
claims  of  the  various  gentlemen  and  ladies  for  whom
Ireland  was  made  to  provide,  and  the  enquiry  was
too  dangerous  to  be  encountered.

Northumberland,  after  so  sharp  a  reprimand,  ven¬
tured  nothing  more  on  his  own  responsibility.  What
was  he  to  do?  The  Lords  Justices,  he  said,  promised
to  prevent  the  committee  from  sitting,  but  he  could
not  trust  the  Lords  Justices.  The  servants  of  the
Crown  were  lukewarm.  Men  in  office  were  found
4  dividing  on  the  discontented  side  in  all  trying  ques¬
tions.’  4  Am  I,’  he  asked,  4  to  temporize  with  the
present  evil  and  make  the  best  composition  I  can,  or
shall  I  strenuously  assert  his  majesty’s  prerogative,
dismiss  these  ungrateful  servants,  and  reward  others
with  their  places  who  have  deserved  well  ?  ’ 1

The  alternative  was  between  disgraceful  humiliation
and  persistence  no  less  disgraceful  in  scandalous
injustice.  The  ministry  shuffled  out  of  it  as  best  they
could.  The  Viceroy  was  allowed  to  confirm  the
promise  that  for  the  present  at  least  the  pension
giving  should  be  suspended.  4  His  majesty,’  Halifax
said  (and  never  was  king’s  name  more  abused  by  his
ministers),  4  was  extremely  displeased,  both  with  the

1  ‘Northumberland  to  Halifax,  November  10, 1763.’  S.  P.  0.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

39

Lords  Justices  and  his  other  bad  servants.  The  chap.
Cabinet,  however,  had  decided  on  consideration  c  that  —
it  would  be  unwise  to  throw  the  public  business  into
confusion  by  depriving  them  of  their  offices.’  The
Viceroy  was  left  to  his  discretion,  being  warned  only
to  avoid  pledging  the  Government  to  engagements
beyond  the  present  session.1

Such  was  English  Government  in  Ireland,  such  the
occupation  of  the  Irish  Legislature,  at  a  time  when  even
in  the  richest  portion  of  the  island  the  law  was  in
suspense — when  quiet  people  could  not  sleep  in  their
beds  without  a  military  guard,  and  the  sole  authority
recognised  and  obeyed  was  the.  Whiteboy  Committee.

At  this  moment,  under  the  brief  administration  of
Lord  Rockingham,  but  whether  at  Rockingham’s
instance  is  more  than  questionable,  a  light  breaks
across  the  scene  as  if  from  the  blue  sky  itself.  The
triumvirate  which  had  so  long  monopolised  the
power  and  patronage  was  broken  in  1764  by  death.
Primate  Stone  died  and  went  to  the  place  appointed
for  him.  Lord  Shannon  died.  Ponsonby  only  was
left.  But  Shannon’s  heir  and  successor  was  married  to
Ponsonby ’s  daughter.  The  faction  was  likely  to  re¬
establish  itself  under  a  new  form,  and  to  recommence
a  compact  of  corruption.  The  young  King  appears
now  to  have  personally  interposed,  and  tried  the  ex¬
periment  whether  Ireland  might  not  be  managed  by
open  rectitude  and  real  integrity.  Northumber¬
land  retired  after  two  years.  Lord  W eymouth  was
named  in  his  place,  but  did  not  come  over.  Lord
Hertford  was  the  next  actual  Viceroy,  and  there
remains  addressed  to  Hertford  and  signed  by  George

1  ‘Halifax  to  Northumberland,  November  26/  S.  P.  0.

40

BOOK

Y.

1765.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

the  Third,  a  paper /of  instructions  so  confidential,  so
full  of  references  to  himself,  so  entirely  different  from
the  ordinary  official  ambiguities,  that  they  can
scarcely  be  referred  to  any  other  source  than  the
King’s  own  mind.

The  new  Lord  Lieutenant  was  directed  to  inform
himself  completely  of  the  true  condition  of  the  country
and  to  acquaint  the  King.  He  was  to  attend  particu¬
larly  to  the  Church ;  as  Crown  livings  fell  vacant  he
was  charged  to  appoint  only  pious  and  orthodox  per¬
sons  who  would  bind  themselves  to  reside  on  their
benefices,  to  make  other  patrons  do  the  same,  and  thus
before  all  other  reforms  to  see  that  God  Almighty  was
well  served.1  The  service  of  God  being  reformed,  the
next  step  was  to  put  an  end  to  fraud.  Every  public
department  in  Ireland  was  saturated  with  dishonesty.
There  were  frauds  in  the  revenue,  frauds  in  the  muster
reports,  frauds  in  the  ordnance  and  the  victualling
stores  ;  evasion,  jobbery,  and  peculation,  where  there
was  any  public  property  to  be  stolen  and  official  hand
to  steal  it.  These  things  were  to  be  searched  into,
and  so  far  as  possible  to  be  set  upon  a  better  founda¬
tion. — So  far  as  possible.  But  even  as  the  King  wrote,
it  seemed  to  flash  across  him  how  deep  the  roots  had
gone  of  the  true  Upas-tree  of  corruption,  penetrating
below  the  bed  of  the  channel  and  piercing  to  his  own

1  I  cannot  positively  state  that
in  the  entire  correspondence  of  the
Home  Government  with  Dublin
Castle  there  is  no  other  indication  of
a  sense  of  responsibility  on  the  part
of  English  ministers  as  to  the  per¬
sons  appointed  to  benefices  in  the
reformed  Church  of  Ireland.  I
can  but  say  that  in  the  many
thousand  Irish  State  Papers  which
I  have  examined,  covering  the  con¬

nection  between  the  two  countries
from  the  accession  of  Elizabeth  to
the  Union,  this  is  the  only  such
paper  which  I  have  found.  Was
it  for  an  English  minister  to  turn
round  upon  the  Establishment  and
speak  of  it  as  the  branch  of  a
Upas-tree  P  Is  the  Irish  Church
to  blame  if  it  has  failed  of  its  mis¬
sion  ?

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

41

Cabinet,  and  even  to  his  own  person,  if  the  sign
manual  could  be  taken  as  evidence  against  him.

4  When  letters  come  from  us/  he  said,  4  ordering
money  to  be  paid  for  public  uses,  and  other  private
letters  for  the  payment  of  money  to  particular  persons,
you  will  prefer  the  public  letter  before  the  private.
Pay  no  attention  to  any  letter  from  us  granting  money
or  lands,  unless  on  petition  previously  sent  through
you,  and  examined  and  reported  on  by  competent
persons.  Give  no  orders  upon  any  letters  of  ours,
either  for  pensions,  money,  lands,  or  titles  of  honour,
unless  such  letters  have  been  entered  at  our  signet
office.  If  warrants  come  to  you  contrary  to  these
instructions,  do  not  execute  them.  Should  the  re¬
venue  tall  short  of  the  cost  of  the  establishment,  you
will  take  care  that  the  same  is  not  applied  to  the
payment  of  pensions  till  the  rest  is  first  paid.  If
there  be  not  enough,  you  will  abate  the  pensions.’

The  remaining  orders  in  this  singular  document
are  no  less  straightforward  and  characteristic.  If
genius  means  an  eagerness  for  change,  a  wild  rushing
after  new  ideas,  an  enthusiasm  for  emancipation  from
restraint,  George  the  Third  was  the  most  common¬
place  of  sovereigns.  If  genius  means  a  loyal  recogni¬
tion  of  the  old  and  tried  principles  established  by
the  experience  of  ages  for  the  guidance  of  mankind,
George  the  Third  was  a  safer  ruler  of  a  great  empire
than  the  most  accomplished  parliamentary  rhetorician.
He  bade  Hertford  look  to  judges  and  magistrates,
remove  those  who  neglected  their  duty,  and  to  fill
their  places  with  men  of  better  merit.  He  gave  him
power  over  all  officials,  of  all  degrees,  to  appoint  or
dismiss.  If  any  man  was  found  to  have  paid  money
for  an  office,  he  was  to  be  immediately  discharged.

CHAP.

i.

42

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

A  sharp  eye  was  to  be  kept  on  Papists.  The  Viceroy
must  issue  a  proclamation,  bidding  them  bring  in  their
arms,  and  deposit  them  in  the  arsenals,  and  he  must
see  the  order  obeyed.  All  lawful  encouragement  was
to  be  given  to  Protestant  strangers  resorting  to
Ireland ;  if  many  wished  to  settle  there,  4  report  to
us,’  the  King  said,  4  and  they  shall  have  all  the  help
we  can  give.’

The  Articles  of  Limerick  and  Galway  were  to  be
strictly  construed.  Licenses  to  the  Catholic  gentry
to  have  guns  or  powder  must  be  conceded  rarely,
and  with  special  caution.  Outlawries  were  not  to  be
reversed  without  permission  from  the  crown.

The  disorders  had  extended  to  the  army.  4  Survey
all  the  forts  in  the  kingdom,’  the  order  went  on.
4  Report  to  us  on  the  defences  and  on  the  stores.  See
that  the  troops  are  quartered  so  as  to  create  least  in¬
convenience  to  our  subjects.  See  that  the  soldiers’
pay  is  not  withheld  by  the  officers,  and  that  miscon¬
duct,  whether  in  high  or  low,  does  not  pass  un¬
noticed.  If  the  officers  light  duels,  cashier  them
from  time  to  time.  Inform  such  officers  as  shall  send
or  receive  any  challenge,  or  shall  affront  one  another,
that  they  shall  never  be  employed  in  our  service.’

Finally,  as  if  he  was  conscious  where  the  real  diffi¬
culty  lay,  though  too  young  as  yet  to  know  it  to  be
insurmountable,  he  concluded  this  singular  paper
with  a  last  injunction: —

4  You  will  not  summon  a  Parliament  without  our
special  command.’1

The  King  had  struck  the  key-note  of  all  Ireland’s
sorrows.  How  easy,  had  there  been  no  Parliament,

1  ‘  Instructions  to  the  Earl  of  Hertford  from  the  King,  August  9,
1765/  abridged.  S.  P.  0.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

43

the  task  of  governing  Ireland !  How  easy,  with  a  chap.
moderate  police,  to  have  distributed  equal  justice,  to  Irl—
have  forced  the  landlords  to  do  their  duties  ;  to  have
forced  the  people,  unexasperated  by  petty  tyranny,
to  submit  to  a  law  which  would  have  been  their
friend !  How  easy  to  have  punished  corruption,  to
have  blown  away  the  malaria  which  enveloped  the
public  departments ;  to  have  established  schools;  to
have  dealt  equal  measure  to  loyal  subjects  of  every
creed !  The  empire  which  the  genius  of  Clive  won
for  England  presented  a  problem  of  government
harder  far  than  Ireland  presented.  Yet  British
faculty  found  means  to  solve  it.  What  enchantment
had  condemned  Ireland  to  be  the  victim  of  a  constitu¬
tion  of  which  chicanery,  injustice,  anarchy,  and  moral
dissolution  were  the  inevitable  fruits  ?  Infinitely
happier  it  would  have  been  for  Ireland — happier,
better,  even  cheaper  in  the  long  run  for  England,
could  her  ministers  have  adopted  loyally  the  scheme
of  government  sketched  by  the  King,  have  dispensed
with  Parliament,  fallen  back  on  the  hereditary  revenue,
and  made  good  the  deficiency  out  of  the  English
exchequer.  But  even  this  method,  too,  it  is  likely
that  parliamentary  exigencies  in  England  would
soon  have  degraded  to  the  old  level.

Keform,  at  any  rate,  was  not  attainable  on  the
honest  road  which  had  been  traced  by  the  King;
nor  was  Hertford,  an  absentee  nobleman,  and  one  of
the  unconscious  instruments  of  the  worst  disorders  of
the  country,  a  person  to  be  trusted  for  such  a  pur¬
pose.  An  attempt  was  to  be  made  to  crush  the
oligarchy  of  the  Shannons  and  Ponsonbies.  The  old
vicious  circle  was  to  be  broken  through,  but  by  such
means  as  were  available  under  the  constitution.

44

BOOK

V.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

Hertford  retreated,  after  a  brief  ineffectual  rule —
the  last  of  the  Viceroys  whose  presence  at  the  Castle
was  limited  to  the  parliamentary  session.  Thus  much
was  recognized,  that  thenceforward  the  representative
of  the  Crown  must  be  a  permanent  resident ;  that  the
Lords  Justices  must  be  dispensed  with,  except  for  acci¬
dental  exigencies,  and  the  patronage  be  absorbed  by
the  Lord  Lieutenant.  It  was  a  nice  operation,  re¬
quiring  courage,  dexterity,  discretion,  firmness,  quali¬
ties  social  and  intellectual  not  often  combined.  Lord
Bristol  was  first  thought  of.  He  accepted  the  office,
and  prepared  to  enter  on  it ;  but  the  longer  he  looked
at  what  was  expected  from  him,  the  less  he  liked  the
prospect.  Lord  Bristol’s  most  important  act  of  au¬
thority  was  to  appoint  his  brother  Frederic  to  the
Bishopric  of  Cloyne — of  all  misuses  of  Irish  Church
patronage  the  grossest  instance.  He  died  soon  after,
and  the  bishop  succeeded  to  the  earldom,  to  play  a
memorable  part  in  the  development  of  the  coming
drama.  The  nobleman  finally  selected  to  carry  out  the
intended  alterations  in  the  Irish  Government  was  Lord
Townshend,  distinguished  hitherto  as  a  soldier,  grand¬
son  of  Walpole’s  Townshend,  and  brother  of  Charles,
who  was  now  English  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

4  5

SECTION  V.

A  few  more  words  of  prelude  are  necessary  before
we  enter  on  the  remarkable  administration  which  was
to  form  an  epoch  in  Irish  history.  It  has  been  suffi¬
cient  so  far  to  notice  the  general  drift  of  the  stream,
on  the  surface  of  which  individuals  are  seen  occu¬
pied  in  paltry  schemes  to  improve  their  own  fortunes,
not  one  of  them  as  yet,  however,  with  sufficient  power
to  influence  materially  the  policy  or  the  fate  of  the
country.  The  practical  force  in  the  Parliament  was
in  the  hands  of  a  few  families,  who  nominated  the
majority  of  the  representatives.  No  questions  had
as  yet  been  stirred  on  which  the  people  were  passion¬
ately  interested  ;  and  minor  scandals  had  been  made
use  of  only  as  a  means  of  embarrassing  the  Govern¬
ment.  On  the  edge  of  a  great  change,  we  pause  for
a  moment  to  notice  a  few  persons,  some  of  whom
had  made  themselves  felt  already  as  troublesome,  and
were  about  to  pass  to  the  front  of  the  stage ;  some
still  obscure  and  unheard  of,  but  meditating  in  the
enthusiasm  of  passionate  youth  on  Ireland’s  miseries,
and  dreaming  of  coming  revolutions.

First  in  rank  was  the  Duke  of  Leinster,  and  indi¬
vidually  the  first  in  influence.  The  House  of  Kil¬
dare  was  the  most  powerful  in  Ireland,  and  the  head
of  it  was  the  natural  leader  of  the  Irish  people.  But
the  Kildares,  at  all  periods  of  their  history,  preferred
to  rule  alone  or  not  at  all.  Many  times  the  Viceroys
bad  attempted  to  draw  them  into  combination  with
other  parties,  but  always  without  success.  The  Duke
of  Bedford  laboured  hard  with  the  reigning  Earl,  but

CHAP.

i.

4(1

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

/

the  Earl  refused  to  work  with  the  Ponsonbies.  Once
only,  for  a  few  months,  he  tried  the  office  of  Lord
Justice,  and  had  retired,  leaving  the  field  to  his  rivals ;
while  his  ambition  had  been  gratified,  and  his  morti¬
fication  soothed,  by  special  distinction  in  the  peerage.
In  1761  he  was  made  a  marquis.  In  1766  he  was
created  duke,  being  then  about  fifty-six  years  old,  the
one  duke  of  which  Ireland  could  boast.  He  was  mar¬
ried  to  a  daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  and
was  the  father  of  seventeen  children,  one  of  whom,
born  in  1763,  and  thus  three  years  old  when  Lord
Townshend  came  to  Dublin,  became  known  to  the
world  thirty-five  years  later  as  Lord  Edward  Fitz¬
gerald.

Lord  Shannon’s  father,  the  reader  will  remember
as  Henry  Boyle,  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Commons,
who,  after  heading  the  opposition  to  the  Government,
sold  his  patriotism  for  an  earldom  and  a  pension.
His  son  Richard,  who  succeeded  to  the  title  in  1764,
was  a  politician  of  his  father’s  school,  under  forty,
with  his  life  still  before  him,  married  to  Speaker
Ponsonby’s  daughter,  and  aiming  steadily  with  the
Ponsonby  alliance  at  controlling  the  Castle,  and  dis¬
pensing  the  patronage  of  ministers.  He  had  enormous
wealth,  and  in  private  made  an  honourable  use  of  it.
Arthur  Young,  who  visited  him  at  Castle  Martyr  in
1771,  speaks  wfith  unusual  enthusiasm  of  his  merit
as  an  Irish  landlord.

Next  in  consequence  to  Lord  Shannon  was  the
Speaker,  the  Right  Honourable  John  Ponsonby,
second  brother  of  the  Earl  of  Bessborough.  The
Duke  of  Devonshire  had  been  twice  Viceroy — in
1737  and  1743.  Lord  Hartington  was  Viceroy  in
1755.  The  long  presence  of  the  Cavendish  family

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

47

at  the  Castle  was  favourable  to  the  Ponsonby  for-  chap.
tunes.  Lord  Bessborough  married  one  of  the  duke’s  < — ^ —
daughters,  and  was  Lord  Justice  in  1756.  John
Ponsonby  married  another,  became  Speaker  when
Boyle  was  raised  to  the  peerage,  and  was  made  Lord
Justice  also.  The  links  of  the  family  compact  are
easily  visible.  The  virtual  sovereigns  of  Ireland
threatened  to  become  hereditary.  From  this  John
Ponsonby  came  George,  afterwards  friend  of  his
country  and  Lord  Chancellor,  who  was  now  a  boy  of
eleven.

Of  the  House  of  Commons’  orators  who  had  made
names  must  be  mentioned —

1.  Mr.  Hely  Hutchinson,  a  barrister  of  large
practice,  who  had  risen  in  his  profession  through  a
seat  in  Parliament,  and  had  become  known  as  a
patriot  orator.  Speaking  and  voting  against  Govern¬
ment,  less  on  principle  than  as  the  surest  road  to
advancement,  on  the  appropriation  of  the  surplus,  the
Pension  and  the  Septennial  Bills,  Mr.  Hutchinson
had  shown  that  he  could  be  dangerous.  In  practical
business  he  had  made  himself  really  useful,  so  far  as
was  compatible  with  attention  to  himself.

2.  Mr.  Sexton  Pery,  a  lawyer  also,  and  the  son
of  a  Limerick  clergyman,  represented  his  native  city.

He,  too,  was  a  patriot,  and  had  earned  impatient
notice  in  the  letters  of  Viceroys  and  Secretaries.

He  had  been  tempted  with  the  Solicitor-Generalship,
and  had  refused  it.  It  was  assumed  that,  like  others,
he  was  purchasable,  but  the  Government  had  not  yet
discovered  at  what  price  he  could  be  secured.

3.  A  third  barrister,  remarkable  in  himself,  and
remarkable  as  the  father  of  a  more  celebrated  son,
was  John  Fitzgibbon.  He,  like  Pery,  came  from

48

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Limerick,  but  from  the  cabin  of  a  Catholic  peasant.

— ^ — '  The  Fitzgibbons  were  of  Norman  blood,  once  wealthy
and  powerful,  but  now  reduced  by  forfeitures,  and
there  remained  of  them  only  a  few  families,  renting
their  few  acres  of  potato  garden  on  the  estates  of
their  ancestors.  Young  John,  in  defiance  of  the  law,
had  been  sent  to  Paris  to  be  educated,  and  was
intended  for  a  priest.  He  had  no  taste  for  the  priestly
calling.  The  Catholic  religion  itself  became  incredible
to  him.  He  went  to  London,  found  means  of  study¬
ing  law,  and  brought  himself  into  notice,  while  still
keeping  his  terms,  by  publishing  a  volume  of  Peports.
Admitted  to  the  Irish  bar,  he  rose  early  into  prac¬
tice,  realized  a  considerable  fortune,  and  bought  a
large  estate  at  Mount-shannon,  in  his  native  county.
He  sat  in  Parliament  for  Newcastle,  in  the  county
of  Dublin,  and  he  stood  almost  alone  in  desiring
nothing  which  Castle  favour  could  give,  aspiring  to
no  rank,  and  content  with  the  wealth  which  he  had
earned.  To  a  Government  which  had  aimed  at  ruling
Ireland  by  honest  methods,  the  elder  Fitzgibbon
would  have  been  an  invaluable  servant;  to  the  Hali-
faxes  and  Northumberlands,  though  he  never  stooped
to  factious  opposition,  he  was  an  object  of  suspicion
and  dislike.  John  Fitzgibbon  the  younger,  who  grew
to  be  Chancellor  and  Earl  of  Clare,  was  born  in  1748,
and  was  now  gaining  his  early  laurels  at  Trinity
College.

Noticeable,  however,  beyond  all  his  contempo¬
raries,  already  prominent  in  the  House  of  Commons,
already  concentrating  in  himself  the  passionate  hopes
of  all  young  generous-minded  Irishmen,  was  the  cele¬
brated  Henry  Flood.  Like  the  younger  Fitzgibbon,
Flood  was  born  into  a  position  which  secured  him  from

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

49

the  temptation  of  making  politics  a  trade.  His  father,
Warden  Flood,  was  Chief  Justice  of  the  King’s  Bench,
and  as  Attorney-General  had  amassed  considerable
property.  Henry,  the  eldest  son,  was  born  in  1732.
He  passed  without  particular  distinction  through
the  Irish  University.  From  Dublin  he  went  as  a
gentleman  commoner  to  Oxford,  where  he  became
noted  rather  as  an  ornamental  youth  of  letters  than
as  an  aspirant  for  University  honours.  Irish  genius
runs  naturally  to  words.  Henry  Flood  was  a  student
of  Demosthenes,  and  his  special  ambition  was  to  be
an  orator.  His  enslaved  and  unhappy  country  weighed
upon  his  spirits.  She  was  in  bondage ;  the  chains
cramped  her  limbs,  and  therefore  she  was  miserable.
She  pined  for  liberty,  and  liberty,  as  Flood  understood
it,  1  was  the  child  of  eloquence.’  Not  by  hard  atten¬
tion  to  the  facts  of  life ;  not  by  submission  to  the  in¬
flexible  laws  which  must  be  obeyed  before  they  will
be  our  servants;  not  by  patient  undoing  the  triple
stranded  cord  of  idleness,  extravagance,  and  anarchy,
in  which  the  object  of  his  affection  was  truly  held  in
servitude;  not  by  these,  but  on  the  short  bright  road
of  bounding  oratory  lay  Ireland’s  path  towards  re¬
demption.  Let  parliamentary  eloquence  breathe  into
the  souls  of  her  people,  and  the  foul  enchantment
would  disappear,  and  Ireland  would  rise  up  in  her
native  loveliness.  With  these  ideas  in  him,  and  with
an  estate  of  5,000/.  a  vear  to  fall  to  him  on  his  father’s
death,  Henry  Flood,  being  then  twenty-seven  years
old,  entered  Parliament  as  member  for  Kilkenny  in
1759.  He  was  re-elected  on  the  King’s  death  for  the
same  county,  and,  with  a  handsome  figure,  a  rich
sonorous  voice,  and  a  mind  stored  with  the  phrases
which  millions  of  young  Irish  hearts  were  then

VOL.  II.  e

CHAP.

i.

50

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

"V  ▼  '

BOOK

y.

prepared  to  accept  as  the  Open  Sesame  of  Paradise,
he  became  at  once  the  idol  of  Irish  patriotism,  catching
the  torch  which  was  dropping  from  the  failing  hand
of  Charles  Lucas,  and  eclipsing  alike  the  waning
brilliancy  of  Anthony  Malone  and  the  meridian
splendour  of  Hely  Hutchinson.

Other  eminent  persons  will  be  heard  of  in  front
places  on  the  stage  of  Irish  politics.  For  special
reasons,  those  which  have  been  mentioned  must  par¬
ticularly  be  borne  in  mind ;  and  there  must  be  added
to  the  list  the  name  of  another  young  man,  then
the  rival  of  John  Fitzgibbon  at  Trinity  College — as
he  was  his  rival  afterwards  on  the  broader  platform
of  life.  Grattan  has  been  beatified  by  tradition  as
the  saviour  of  his  country.  In  his  own  land  his
memory  is  adored.  His  glittering  declamations  are
studied  as  models  of  oratory  wherever  the  English
language  is  spoken.  Fitzgibbon  is  the  object  of  a
no  less  intense  national  execration.  He  was  followed
to  his  grave  with  curses,  and  dead  cats  were  flung
upon  his  coffin.  If  undaunted  courage,  if  the  power
to  recognize  and  the  will  to  act  upon  unpalatable
truths,  if  the  steady  preference  of  fact  to  falsehood,  if
a  resolution  to  oppose  at  all  hazards  those  wild  illu¬
sions  which  have  lain  at  all  times  at  the  root  of  Ire¬
land’s  unhappiness,  be  the  constituents  of  greatness
in  an  Irish  statesman,  Grattan  and  Fitzgibbon  are
likely  hereafter  to  change  places  in  the  final  estimate
of  history.

Grattan  was  the  elder  by  two  years.  His  father
also  was  in  Parliament.  He  was  Recorder  of  Dublin
and  member  for  the  city.  John  Fitzgibbon  was  born
in  1748,  Henry  Grattan  in  1746.  They  were  at  school
together,  and  afterwards  at  college,  where  both  carried

REVIVAL  OF  THE  CELTS.

51

off  the  highest  prizes.  From  Trinity  they  went  to
London,  to  study  law  at  the  Temple,  but  here  their
paths  divided.  Grattan  was  left  fatherless  when  he
was  under  nineteen.  He  inherited  little  property,  and
had  his  own  fortune  to  make  for  himself ;  but  he  dis¬
liked  the  bar,  and  remained  for  some  time  uncertain
what  career  he  should  adopt.  Fitzgibbon  was  heir
to  a  large  estate;  but  he  threw  himself  earnestly  into
his  profession,  and  long  before  the  Counsellor  died
was  in  the  first  flight  of  Irish  lawyers.

The  parliamentary  life  of  these  two  young  men
had  yet  to  begin.  Let  it  be  understood  that  their
manhood  was  maturing  and  their  minds  were  form¬
ing  in  the  scenes  about  to  be  described.

£  2

CHAP.

I.

<

52

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

CHAPTER  II.

LORD  TOWNSHEND  S  ADMINISTRATION.

BOOK

V.

17677

SECTION  I.

George,  third  Viscount  Townshend,  was  selected  as
Viceroy  of  Ireland  in  the  summer  of  1767,  under  the
last  administration  of  Lord  Chatham,  having  just
succeeded  to  the  title  by  his  father's  death.  His
career  in  the  army  had  been  creditable,  if  not  par¬
ticularly  brilliant.  He  was  with  Wolfe  on  the
heights  of  Abraham,  and  General  Monckton,  the
second  in  command,  having  been  carried  off  wounded
early  in  the  action,  Townshend,  when  Wolfe  fell,
became  superior  officer,  and  signed  the  capitulation  of
Quebec.1  His  brother  Charles  died  immediately  after
his  nomination,  and  in  the  first  sorrow  for  the  loss  of
father  and  brother  he  entered  upon  his  intricate  office.
In  appearance  the  new  Viceroy  was  a  bon  vivant ;  in
his  manners  easy  ;  in  his  conversation  humorous,  and
seemingly  frank  and  transparent.  He  was  as  ready
with  a  proverb  as  Sancho  Panza,2  and  let  fall,  it  was

1  The  popular  leaders  in  Ireland
charged  Townshend  with  having
cheated  Monckton  of  his  laurels,
and  stolen  an  honour  to  which  he
had  no  claim.  History,  in  the
hands  of  Irish  writers,  has  often  a
tendency  to  become  mythological.

See  Baratariana,  p.  94.

2  This  peculiarity  was  the  occa¬
sion  of  the  name  Barataria  being
given  to  Ireland  in  the  squibs  and
essays  published  by  Flood  and  his
friends.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

said,  in  half  an  hour,  and  as  it  were  by  accident,  more
good  things  than  could  be  heard  in  a  session  even  of
the  Irish  Parliament,  where  wit  was  never  wanting.
Besides  these  qualities  he  had  others  undiscovered  by
the  patriots  whose  object  he  defeated.  He  displays  in
his  letters  an  unusually  noble  disposition,  a  contempt
approaching  to  loathing  for  the  measures  to  which  he
was  compelled  to  stoop,  and  for  the  men  whom  he
was  obliged  to  conciliate  by  the  necessities  of  Par¬
liamentary  Government.  The  King  adhered  to  the
views  expressed  in  his  instructions  to  Hertford,  and
Townshend  had  come  with  a  loyal  intention  to  put
an  end,  as  far  as  possible,  to  Irish  jobbery  and  Irish
anarchy.  Pitt’s  Government  had  resolved  in  sincerity
to  have  done  with  pensions,  sinecure  offices,  and
bribery.  The  promise  which  Halifax  had  allowed
Northumberland  to  give  dishonestly,  Townshend  was
really  to  act  upon.  The  Irish  politicians  were  to
have  an  opportunity  of  showing  whether  their  com¬
plaints  had  been  sincere,  whether  they  were  prepared
to  co-operate  loyally  and  without  the  need  of  under¬
hand  influence  in  measures  of  genuine  reform.

The  first  necessity  was  to  protect  the  public  peace.
The  Whiteboys  were  scarcely  quieted  in  the  south :
when  the  gentry  relaxed  their  efforts,  disturbances
would  inevitably  recommence.  Landlord  exactions  had
provoked  a  convulsion,  presently  to  be  described,  in
Ulster,  with  which  the  magistrates  were  no  less  unable
to  cope.  It  had  been  determined,  if  Parliament  would
consent,  to  add  three  thousand  men  to  the  ordinary
garrison  to  do  the  work  of  police.  Again,  the  Irish
judges,  like  the  judges  in  the  colonies,  hadhitherto  held
office  during  pleasure.  English  ministers  had  been
peculiarly  tenacious  of  the  power  to  remove  them

53

CHAP.
II.

”1767.

I

54

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  at  will.  Townshend  had  come  prepared  to  assimilate
>_  y/. — >  their  tenure  to  that  of  their  brethren  on  the  English
1767,  bench  once  more.  The  Irish  Parliament  had  played
fast  and  loose  with  the  Septennial  Bill,  and  in  their
hearts  desired  it  should  never  more  be  heard  of.  The
Cabinet  had  concluded  that  it  was  a  measure  which
ought  to  be  passed.  Lord  Hertford,  before  taking
leave,  had  said  that  he  should  recommend  the  change,
and  the  new  Viceroy  had  brought  full  powers  to  give
it  Government  support.  Here  were  three  consider¬
able  reforms,  the  first  of  supreme  importance,  which
the  Irish  patriots,  if  they  were  really  anxious  for
their  country’s  good,  had  an  opportunity  of  securing
with  the  full  assent  of  England.  There  had  been  a
difference  of  opinion  about  the  latter,  or  at  least  how
far  the  Government  should  take  the  initiative  in  pro¬
posing  them.  Townshend  met  Parliament  with
the  impression  that  he  had  been  instructed  to  com¬
mend  the  alteration  of  the  judges’  tenure  to  immediate
attention.

The  session  began  on  the  20th  of  October.  The
speech  from  the  throne  was  brief,  but  it  contained
a  distinct  mention  of  this  particular  point,  and  it
promised  generally  and  significantly  that  the  King
would  consent  to  any  other  measures  which  might
promote  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the  country.

Chatham  was  too  ill  to  attend  to  business,  and
even  when  the  intention  was  good,  Irish  affairs  were
carelessly  regarded  by  the  rest  of  the  Cabinet.  Lord
Shelburne  considered  that  the  subject  had  been
opened  too  abruptly;  he  would  have  preferred  that
the  Viceroy  should  have  felt  his  way  more  cautiously  ;
and  he  intimated,  perhaps  by  an  error  of  the  pen,
that  the  intention  was  to  appoint  the  Irish  judges,
not  during  good  behaviour  as  in  England,  but  for

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

55

life.1  The  Septennial  Bill,  if  introduced  at  all,  was  to  chap.
be  made  octennial.  . — ^

Townshend  warmly  defended  himself.  In  what  he  17(>7*
had  said  about  the  judges,  he  maintained  that  he  had
rather  fallen  short  of  his  instructions  than  exceeded
them  ;  and  as  to  a  life  tenure,  places  held  for  life  were
openly  bought  and  sold  in  Ireland.  He  regretted,
not,  as  will  be  seen,  without  reason,  that  he  had  been
unable  to  mention  the  Septennial  Bill,  but  he  was  pre¬
pared  to  encourage  it  in  its  new  form  with  all  his
powers.

The  Irish  politicians  were  perplexed  to  know  how
to  behave  in  their  new  situation.  They  had  discovered
that  there  were  to  be  no  more  sinecures  and  pensions,
and  they  had  something  real  to  complain  of  in  the
manner  in  which  the  lucrative  offices  of  state  had  been
hitherto  disposed  of  out  of  the  country.  Their  best
preferments,  treasurerships,  vice-treasurerships,  com*
missionerships,  were  conferred  by  prime  ministers
upon  their  supporters  in  England,  who  took  the
salaries  and  left  the  duties  to  be  discharged  by
deputy,2  and  of  high  patronage  there  was  little  left  for
them  to  expect.  They  had  discovered  that  the  point  on
which  the  King  was  most  anxious  was  the  augmenta¬
tion  of  the  army.  4  Mankind/  reported  the  Viceroy,

1  ‘We  are  all  astonished  to  find
mention  in  your  speech  of  your
having  it  in  charge  from  his  ma¬
jesty  to  recommend  a  provision  to
secure  the  judges  in  their  offices
during  good  behaviour.  We  ap¬
proved  the  measure,  but  advised  you
to  use  general  words.  You  were
instructed  to  talk  confidentially
of  the  determination  of  Government
to  support  the  Septennial  Bill,  and
the  judges  for  life. . .  We  must  have
the  bill  for  limiting  the  duration  of
Parliaments  for  eight  years,  instead

of  seven,  to  avoid  the  confusion  of
a  general  election  in  both  king¬
doms  the  same  year.  Shelburne  to
Townshend,  October  29 — Novem¬
ber  5:  s.  p.  o.

2  At  this  time  the  Lord  Trea¬
surer  of  Ireland  was  the  Duke  of
Devonshire;  Rigby  and  Welbore
Ellis  were  Vice-Treasurers;  Wil¬
liam  Gerard  Hamilton  was  Chan¬
cellor  of  the  Exchequer ;  Rigby —
fortunate  man  !  —  was  also  Irish
Master  of  the  Rolls.

56

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  ‘judge  pretty  well  how  to  time  their  requests.’  If  mem*
— -  bers  were  not  to  be  pensioned,  if  sinecures  were  to  be
1 7 iu '  abolished,  and  if  their  only  prizes  were  to  be  bestowed
in  England,  something  or  other  must  be  found  to
make  it  worth  their  while  to  meet  the  King’s  wishes.
They  found  difficulties.  They  discovered  wrongs,
real  or  imaginary.  The  tenure  of  judges  had  been  a
foremost  grievance  so  long  as  the  change  was  refused.
Now  that  their  wish  was  complied  with,  it  was  treated
as  of  no  consequence.  They  themselves  detested  the
Septennial  Bill  ;  but  when  the  speech  was  silent  upon
it,  they  discovered  that  England  was  purposely
thwarting  an  important  reform.1  The  Chancellorship
was  vacant.  Lord  Bowes  had  been  three  months  dead.
The  Cabinet  was  pausing  over  his  successor.  The
Irish  lawyers  had  a  well-founded  suspicion  that  the
most  brilliant  prize  of  their  profession  was  again  to  be
given  to  a  stranger.

The  Viceroy  knew  what  they  meant,  and  did  not
expect  them  to  be  angels.  ‘  As  so  large  a  share,’  he
wrote  to  Shelburne,  4  of  the  principal  offices  and
emoluments  have  not  been  disposed  of  in  this  country,
your  lordship  may  think  it  probable  I  should  hear  of
these  circumstances  when  the  Crown  has  an  object
in  view.  It  may  prove  expedient,  when  men  of
first-rate  abilities  are  forming  expectations,  that  I
should  transmit  their  wishes.’ 2

Townshend  had  brought  with  him  the  feelings  of
an  Englishman  who  did  not  yet  understand  the
country.  He  had  supposed  the  Irish  Parliament  had
been  sincere  in  their  complaint  of  the  Pension  List.
Their  objection  had  been  only  to  the  disposition  of  a

1  Baratariana,  page  17.  vernber  15.  Secret  and  separate.’

2  1  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  No-  S.  P.  0.

t

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

57

fund,  which  they  would  have  preferred  to  share  among  chap.
themselves,  in  favour  of  royal  bastards,  mistresses,  and  • — ^ —

*  1  H  PH

favourites.  They  were  about  to  open  his  eyes  with  '
some  rudeness  to  their  real  views.  He  was  in  the
act  of  recommending  the  claims  of  their  leaders  to
Shelburne’s  consideration  when  Philip  Tisaall,  the
Attorney-General,  came  into  his  room  and  abruptly
told  him  4  that  besides  an  address  on  the  vacancy  of  the
Great  Seal  which  would  probably  be  carried,  a  motion
would  be  made  in  the  House  of  Commons,  which  could
not  be  resisted,  for  a  short  Supply  Bill.’  Here  was
a  reception  for  a  Viceroy  who  had  come  to  end  cor¬
ruption  and  malpractices !  He  called  a  meeting  of
the  council.  The  Lords  Justices,  the  Earl  of  Shannon,
and  the  Speaker,  with  the  most  perfect  coolness,  con¬
firmed  Tisdall’s  words.  4  The  discontent  was  so
great,’  they  said,  4  that  it  was  impossible  to  stem  the
torrent.’  The  Commons  4  considered  the  refusal  of  the
Money  Bill  to  be  the  only  certain  method  of  obtain¬
ing  those  popular  bills  which  had  been  so  often
demanded  and  so  constantly  refused.’

The  ground  of  action  was  more  singular  than  the
action  itself.  The  Judges’  Tenure  Bill  had  been  spon¬
taneously  offered.  The  Septennial  Bill  had  been
rather  approved  than  disapproved.  It  had  been  post¬
poned  hitherto  at  the  desire  of  the  men  who  in  Parlia¬
ment  had  affected  to  demand  it.  They  had  but  to  ask
now  to  have  their  wishes  immediately  gratified,  and  yet
Malone,  who  was  out  of  office,  was  the  only  member
of  council  who  would  say  that  he  thought  the  pass¬
ing  of  a  short  Supply  Bill  would  be  an  improper
measure.

4  I  cannot  express  my  surprise,’  Townshend  said
in  reporting  the  scene,  4  at  finding  myself  in  the

58

THE  ENGLISH  IN  I  PEL  AND.

book  midst  of  the  King’s  servants,  and  hearing  a  question

\T  ' —

_ *  of  this  sort  treated  by  a  part  of  them  in  this  manner,

1767.  anc[  a  ^ay  presse(j  for  the  consideration  of  a  measure
which  ought  to  have  been  rejected  with  indignation.’ 1

The  real  meaning  of  the  opposition  was  of  course
evident.  A  Chancellor  had  been  already  chosen,  an
Englishman  as  the  Irish  anticipated,  and  the  Cabinet
did  not  intend  to  reverse  their  selection.  Hewett,
one  of  the  judges  of  the  Court  of  King’s  Bench,  was
coming  over  with  the  title  of  Lord  Lifford.  4  His
known  attachment  to  Revolution  principles,  great
knowledge,  and  unspotted  integrity,’  were  considered
his  sufficient  recommendation.  Lord  Shelburne  replied
to  Townshend’s  unpleasant  news  that  the  King  could
not  but  feel  4  amazement  at  such  extraordinary  be¬
haviour  when  he  had  meant  so  well.’  4  A  short  Money
Bill  struck  at  the  very  being  of  Government.’  4  The
effect  could  only  be  the  rejection  of  the  Bills  which
were  the  pretended  object.’  4  The  public,’  Shelburne
hoped, ‘would  soon  see  through  the  flimsy  pretext  of  the
contrivers  and  punish  them  as  they  deserved.’  4  Alto¬
gether  it  was  one  of  the  meanest  stratagems  which
low  cunning,  narrow  parts,  and  interested  motives,
could  suggest  to  any  set  of  men  in  public  affairs.’  If
the  Parliament  was  to  continue,  however,  the  hungry
expectants  must  be  fed  in  some  way.  4  The  King,’
Shelburne  said,  4  did  not  think  proper  to  recede  from
his  resolution  with  regard  to  places,  pensions,  and
reversions.  Yet  his  majesty  would  consider  such  other
just  marks  of  his  countenance  and  protection  as  at
the  end  of  the  session  might  be  recommended.’  There
were  still  peerages,  inferior  commissionerships,  and

1  ‘  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  November  15.  -  Secret  and  separate.’
S.  P.  0.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

59

professional  offices  of  various  kinds  for  those  who  chap.

would  support  the  Government  against  faction.1  > _

The  Shannon- Ponsonby  party  in  the  Council  had  1767,
exhibited  their  strength  ;  and  were  satisfied  for  the
moment  with  having  shown  that  if  Ireland  was  to  be
reformed  it  was  not  to  be  at  their  expense.  The  oppo¬
sition  to  the  Money  Bill  was  withdrawn.  An  adverse
motion  by  Flood  on  the  appointment  of  Lord  Lifford
was  rejected  by  a  large  majority;  and  the  heads  of  a
Septennial  or  Octennial  Bill  were  passed  for  transmis¬
sion  to  England.  This  time  they  were  carried  to  the
Castle  by  the  Speaker  in  the  usual  form,  with  the  entire
House  in  attendance.  An  Absentee  Tax  was  revived  in
the  Money  Bill — a  tax  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound
on  all  pensions,  salaries,  and  profits  of  employments
payable  to  persons  not  resident  in  Ireland.  Imposed
originally  under  George  the  First,  it  had  been  accom¬
panied  with  a  power  to  the  Crown  to  grant  exemp¬
tions  under  the  sign-manual.  The  exemptions  had
been  so  numerous  that  the  results  had  proved  4  very
inconsiderable.’  4  The  tax  bore  hard  on  individuals
who  most  wanted  favour,  and  had  not  interest  to
procure  it,’  and  had  been  allowed  to  fall  through.  It
was  now  replaced  without  the  reservation ;  the  only
exceptions  permitted  being  in  the  case  of  pensions  to
the  royal  family,  or  to  officers  who  had  specially  dis¬
tinguished  themselves.  To  a  proposal  so  definitely
just,  Townshend  offered  no  opposition,  and  in  private
gave  it  his  full  approval.  The  heads  of  the  Judges’

Tenure  Bill  were  passed  also,  but  international  jea¬
lousy  on  both  sides  interfered  with  its  success.  It  had
been  drawn  on  the  English  precedent,  and  contained

1 1  Shelburne  to  Townshend,  November  24,  1767.  Secret.’  S.  P.  0.

60

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IKELAND.

book  a  clause  for  the  possible  removal  of  the  Judges  of
'  Ireland  4  on  the  representation  of  the  Privy  Council
17G7,  and  the  Houses  of  Lords  and  Commons.’  What  did
Lords  and  Commons  mean  ?  The  Irish  Parliament
claimed  the  power  of  removal  to  themselves  ex¬
clusively.  The  Council,  who  could  alter  bills
before  transmission,  was  induced  with  difficulty  to
allow  joint  authority  to  the  Lords  and  Commons
of  England.  Townshend,  perhaps  under  instructions
from  Shelburne,  who  was  still  resenting  the  short
Money  Bill,  desired  to  secure  a  separate  power  over  the
judges  to  the  English  Parliament,  whether  the  Irish
Parliament  consented  or  refused.  The  Council  begged
him  not  to  insist  on  an  alteration  which  would  be
fatal  to  the  measure,  and  the  bill  was  allowed  to
go  as  the  Council  left  it.  Had  the  Irish  Par¬
liament  behaved  decently  at  the  beginning  of  the
session,  they  could  have  drawn  the  heads  in  their
own  form,  and  no  difficulty  would  have  been  made.
As  matters  stood,  there  was  a  probability  that  the
heads  of  the  bill  might  not  be  returned  to  them.1

The  usual  pause  now  followed.  Heads  of  bills
were  discussed  in  the  autumn,  sent  to  England  to  be  '
considered  and  revised,  and  on  their  return,  at  the
beginning  of  the  year,  were  re-debated,  and  either
passed  or  rejected.  The  4  servants  of  the  Crown  ’
took  advantage  of  the  recess  to  clear  up  their  rela¬
tions  with  the  Viceroy.  They  had  taught  him,  as
they  supposed,  that  he  could  not  govern  without
them.  They  desired  to  make  him  finally  understand  the
terms  on  which  he  might  calculate  on  their  support.
Lord  Shannon,  the  Speaker,  and  Mr.  Hely  Hut  chin  -

1  ‘Townshend  to  Shelburne,  December  28,  1767.  Secret  and  con¬
fidential.’

i

%  .*

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

61

son  requested  a  private  interview,  and  defined  their
expectations.  Ignorant  that  the  powers  of  the  Lords
Justices  were  henceforth  to  be  no  more  real  than  they
had  become  in  England,  Ponsonby  and  his  son-in-law
demanded  to  have  their  offices  continued  to  them.
Hely  Hutchinson  was  for  himself  unambitious :  he  was
Prime  Sergeant ;  he  had  a  lucrative  practice,  and  a  pri¬
vate  fortune  independent  of  it;  he  asked  for  some  pro¬
vision  for  his  two  sons,1  either  by  place  or  pension,
and  ‘  his  wife,  at  the  end  of  the  session,  to  be  created
a  viscountess/  On  these  terms,  and  not  otherwise,
these  distinguished  persons  were  prepared  to  carry
Townshend  through  his  parliamentary  difficulties,
and  to  defend  the  supremely  important  measure  which,
in  the  critical  temper  of  the  House  of  Commons,  had
not  yet  been  brought  forward — the  augmentation  of
the  army.

Ponsonby  and  Shannon  together  commanded  a
majority  in  the  House.  Hely  Hutchinson,  the  Vice¬
roy  said,  4  was  the  most  powerful  man  in  Parliament,
of  great  abilities  to  conduct  a  debate.’2  Whether  a
bargain  thus  unblushingly  offered  was  to  be  submitted
to,  he  referred  to  the  consideration  of  the  King.

The  negotiation  could  not  wholly  be  kept  secret.
It  was  whispered  in  the  political  circles  of  Dublin.
The  apostacy  of  the  triumvirate  would  for  a  time
destroy  the  party  who  called  themselves  the  defenders
of  their  country ;  and  Henry  Flood  and  his  friends,
who  as  yet  lay  outside  the  lines  of  promotion,  and
were  fired  with  patriotic  indignation,  commenced  a

1  Richard,  then  eleven  years  old,
created  afterwards  Earl  of  Do-
noughmore;  and  Henry,  a  year
younger,  who,  as  Lord  Hutchin¬
son,  succeeded  Abercrombie  in  com¬

mand  of  the  army  in  Egypt.

2  1  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  De^
cember  2,  1767.  Secret  and  sepa^
rate.’

CHAP.

II.

1767.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

series  of  letters  in  the  Dublin  journals,  in  which  Ire¬
land  appears  as  Barataria,  Townshend  as  Sancho,  and
the  various  members  of  the  Council  as  officers  of  his
household.  Of  Ponsonby  they  had  evidently  good
hopes.  He  was  applauded  for  his  past  virtues,  but
made  to  understand  that  he  was  on  his  trial  before
the  country.  The  Prime  Sergeant  Eufinus  was  re¬
garded  with  deep,  and,  it  must  be  allowed,  deserved
suspicion.1

When  the  mysteries  of  parliamentary  government
are  hereafter  revealed,  it  will  be  known  how  far  such
overtures  form  a  sample  of  the  methods  in  which  in
other  countries  besides  Ireland  free  institutions  can
be  made  to  work.  Shelburne  expressed  less  sur¬
prise  than  disgust.  He  complained  of  the  Absentee
tax,  but  let  it  pass.  The  Judges’  Tenure  Bill  was
rejected.  The  chance  had  been  thrown  away.  The
augmentation  of  the  army  was  the  essential  thing.

1  The  internal  state  of  Ireland’  made  an  increase  of
force  absolutely  necessary ;  yet  it  was  unendurable
to  submit  to  dictation — dictation  so  gross  and  un¬
principled.  ‘  We  cannot  recommend  the  King,’  Shel¬
burne  said,  ‘  to  grant  places  and  pensions  for  life  or
years.  The  leading  persons  in  Ireland  must  act  as
they  can  answer  to  their  consciences  and  as  representa¬
tives  of  their  country.  The  King  will  certainly,  at  the
end  of  the  session,  take  into  consideration  the  merits  of
those  who  shall  have  exerted  themselves  for  the  sup¬
port  of  his  Government  and  the  good  of  Ireland.
Nor  can  the  conduct  of  those  who  shall  have  acted  from
motives  of  a  less  honourable  nature  escape  his
majesty’s  notice.’2

1  Saratariana,  letters  1,  2,  3.

3  ( Shelburne  to  Townshend,  December,  1767.’

LOKD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

Townshend  wholly  agreed  as  to  the  duty  of  4  the
leading  persons  of  Ireland.’  The  increase  of  the
army  was  required  to  keep  the  peace,  and  prevent
murder  and  rape,  and  cattle-houghing.  The  lords  and
gentlemen  might  have  been  expected  to  further  it  for
their  own  sakes.  4  But  being  on  the  spot,’  Townshend
said,  4  and  seeing  the  general  disposition  of  the  House
of  Commons  in  its  true  light,  I  cannot  be  so  sanguine
as  to  hope  that  these  sentiments  are  sufficient  grounds
on  which  a  measure  of  this  sort  is  to  be  brought  into

Parliament,  and  carried  through  with  success.  I
know  his  majesty  did  not  mean  to  grant  more  pen¬
sions,  nor  could  I  give  them  hopes,  though  I  could
not  help  listening  to  their  proposals.  But  when  I
observed  how  very  weak  this  Government  had  become,
I  thought  it  my  duty  to  submit  the  matter  again  to
his  majesty,  being  convinced  that  until  the  system  of
government  here  can  be  totally  changed,  and  the  true
weight  and  interest  of  the  Crown  brought  back  to
its  former  channel,  there  must  be  some  relaxation  of
this  rule.  I  am  sorry,  therefore,  you  feel  yourself
precluded  from  recommending  anything  of  this  sort
to  his  majesty.  I  am  afraid  strict  adherence  to  the
rule  will  at  this  time  be  a  great  prejudice  to  his
majesty’s  service.’1

The  applicants  for  corruption  received  their  answer.
They  enquired  whether  the  augmentation  was  to  be
pressed.  They  were  informed  that  it  would  be
pressed.  Hutchinson,  speaking  for  the  others,  de¬
clared  coolly  that  Shannon  and  Ponsonby  would
oppose,  that  without  them  it  could  not  be  carried,  and
that  every  art  would  be  used  to  prejudice  the  people

63

CHAP.

II.

17G8.

1768.

1  ‘  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  January  3,  1768.  Secret.’

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

()4

BOOK

y.

~rm.

against  a  measure  which  would  be  represented  as  a
"  conspiracy  against  their  liberties.  Even  yet  unable
to  realize  the  character  of  Irish  politicians,  the  Viceroy
appealed  to  the  Privy  Council,  and  in  the  most  serious
language  entreated  them  to  remember  their  obliga¬
tions.  Ponsonby  answered  ambiguously.  Hutchin¬
son  and  the  Attorney-General1  showed  that  nothing
better  was  to  be  expected  of  them.  On  the  re-assem¬
blage  of  the  Houses,  a  hostile  motion  was  introduced
by  Pery  for  a  committee  to  enquire  into  the  state  of
the  army,  and  was  allowed  to  pass  unresisted.  The
Viceroy  remonstrated  again  with  Lord  Shannon.
Lord  Shannon  let  him  see  that  the  proposed  con¬
ditions  must  be  conceded.  4  You  will  see/  Towns-
hend  wrote,  c  that  those  who  offered  to  assist
under  such  terms  as  upon  due  consideration  were
rejected,  have  gone  into  determined  opposition  to  the
King’s  Government  itself.  What  shall  I  do  ?  Shall
I  apply  to  those  who  are  generally  in  opposition,
and  are  called  the  independent  gentry  of  this  coun¬
try  ?  Shall  I  prorogue  ?  I  doubt  whether  any
other  course  will  prevent  things  from  being  carried
to  lengths  that  we  shall  not  hereafter  be  able  to

remedy.’ 2

The  situation  was  too  intricate  to  be  decided  from
England.  The  true  answer  should  have  been  the
dismissal  of  a  body  in  whom  patriotic  feeling  was
smothered  in  self-interest,  and  the  restoration  of
order  and  security  by  a  stringent  police.  It  was  an
answer,  however,  which  England,  with  her  iniquitous
trade  laws,  her  scandalous  misappropriation  of  Irish
offices,  her  long  contemptuous  neglect  of  every  duty

1  risdall.

2  ‘Townshend  to  Shelburne,  January  26.  Secret.’

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

65

which  a  ruling;  country  owed  to  an  annexed  depen-  chap.

•  ^  ^  •  9  ^  II

dencv,  was  in  no  condition  to  give.  Shelburne  left  ^ —

Townshend  to  his  own  judgment,  merely  saying,
that  neither  the  King  nor  the  Cabinet  4  had  any  pre¬
dilection  for  any  man  or  set  of  men,  having  nothing
else  in  view  than  to  conduct  the  King’s  affairs
honourably  and  safely.  If  the  business  could  be
carried  on  by  the  men  at  present  in  office,  they  would
prefer  that  there  should  be  no  change.  If  the  King’s
servants  refused  to  give  solid  support,  the  Viceroy
might  send  for  the  independent  gentlemen.  If  the
House  of  Commons  persisted  in  passing  offensive
measures,  the  Cabinet  were  unanimously  of  opinion
that  he  should  prorogue.’1

Meantime  the  Septennial  Bill  returned,  changed
only  to  Octennial,  for  the  reasons  given  before  by  Lord
Shelburne.  The  agitators,  though  they  knew  that
the  Bill  was  coming  back  to  them,  had  professed  to
believe  that  it  would  be  again  rejected.  A  motion
had  been  proposed,  which  Flood  noisily  supported,
that  he,  with  Lucas  and  William  Ponsonby,2  should
cross  to  England  and  demand  it  at  the  Council  doors.
Hutchinson,  to  clear  himself  of  suspicion  of  want  of
patriotism,  had  spoken  violently  against  the  augmen¬
tation  of  the  army,  and  had  proposed  an  Irish  militia
instead.  Others,  with  characteristic  impudence,  re¬
newed  their  clamours  against  the  Pension  List.  The
appearance  of  the  Octennial  Bill  for  the  moment
shamed  these  passionate  gentlemen  into  something
like  silence.  The  Viceroy  had  taken  advantage
quietly  of  the  feud  between  the  Fitzgeralds  and  the
Ponsonbies  to  pay  court  to  the  Duke  of  Leinster.

1  1  Shelburne  to  Townshend,  February  10,  1768.’

2  The  Speaker’s  eldest  son.

VOL.  II.  E

66

BOOK

V.

17G8.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

The  duke  came  to  his  support,  and  carried  with  him
many  of  the  country  gentlemen.1  The  threatened
committee  of  enquiry  was  dropped.  The  House
voted  an  address  of  thanks  for  the  Octennial  Bill;
and  if  the  army  question  could  be  got  over,  the  ses¬
sion,  after  all,  might  come  to  a  quiet  end.

The  passing  of  the  Octennial  Bill  would  be  followed
immediately  by  a  general  election.  Suspicions  had
been  deliberately  excited  among  the  people  that  the
Government  had  sinister  intentions  in  desiring  to  add
to  the  troops  ;  and  Townshend’s  best  friends  advised
him  to  postpone  so  critical  a  subject  as  the  augmen¬
tation  of  the  army  to  another  session.  Townshend
himself  was  strongly  of  the  same  opinion.  He  sent
his  secretary,  Lord  Frederick  Campbell,  to  London,
to  endeavour  to  persuade  the  Cabinet.  As  a  matter
of  party  management,  he  was  probably  right.  But
the  shameful  anarchy  which  ruled  undisturbed  in
so  many  parts  of  the  country  had  shocked  the  King
too  deeply  to  allow  him  to  listen.  Come  what  would,
there  should  be  an  end  to  murder  and  brigandage.
Shelburne  ordered  Townshend  to  persevere  at  all
risks,  and  to  assure  the  independent  members  that
their  services  should  be  remembered,  if  they  stood
by  him  in  beating  down  an  opposition  which  was  the

1  ‘  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  Feb¬
ruary  16.’  A  curious  fear  had  been
expressed  by  the  independent  mem-
berstthat  if  they  voted  for  the  Army
Bill,  1  the  weight  of  the  Crown
would  be  exerted  against  them
hereafter  by  those  whose  designs
they  w'ould  now  defeat  by  the  sup¬
port  of  the  Government.’  They
feared,  that  is,  that  Lord  Shannon
and  the  Speaker1  would  continue
Lords  Justices  when  Townshend

went  back  to  England,  and  they
would  be  left  at  their  mercy.  It
was  the  same  complaint,  in  another
form,  which  the  loyal  gentlemen  of
the  Pale  used  to  make  to  the  mi¬
nisters  of  Henry  VIII.  If  they  sup¬
ported  an  English  Viceroy  against
the  Irish  clans,  the  Government,
sooner  or  later,  would  tire  of  its
efforts,  and  leave  them  to  be  de¬
stroyed  by  the  Geraldines.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

r  ~  •

more  abominable  from  the  affectation  of  patriotism
in  which  it  was  disguised.1

Townshend  by  this  time  understood  Ireland.  He
complied,  but  he  guessed  what  would  follow.  On
the  19th  of  April  a  message  was  sent  to  the  Commons
in  the  name  of  the  Crown,  that  three  thousand  ad¬
ditional  soldiers  were  required  for  the  defence  of  the
country;  the  Absentee  Tax  would  suffice  to  meet  the
expense,  and  no  fresh  burden  would  be  thrown  upon
the  people  ;  his  majesty,  therefore,  confidently  relied
on  the  willing  consent  of  the  Irish  legislature.  The
oligarchy  had  committed  themselves  too  deeply  to
retract.  If  they  yielded,  their  power  was  at  an  end.
The  usual  cries  were  raised  of  Ireland’s  liberty  being
in  danger.  Shannon,  Ponsonby,  Tisdall,  Hutchinson,
in  public  and  private,  by  themselves  and  their  friends,
played  on  the  childish  passions  of  the  Irish  people.
In  a  full  House,  on  the  motion  of  the  brilliant  en¬
thusiast,  who  aspired  to  be  Ireland’s  champion,  Mr.
Flood,  the  Government  was  defeated.

The  struggle  was  for  life  and  death.  England  was
too  apt  to  forget  her  Irish  friends,  especially  when
their  efforts  were  unsuccessful.  Townshend  thought
it  necessary  to  remind  the  Cabinet  immediately  that
they  must  keep  their  promises  to  those  who  had  stood
by  him,  and  who  would  otherwise  be  sacrificed  to  the
resentment  of  the  coalition.  He  considered  for  a
week  before  he  could  decide  on  the  course  which  it
would  now  be  desirable  to  follow.

4  When  the  King,’  he  wrote  at  length  to  Shelburne,
c  comes  to  reflect  on  certain  passages  in  my  letters  to
your  lordship,  his  majesty  can  be  no  stranger  to  the

67

CHAP.

II.

1768.

1  1  Shelburne  to  Townshend,  March  14.’  S.  P.  0.

p  2

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

scandalous  causes  of  the  late  miscarriage.  It  was
clearly  made  out  that  so  far  from  any  additional  vote
of  credit  being  needed,  the  money  already  voted
would  be  sufficient  till  Parliament  should  meet  again
to  answer  the  whole  expense  of  the  estimates. .  .  .You
must  now  be  convinced  on  what  grounds  many  of
the  leading  interests  of  this  kingdom  have  hitherto
undertaken  to  carry  on  his  majesty’s  affairs;  and  why,
when  difficulties  have  arisen,  or  have  been  artificially
created,  Government  has  generally  been  defeated  by  its
own  strength.  . .  .  The  most  effectual  means  to  restore
vigour  to  the  Government  would  be  to  keep  Ireland
under  the  constant  attention  of  a  resident  governor
in  whose  hands  should  be  placed  the  absolute  disposal
of  the  several  offices  of  revenue.  The  commissioners
exercise  great  weight  over  the  officers  under  them,
for  whose  conduct  on  this  occasion  I  cannot  otherwise
account.  As  this  will  operate  but  slowly,  however,  I
should  wish  to  know  whether,  in  the  different  branches
of  his  majesty’s  service,  some  persons  ought  not  to  be
immediately  marked  as  particular  objects  of  dis¬
pleasure.  Many  distinguished  persons  have  supported
us  through  the  session  without  hinting  at  any  consi¬
deration  :  though  their  j udgment  was  against  pressing
the  Augmentation  Bill,  they  yet  hazarded  their
elections  in  supporting  it.  I  am  not  without  hope
that  when  it  shall  be  observed  that  his  majesty’s
disapprobation  is  strongly  shown  to  the  principal
opposers  of  so  salutary  a  measure,  the  tide  of  popular
resentment  will  turn  against  those  who  have  en¬
deavoured  to  direct  it  against  Government.’ 1

The  country  was  already  preparing  for  a  general

1  1  Townsliend  to  Shelburne,  May  10,  1768.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

69

election.  4  Every  county  and  borough  was  a  scene  of
dissipation  and  animosity.7  Candidates  were  flying
to  and  fro,  bribing,  treating,  and  spouting  patriotism
and  Ireland’s  rights.  French-Irish  priests,  oflicers  of
the  Irish  Brigade,  apostles  of  anarchy  of  all  sorts  were
scenting  the  approaching  battle,  coming  over  in  dis¬
guise,  and  4  feeling  the  pulses  of  the  community.7  On
all  grounds  it  was  desirable  to  shorten  the  dangerous
period.1  The  Viceroy  demanded  and  obtained  per¬
mission  to  bring  it  to  an  immediate  end.  The  bills
already  passed  through  committee  received  the  royal
assent.  Parliament  was  dissolved,  and  writs  were
instantly  issued  for  a  new  election.  Five  serviceable
members  of  the  late  House  were  recommended  for
peerages  and  obtained  them.2  Lord  Kingston  received
an  earldom,  the  Viceroy  insisting  that  striking  evi¬
dence  of  this  kind  was  necessary  to  show  that  the
King  meant  to  proportion  his  rewards  to  public  desert.
The  Doneraile  title  was  extinct.  Two  collateral  St.
Legers  were  applying  for  it,  both  of  whom  were
likely  to  be  elected  members  of  the  House  of  Com¬
mons.  They  were  put  on  their  good  behaviour  for
the  next  session:  whichever  of  them  served  the
Government  best  should  receive  the  prize.

4  This  is  now  the  crisis  of  Irish  Government,7  wrote
Townshend.  4  If  a  system  is  at  this  time  wisely
formed  and  steadily  pursued,  his  majesty’s  affairs  may
hereafter  be  carried  on  with  ease,  dignity,  and  safety  ;
but  if  only  a  few  changes  are  made  here  and  there,
and  this  particular  man  is  to  be  raised  and  another

CHAP.

ii.

TtgT

1  ‘  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  May
17,  1768/

2  Thomas  Dawson  was  created
Lord  Dartry;  W.  H.  Dawson,  of
Queen’s  County,  Lord  Portarling-

ton;  Abraham  Crichton  Lord  Erne;
John  Eyre,  of  Eyre  Court,  Lord
Eyre ;  and  Mr.  Corby,  of  Strad-
bally,  Lord  Corby.

70

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  depressed,  probably  to  be  restored  again  in  a  few
>  v'  -  months,  as  in  1755, 1  with  double  powers  and  weight,
!768.  will  only  add  fuel  to  the  fire,  and  at  last  bring  the
King’s  authority  in  Ireland,  low  as  it  is,  into  still
greater  contempt.  If  the  plan  which  I  have  proposed
shall  be  adopted,  and  the  King  and  his  servants  have
that  confidence  in  me  as  to  think  I  am  a  fit  person  to
carry  it  into  execution,  his  majesty  will,  I  hope,  allow
me  by  degrees  and  on  proper  occasions  to  submit  to
him  such  changes  as  shall  appear  to  me  necessary.’ 2

1  When  Lord  Shannon  got  his  peerage.

2  1  Townshend  to  Shelburne,  May  31,  1768/

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

SECTION  II.

Notwithstanding  the  dissoluteness  of  the  Dublin
workmen,  the  factiousness  of  the  patriots,  and  the
social  disorders  which  had  assumed  so  menacing  an
appearance,  the  material  prosperity  of  Ireland  had  for
twenty  years  been  slowly  increasing.  The  Peace  of
Aix  la  Chapelle  was  the  turning  point  at  which,  in
parts  at  least  of  the  island,  the  people  began  to  lay
aside  their  dreams  and  turn  to  industry.  Even  the
Whiteboy  movement,  caused  as  it  had  been  by  the
increase  of  cattle  and  the  rise  of  rents,  was  a  result
and  symptom  of  the  upward  tendency.  The  linen
manufacture  was  growing  in  Ulster.  Intelligent
country  gentlemen  were  building  houses,  planting,
draining,  and  raising  green  crops.  Arthur  Young,
who  travelled  through  the  country  in  1771,  found
universally  the  term  of  twenty  years  defined  as  that  at
which  the  upward  movement  had  commenced  which  was
still  in  progress.  The  year  which  followed  the  disso¬
lution  of  1768  was  the  most  productive  which  had
been  known  for  a  century ;  and  had  the  state  of  public
opinion  permitted  England  to  recognise  that  a  Par¬
liament  was  at  all  times  a  curse  to  Ireland  and  not  a
blessing  ;  could  she  have  perceived  at  the  same  time,
without  waiting  to  be  taught  by  calamity,  the  folly
and  iniquity  of  her  trade  laws,  the  permanent  re¬
generation  of  Ireland  might  have  dated  from  that
period.

It  was  not  to  be.  A  new  Parliament  was  elected,
but  it  was  not  called  together  before  the  usual  period,

72

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

LOOK

V.

1769.

in  the  autumn  of  the  following  year.  The  Viceroy
used  the  interval  to  impress  the  lesson  which  he
desired  Irish  politicians  to  lay  to  heart.  He  hoped,
though  he  was  far  from  sanguine,  that  by  straight¬
forward  open  measures,  by  the  suppression  of  jobs,
by  honest  administration  on  the  principles  which  had
been  laid  down  by  the  King,  he  might  find  sufficient
backing  when  the  legislature  reassembled  to  carry  on
the  business  of  the  state  without  reverting  to  the  old
methods.  For  a  vigorous  policy,  however,  he  required
the  assistance  of  the  Home  Government,  and  the  Home
Government,  as  usual,  wavered.  4  You  are  to  have
all  the  support/  Lord  Weymouth  wrote  to  him  in  the
summer  of  1769,  4  that  your  known  zeal  entitles  you
to,  and  your  own  ideas  shall  be  adopted  as  to  the
mode  of  that  support,  if  there  is  a  moral  certainty
that  you  will  be  successful  in  procuring  a  majority.
Your  sketches  of  the  principal  characters  in  this
country  are  drawn  with  too  much  coolness  and  im¬
partiality,  and  with  too  genuine  an  air  of  truth,  to
permit  us  to  doubt  their  correctness.  His  majesty
arms  you  with  full  powers  to  act  as  you  shall  think
desirable.  ’ 1

The  Viceroy’s  4  ideas  ’  had  been  to  make  a  clean
sweep  of  the  dishonest  members  of  the  Council,  and
to  fill  their  places  with  others  of  whose  conscientious¬
ness  he  had  better  expectations.  To  certainty  of
success  he  admitted  frankly  that  he  could  not  pretend.
He  could  not  confer  confidentially  with  individual
members ;  he  could  not  canvass  for  support ;  he  could
only  repeat  his  opinion,  that  if  the  disastrous  habit
of  buying  off  opposition  was  fairly  abandoned,  and  if

1  1  Weymouth  to  Townshend,  June  9,  1769.  Most  secret.’

LOUD  TOWNSHEND'S  ADMINISTRATION.

73

Government  was  firm  in  showing  that  it  would  sup¬
port  honest  men  and  honest  measures,  the  Shannon
and  Ponsonby  faction  would  be  broken  up.

Had  Chatham  continued  at  the  head  of  affairs,  the
bold  course  might  have  been  adopted.  But  Chatham
was  gone,  and  without  Chatham  the  Cabinet  who
were  unwisely  brave  towards  the  American  colonies,
had  no  army  to  spare  to  encounter  Irish  faction.
They  advised  half  measures.  The  false  c  servants
of  the  Crown  7  were,  for  the  present  a, t  least,  to  remain
in  their  places.  They  were  worthless  and  unprin¬
cipled  ;  they  were  fishing  in  troubled  waters  for
their  own  interest  ;  but  they  might  oppose  the  sup¬
plies  if  they  were  removed,  and  the  Viceroy  was
directed  to  make  one  more  experiment  of  temporizing.
Very  unwillingly  he  submitted,  pleading  only  to  be
allowed  to  show  open  countenance  and  favour  to  4  the
eminent  gentlemen  who  had  supported  him  in  his
last  trial,’  if  only  to  show  his  majesty’s  determination
that  though  he  was  pleased  to  suffer  his  servants  to
remain,  the  power  of  the  kingdom  was  not  to  return
to  its  late  channel.

There  had  been,  was,  and  ever  would  be,  but  one
way  of  governing  Ireland — by  putting  authority  ex¬
clusively  into  the  hands  of  men  of  personal  probity
and  tried  loyalty  to  the  British  connection.  Untaught
by  unvarying  experience,  England  has  persisted  from
the  beginning  in  the  opposite  method.  She  has
sought  to  rule  with  the  support  of  men  by  whom  it
has  been  a  disgrace  to  be  supported,  to  sacrifice  the
known  and  obvious  interests  of  the  Irish  people  to
the  intrigues  of  demagogues  for  whom  the  horsewhip
would  have  been  a  fitter  reward.  From  the  days  of
the  Earls  of  Kildare  to  the  days  of  the  modern  Upas

CHAP.

ii.

TtgdT

74

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IliELAND.

BOOK

V.

17G9.

Tree  she  has  walked  in  the  same  footsteps  and  always
to  the  same  goal.  She  has  encouraged  the  hostility
which  she  hoped  to  disarm.  She  has  taught  those
whom  she  has  wished  to  conciliate  that  they  may
defy  and  insult  her  with  impunity.

Townshend  did  not  dispute  his  orders,  but  as  the
session  approached  he  continued  to  repeat  his  opinion
that  bolder  measures  would  answer  better.  4  I  know
from  the  surest  sources,’  he  wrote  to  Weymouth  in
August,  4  that  there  are  many  gentlemen  connected
with  the  Speaker  who  are  waiting  only  to  see  whether
the  English  Government  will  or  will  not  resume  its
authority.’ 1  Late  in  the  month  he  went  on  progress
in  Munster,  and  paid  Lord  Shannon  a  visit  at  Castle-
martyr.  Ponsonby  was  staying  there  also.  They
were  coldly  polite,  and  evidently  intended  mischief.

4  I  assure  you,’  the  Viceroy  said,  k  there  is  nothing
popular  or  formidable  in  these  persons  or  their  party.
It  is  the  power  they  derive  from  the  Crown  and  exercise
so  fully  and  largely  over  this  kingdom  which  subjects
the  minds  of  people  to  them.  Neither  Lord  Shannon
nor  Mr.  Ponsonby  could  preserve  even  their  common
provincial  influence  without  their  offices.  The  Oc¬
tennial  Bill  gave  the  first  blow  to  the  dominion  of
aristocracy  in  this  kingdom.  It  rests  with  Govern¬
ment  to  second  the  good  effects  of  it,  and  to  re-establish
its  own  authority  by  disarming  those  who  have  turned
their  arms  against  it.  Only  let  us  be  firm  and  re¬
solute,  and  all  right-minded  people  will  come  over
to  us.’  2

It  was  not  only  to  reduce  the  power  of  the  aristocracy
in  Parliament  that  the  Viceroy  was  anxious  for  vigo-

1  1  Townshend  to  Weymouth,  August  18.’

2  ‘  To  Weymouth,  September  13.  Most  secret  and  separate.’

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

75

rous  action.  As  Lords  Justices,  the  Speaker  and  his  chap.
son-in-law  had  the  supervision  of  the  revenue,  and  it  > — ^ —
was  calculated  that  by  various  forms  of  peculation  as
much  as  150,000/.  a  year  was  lost  to  the  Government
out  of  the  customs  duties.  Ponsonby  had  appointed
his  friends  to  the  Customs  offices  from  highest  to  lowest,
and  though  never  suspected  of  having  himself  conde¬
scended  to  fraud,  it  was  thought  possible  that  he  had
not  endangered  his  political  influence  by  too  inconve¬
nient  inquisitiveness.  In  some  way  or  other  at  any
rate  large  sums  were  unaccounted  for.  In  this  very
summer  time  the  Viceroy  learnt  that  a  large  cargo  of
tobacco  had  been  seen  at  a  spot  where  it  was  delibe¬
rately  overlooked,  and  that  the  cargo  of  an  East  In-
diaman,  on  which  the  duties  would  have  been  13,000/.,
had  been  landed  surreptitiously  at  Cork,  and  that
no  enquiry  had  been  made.  Hertford  had  received
power  from  the  King  to  remove  all  officers  of  all
degrees  if  found  unfit  for  their  posts.  These  powers
had  not  been  renewed  to  Townshend.  He  could  not
punish  the  incompetent  or  dishonest.  He  could  not
reward  and  encourage  the  good.  To  the  members  of
Parliament  who  had  been  watching  how  the  wind
would  blow,  he  could  give  none  of  the  assurances
which  they  expected,  and  which  he  had  begged  so
earnestly  to  be  allowed  to  hold  out.  Even  Lord  Drog¬
heda  and  Lord  Tyrone,  who  had  supported  him  in
the  last  session  under  promise  of  marquisates,  had
their  ambition  still  ungratified,  and  were  ‘  threatening
vengeance.’ 1

Thus  it  was  that  when  the  time  came  for  the  new
Parliament  to  meet,  the  impression  prevailed  that
England  was  afraid,  and  that  opposition  would  remain

1  ‘  Townshend  to  Weymouth,  October  22.’

76

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

y.

'  1769.

as  before — the  surest  road  to  promotion  and  pa¬
tronage.  The  Government  had  been  defied,  and  had
ventured  a  dissolution.  But  a  dissolution  had  been
inevitable,  at  all  events.  The  insolent  4  servants
of  the  Crown  ’  were  still  in  office,  and  on  them  and
on  Irish  ideas  it  was  alone  safe  for  those  who  were
making  politics  their  profession  to  rely.  Even  the
Viceroy  himself  had  been  obliged  to  affect  politeness
to  them.  4 1  declined  coming  to  extremities/  he
sadly  said,  4  because  I  have  all  along  observed  in
your  letters  a  reluctance  to  any  measures  that  might
be  thought  violent.  Things  remain,  therefore,  as
they  were,  both  as  to  men  and  measures/1

The  session  began  on  the  17th  of  October.  Pon-
sonby  was  re-elected  Speaker  without  opposition.
The  speech  avoided  doubtful  subjects,  but  drew  at¬
tention  to  frauds  in  public  departments,  which  Pon-
sonby  might  take  to  himself,  if  he  chose ;  4  to  clandes¬
tine  running  of  goods,’  which  4  had  been  carried  to
great  lengths  ;  ’  and  to  the  imperfect  discharge  of
their  duties  by  the  officers  of  the  revenue.2

The  patriots  were  eager  to  try  their  strength,  or  to
show  it  in  the  new  House.  The  Government  must
be  informed,  as  speedily  as  possible,  that  they  meant
to  be  its  masters,  and  to  dictate  their  own  terms.
The  question  on  which  the  Viceroy  was  most  anxious
was  as  before,  of  course,  the  augmentation  of  the
army.  A  motion  was  made  immediately  in  the  com¬
mittee  of  supply  to  consider  whether  an  increase  was
necessary,  and  the  Government  was  again  defeated

1  ‘To  Weymouth,  October  17.’

3  Arthur  Young  says  that  in
1771  smuggling  had  much  de¬
clined.  It  is  one  of  the  few  in¬
stances  in  which  this  usually  exact

writer  is  mistaken.  The  contraband
trade  yielded  perhaps  less  extrava¬
gant  profits,  but  it  was  never  more
active,  and  ran  in  so  smooth  and  deep
a  stream  that  little  was  heard  of  it.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

77

by  104  to  72.  The  first  blow  was  followed  in¬
stantly  by  a  second.  The  popular  leaders  brought
up  the  Pension  List,  and  examined  its  composition.
There,  it  was  but  too  true,  scandalously,  shamefully,
inexcusably,  stood  the  name  of  the  Countess  of
Yarmouth,  niece  of  her  grace  of  Kendal,  for  4,000/.
a  year.  There  stood  Lord  Grantham,  with  2,000/.
for  his  own  life  and  his  son’s  ;  Lord  Cholmondeley
was  there,  whose  merit  was  to  have  been  Walpole’s
son-in-law,  for  3,500/.  ;  Lord  Bathurst  had  2,000/.  ;
Lady  Waldegrave  800/.  81,000/.  in  all  was  taken

from  the  Irish  revenues  for  these  extraordinary
personages  by  a  virtuous  Government,  while  honest
national  patriots  were  expected  to  shiver  unre¬
warded;  and  the  highest  offices  in  the  Irish  ser¬
vice  were  bestowed  equally  on  English  favourites,
who  did  not  trouble  themselves  even  to  reside  and
do  their  duty.  The  army  question  came  up  again
in  another  form.  What  use  did  the  Crown  make
already  of  the  sums  voted  for  the  defence  of  the
kingdom?  Colonel  Yallancey  reported  that  all  round
the  coast  the  fortifications  were  in  ruins.  Cork,
Waterford,  Belfast,  Limerick,  wealthy  and  growing
cities,  were  utterly  undefended;  the  guns  in  the  batte¬
ries  were  a  hundred  years  old,  and  hardly  useful  as  old
iron.1  This,  too,  was  disgracefully  certain ;  and  though
the  repairs  would  have  commenced  on  Doomsday  in
the  afternoon,  if  left  to  the  patriots,  though  the  Irish
Lords  Justices  were  the  persons  really  responsible  for
the  neglect,  none  the  less  it  was  a  telling  charge  ;
and  the  points  of  it  were  not  lost  in  the  handling.
The  committee  of  supply  recommended,  instead  of

CHAP.

II.

1769?

1  1  Commons'  Journals ,  November  16/

78

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  an  increase  of  the  army,  a  local  militia.  The  Duke

— — -  of  Leinster  made  up  his  quarrel  with  the  Speaker,  and

1 7 threw  his  influence  into  the  opposition,  which  was  now
in  overwhelming  strength ;  and  Flood,  Lucas,  and
Pery  were  chosen  to  draw  up  a  Militia  Bill.  The
stream  of  triumph  still  bore  them  on.  They  passed
next  to  the  field  on  which  they  had  suffered  their
last  reverses  in  their  conflict  with  England — the  ori¬
gination  of  their  Money  Bills.  Since  their  defeat  on
the  appropriation  of  the  surplus,  the  Money  Bill  had
been  presented  to  them  by  the  Council,  and  they  had
endured  it  as  a  perpetual  affront.  Their  turn  was
come  for  revenge.  On  the  21st  of  November  the
motion  for  the  usual  supplies  was  rejected  by  a  large
majority,  because  it  had  not  taken  its  rise  in  the  House
of  Commons  of  Ireland.  The  Commons  did  not  mean
to  refuse  the  grant.  They  proceeded  immediately  to
draw  a  bill  of  their  own.  But  they  were  resolved
to  vindicate  their  privilege  ;  and  lest  the  Viceroy
should  attempt  to  make  himself  independent  of  them
by  falling  back  on  the  hereditary  revenue,  they
thwarted  measures  which  he  had  proposed  for  a  re¬
duction  of  the  expenditure,  and  they  even  introduced
a  motion  the  effect  of  which  if  carried  into  execution
would  have  largely  reduced  the  fixed  and  permanent
duties.1  This  last  step  was  of  so  extreme  a  kind,  that
the  opposition  was  less  unanimous.  The  friends  of
Government  struggled  hard  to  resist  it,  and  had  very
nearly  succeeded.  But  this,  too,  was  carried  by  the
casting  vote  of  the  Speaker,  4  who,  to  the  astonish-

1  ‘  The  sinking  of  the  hereditary-
revenue  is  the  great  plan  of  some
gentlemen  here,  and  was  fought
strongly  by  the  servants  of  the

Crown  in  committee,  and  after¬
wards  in  the  House. — Townshend
to  Weymouth,  December  6/

LORD  TOWNSHEXPS  ADMINISTRATION.

79

ment  of  everybody,  though  himself  at  the  head  of  chap.
the  revenue,  divided  against  the  Castle.’1  — IL—

’  °  17 ro

Nothing  so  violent  as  this  had  been  seen  in  the
Irish  Parliament  since  the  Yiceroyalty  of  Lord  Syd¬
ney.  On  that  occasion  the  Viceroy,  without  even
waiting  for  orders  from  home,  had  replied  by  a  pro¬
rogation.  Lord  Sydney’s  conduct  had  been  fully
approved  by  William’s  ministers.  The  Parliament
which  had  defied  him  was  not  suffered  to  re-assemble,
and  there  had  been  serious  thoughts  of  abolishing
the  parliamentary  constitution.

Townshend  had  been  too  feebly  supported  by  the
Cabinet  to  venture  on  such  summary  measures  on  his
own  responsibility.  He  was  confronted  by  a  combi¬
nation  of  all  the  great  Irish  houses — the  Leinsters,
the  Shannons,  the  Ponsonbies,  the  Beresfords,  the
Loftuses — who  had  forgotten  their  jealousies  in  the
common  resolution  to  maintain  the  oligarchical  con¬
stitution.

The  catastrophe  had  come  which  Townshend  had
foreseen.  The  noble  lords,  he  said,  4  have  unmasked
their  real  sentiments  ;  ’  4  they  have  shown  they  mean
to  acknowledge  as  little  as  possible  the  superiority  of
the  mother  country.’  4  Such  conduct  as  they  have
observed  I  should  despise  as  a  private  man  ;  but
when  marked  towards  his  Majesty’s  representative,
it  becomes  an  object  of  serious  consideration.’  4  The
constant  plan  of  these  men  is  to  possess  the  govern¬
ment  of  this  country,  and  to  lower  the  authority  of
English  Government,  which  must,  in  the  end,  destroy
the  dependence  of  this  country  on  Great  Britain.’

Conciliation  had  borne  its  natural  fruits.  The

1  ‘Townshend  to  Weymouth,  Dec.  G.,  1769.’  S.  P.  0.

80

BOOK

y.

1769.

!

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

coercive  method  was  now  to  be  fallen  back  upon  at  in¬
creased  disadvantage.  Much  of  the  revenue  had  been
wasted  on  public  works  or  jobs.  This  might  be  saved
at  once.  If,  by  good  management  and  a  more  careful
collection  of  the  fixed  customs  and  excise,  the  expen¬
diture  could  be  brought  within  the  hereditary  revenue,
the  Cabinet  directed  Townshend  to  dissolve  the
Parliament,  and  terminate  the  childish  farce  by
governing  without  one.

It  appeared  on  examination,  that  if  the  expenses
were  pared  down  to  the  limits  of  what  was  barely
necessary,  there  would  remain  an  annual  deficiency
of  no  more  than  34,000/.  When  the  additional
duties  were  no  longer  voted,  prices  would  fall,  con¬
sumption  would  increase,  smuggling  and  private  dis¬
tilling  would  cease  to  be  profitable,  and  the  hereditary
revenue  would  probably  rise.  Even  if  the  establish¬
ment  were  carried  on  upon  the  present  scale,  with  the
Pension  List  included,  the  yearly  excess  need  not  be
more  than  260,000/.  The  experiment  might  at  least
be  carried  as  far  as  to  show  the  agitators  that  Eng¬
land  was  not  at  their  mercy.

Townshend  summoned  the  Council,  in  which  Pon-
sonby,  Shannon,  and  the  Prime  Sergeant  continued
to  sit ;  and  he  told  them  that  after  the  last  vote  of  the
House  of  Commons,  he  should  so  far  follow  the  pre¬
cedent  of  Lord  Sydney  as  to  protest,  and  to  insist
on  the  entry  of  his  protest  in  the  journals.1

1  1  The  wrong  which  Ireland  con¬
ceived  itself  to  suffer  about  its
Money  Bills  was  only  appreciable  by
the  Nationalist  imagination.  The
patriots  did  not  deny  that  the  Privy
Council  had  a  right  to  originate  a
Money  Bill.  They  denied  only  that

it  fell  within  the  provisions  of
Poynings’  Act,  and  that  the  Council
had  the  exclusive  right.  Thev
claimed  that  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  had  a  right  of  origination  also ;
and  they  professed  to  mean  no  more
than  that,  of  two  methods  equally

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

By  skilful  diplomacy,  by  social  attentions,  by  the
brilliant  hospitality  of  the  Castle,  by  the  combined
powers  of  integrity  of  general  purpose,  and  flexi¬
bility  of  scruple,  on  the  means  by  which  that  purpose
was  to  be  obtained,  the  adroit  Lord- Lieutenant  had
in  some  degree  overcome  the  opposition  in  the  Council
itself.  Hely  Hutchinson  had  been  bought  at  a  lower
price  than  he  had  set  upon  his  services,  for  his  wife
had  still  to  wait  for  her  peerage.  Tisdall,  the
Attorney -General,  had  been  gained  over..  Anthony

legal,  they  preferred  their  own.
Their  real  aspiration  probably  was  to
be  rid  of  Poynings’  Act  altogether ;
but  this  they  could  not  venture  to
avow  except  under  a  veil  of  satire.
In  the  height  of  the  tumult  there
appeared  in  the  Freeman’s  Journal
“  The  Hibernian  Courtier’s  Creed,”
signed  by  Athanasius  Secundus : —
‘  “  Whosoever  would  be  an  Hiber¬
nian  Courtier,  it  is  necessary,  before
all  mental  endowments,  that  he  ex¬
pound  rightly  the  law  of  Poynings,
as  explained  by  the  4th  and  5th
chapters  of  Philip  and  Mary.

‘  “  "Which  law,  unless  he  keeps
pure  and  unmixed  with  any  rational
interpretation,  he  cannot  enjoy  place
or  pension,  neither  shall  he  receive
concordatum  in  this  kingdom.

1  u  Now,  the  true  construction  of
Poynings’  Act  is  that  four  different
branches  of  the  Legislature  are  al¬
ways  acknowledged  in  our  Irish
Privy  Council,  continually  subsist¬
ing.

1  u  For  in  the  enacting  of  every
law  the  King  hath  a  deliberative
voice ;  the  Lords  have  a  delibera¬
tive,  the  Commons  have  a  delibera¬
tive;  and  the  Privy  Council  have
a  deliberative.

1  “  The  King  hath  a  negative
voice,  the  Lords  have  a  negative,

VOL.  II.

the  Commons  have  a  negative,,  and
the  Council  a  negative.

1  u  And  yet  there  are  not  four  de-
liberatives  nor  four  negatives,  but
one  deliberative  and  one  negative,
frequently  exercised  against  King,
Lords,  and  Commons,  by  his  majes¬
ty’s  most  honourable  Privy  Council.

1  “  Further,  it  is  essential  to  the
preservation  of  his  present  place,
and  to  his  further  hopes  of  prefer¬
ment,  that  he  conceive  just  ideas
of  the  origination  of  Money  Bills.

1  u  His  interest  will  thus  ever
oblige  him  to  confess  that  all  bene¬
volences  are  free  gifts  from  the
people ;  constitutionally  take  their
rise  in  an  assembly  neither  made,
nor  created  by,  nor  proceeding  from
the  people.

‘  “  This  is  the  Hibernian  Cour¬
tier’s  political  faith,  to  which  who¬
soever  inviolably  adheres  shall  be
rewarded  with  a  masked  pension
for  himself,  and  a  fancy  ball,  with¬
out  masks,  for  his  wives  and  daugh¬
ters.

1  11  And  for  all  those  who  reject
the  foregoing  liberal  explanation,
there  shall  be  protests,  proroga¬
tions,  partial  sheriffs,  packed  juries,
and  influenced  electors  to  their
lives’  end.”  ’ — Baratariana ,  p.  99.

G

82

BOOK

V.

Ttgik

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

Malone  had  taken  the  Viceroy’s  side  from  the  first.
These  gentlemen  were  now  prepared  to  a  certain  ex¬
tent  to  support  Government.  They  expressed  proper
regret  at  the  behaviour  of  the  House  of  Commons.
As  the  protest  would  be  received  with  ill  humour,
they  advised  as  a  further  step  an  immediate  proroga¬
tion.  One  thing,  however,  they  would  not  do  ;  they
refused  unanimously  to  assist  in  reducing  the  expen¬
diture  to  the  level  of  the  hereditary  revenue.  4  They
were  all  unwilling,’  the  Viceroy  wrote,  ‘that  the
hereditary  revenue  should  be  thought  sufficient,  and
therefore  said  everything  that  could  prevent  that
experiment  from  being  tried.’ 1

That  an  attempt  might  be  made  to  govern  without
a  Parliament  the  House  of  Commons  had  already
anticipated.  That  it  was  deliberately  in  contempla¬
tion,  being  acknowledged  in  Council,  was  of  course
whispered  about.  Public  feeling  caught  alarm.
Dublin  fell  into  a  fever  fit  of  patriotic  enthusiasm  ;
the  House  of  Commons  was  the  idol  of  the  hour,  the
defender  of  Ireland’s  liberties  ;  the  emotions  may  be
conceived,  therefore,  with  which  at  this  crisis  a  para¬
graph  was  received  which  had  just  appeared  in  the
4  London  Daily  Advertiser,’  telling  the  patriots  how
they  were  regarded  in  that  malignant  country  which
was  the  cause  of  all  their  woes.

On  the  18th  of  December  a  motion  was  made  in
the  House  of  Commons  that  a  paragraph  be  read
from  Mr.  Woodfall’s  Paper  of  the  9th,  relating  to  the
votes  on  the  Money  Bill.  The  Paper  was  produced.
The  clerk  rose  and  read —

4  Hibernian  patriotism  is  a  transcript  of  that  filthy

1  ( Townshend  to  Weymouth,  December  11.’

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

83

idol  which  is  worshipped  at  the  London  Tavern,  chap.

Insolence  assumed  from  an  opinion  of  impunity  « - —

usurps  the  place  which  boldness  against  real  injuries  17G9‘
ought  to  hold.  The  refusal  of  the  late  Bill  of  Supply
because  it  was  not  brought  in  contrary  to  the  practice
of  ages,  in  violation  of  the  constitution  and  to  the  cer¬
tain  ruin  of  the  dependence  of  Ireland  on  Great  Britain,
is  a  kind  of  behaviour  more  suiting  to  an  army  of
Whiteboys  than  the  grave  representatives  of  a  nation.

This  is  the  most  daring  insult  that  has  been  hitherto
offered  to  Government.  It  must  be  counteracted  with
firmness,  or  else  the  State  is  ruined.  Let  the  refrac¬
tory  House  be  dissolved.  If  the  same  spirit  of  sedi¬
tious  obstinacy  should  continue,  I  know  no  remedy  but
one.  The  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  is  supreme  over
its  conquests  as  well  as  its  colonies,  and  the  service  of
the  nation  must  not  be  left  undone  on  account  of  the
factious  obstinacy  of  a  Provincial  Assembly.  Let  our
Legislature,  for  they  have  the  undoubted  right,  vote
the  Irish  supplies,  and  save  a  nation  that  their  own
obstinate  representatives  endeavour  to  ruin.’

It  was  come  to  this  then.  Not  only  were  they  to
be  governed  without  a  Parliament,  by  the  hereditary
revenue,  but  taxes  were  to  be  imposed  on  them  at
the  will  and  pleasure  of  the  Legislature  of  Great
Britain.  Already  from  across  the  Atlantic  were  coming
sounds  of  the  approaching  battle  for  colonial  freedom.

The  wrongs  of  which  America  had  to  complain  were
but  mosquito  bites  by  the  side  of  the  enormous  in¬
juries  which  had  been  inflicted  by  English  selfishness
on  the  trade  and  manufactures  of  Ireland.  Why  was
Ireland  to  submit  when  America  was  winning  admira¬
tion  by  resistance?  Why,  indeed  ?  save  that  America
was  in  earnest.  The  Irish  were  not.  America  meant

G  2

84

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1769.

to  fight.  The  Irish  meant  only  to  clamour  and  to
threaten  to  fight.  The  American  leaders,  rightly
or  wrongly,  were  working  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole
population  of  the  colonies.  The  Irish  leaders  were
using  the  wrongs  of  their  country  as  a  means  of  forcing
England  to  bribe  them  into  connivance.  Had  the
Irish  at  any  period  of  their  history  aspired  to  any
noble  freedom,  they  would  have  fought  for  it  as  the
Scotch  fought  at  far  greater  disadvantage.  They
expected  to  obtain  the  privileges  which  are  the  only
prize  of  the  brave  and  noble  by  eloquence  and  chi¬
canery.  They  desired  those  privileges  only  to  convert
them  into  personal  profit  ;  and  when  the  hard  truth
wras  spoken  to  them,  they  screamed  like  hysterical
girls.

A  resolution  was  carried  instantly  without  a  dis¬
sentient  voice,  that  the  paragraph  which  they  had
heard  4  was  a  daring  invasion  of  the  rights  of  Par¬
liament,’  and  c  was  calculated  to  create  groundless
jealousy  between  the  subjects  of  the  two  kingdoms.’
The  offending  paper  was  burnt  on  College  Green
before  the  doors  of  the  House  by  the  hangman,  the
sheriff  and  javelin -men  attending  in  state  at  the  execu¬
tion.  Flood  and  Pery  moved  that  the  Viceroy  be
questioned  on  his  intentions.  The  House  agreed,  and
their  temper  was  not  mended  by  Townshend’s  answer.

4  He  did  not  think  himself  authorised,  he  said,  to  dis¬
close  his  majesty’s  instructions  till  he  had  received  his
majesty’s  commands  for  so  doing.’ 1

A  middle  course  was  now  impossible  ;  at  all  risks
the  servants  of  the  Crown,  who  were  the  real  insti¬
gators  of  the  action  of  the  House,  must  be  taught  that

1  Commons’  Journals ,  December  21.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION".

85x

they  had  passed  the  limits  of  forbearance.  On  the
23rd  the  Viceroy  wrote  for  permission  to  remove  v
Lord  Shannon,  the  Speaker,  and  five  other  lords  and
gentlemen  from  the  Privy  Council,  and  from  the
offices  which  they  held  under  the  Crown.1  A  4  most
secret  ’  letter  of  the  same  date  reiterates  his  reasons
for  requesting  it.

4  Mr.  Ponsonby  must  be  displaced  from  the  head
of  the  Revenue  Board.  I  need  not  dwell  upon  his
conduct  while  the  marks  are  so  recent  and  decisive.
The  authority  of  the  Crown  in  this  country  can  never
be  maintained  while  this  gentleman  holds  his  present
powers.  If  we  dissolve  Parliament  he  will  canvass
for  the  chair  of  the  next,  with  the  whole  power  and
authority  of  his  office,  and  we  must  see  to  prevent
him.  Lord  Lanesborough’s  friends  have  gone  against
us,  and  he  was  under  the  gravest  obligations  to  the
Crown.  Mr.  Champneys  was  placed  on  the  esta¬
blishment  for  1,000/.  a  year,  to  open  a  seat  for  his
lordship  at  the  Revenue  Board.  To  make  the
revenue  produce  what  it  ought,  one  or  two  members
of  the  board  must  be  Englishmen,  always  resident,
regularly  bred  in  the  revenue  of  England,  men  of
sense,  spirit,  and  honour,  who  could  be  depended  on
to  do  their  duty  themselves  and  prevent  others  from
abusing  theirs.  Lord  Shannon  must  be  removed
from  the  Ordnance,  and  the  inferior  board  must  be
changed  also.  The  principal  share  of  the  power  and
influence  of  those  parties  which  have  so  long  embar¬
rassed  Government  was  owing  to  the  favour  as  well  as

CHAR

ii.

"moT

forbearance  of  the  Crown  under  which  they  have  been
cherished  ;  while  by  a  constant  private  understanding

1  The  Earls  of  Louth  and  Sir  Hercules  Langford  Rowley,
Lanesborough,  Sir  William  Mayne,  and  Sir  William  Fownes.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

with  its  declared  opponents,  they  have  distressed  one
Lord-Lieutenant,  compromised  with  another,  always
gaining  something  for  themselves,  and  paring  away
the  authority  and  reputation  of  the  English  Govern¬
ment  until  it  has  scarce  ground  left  to  stand  upon.
Members  of  the  House  of  Commons  have  been  watch¬
ing  to  see  where  the  power  would  finally  reside.  I
earnestly  recommend  these  changes,  and  such  a  regu¬
lation  of  the  revenue  as  shall  tend  to  its  improvement
and  the  support  of  the  Government.  Lose  no  time.
The  same  cabals,  the  same  demands,  intrigues,  and
pretended  patriotism  will  revive.  Government  must
begin  from  this  moment  to  extricate  itself  from  this
dilemma  or  must  submit.’ 1

The  Parliament  was  allowed  one  more  opportunity
of  repentance.  Half  alarmed  at  their  own  audacity,
the  factious  members  had  consented  after  all  to  the
augmentation  of  the  army.  Part  of  the  supplies  had
been  voted  under  forms  not  included  in  the  bill  which
they  had  thrown  out.  The  necessary  business  was
wound  up  at  Christmas,  and  the  royal  assent  was  given
to  the  Acts  which  had  already  been  passed.  The
Viceroy,  on  the  26th,  addressed  the  two  Houses.  He
told  them  with  painful  plainness  the  light  in  which  he
regarded  them  and  their  doings  ;  and  then,  as  Lord
Sydney  had  done,  and  as  he  had  given  notice  that  he
himself  intended  to  do,  he  submitted  a  distinct  protest
against  the  claims  which  they  had  advanced,  and  re¬
quired  them  to  enter  it  on  the  Journals.  The  Peers
consented,  five  only  objecting  and  recording  the
grounds  of  their  disagreement.2  The  Commons,  too
proud  to  yield  further,  and  aware,  like  the  Viceroy,

1  1  Townshend  to  Weymouth,  2  Loutli,  Charlemont,  Powers-
December  23.’  Abridged.  court,  Longford,  and  Mountm orris.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

87

that  it  was  a  crisis  in  the  constitution,  when  to  give
way  was  to  allow  themselves  defeated,  positively  re¬
fused.  Townshend,  on  his  side,  was  firm.  Had  they
complied,  they  would  have  separated  for  the  fortnight’s
recess  and  have  re-assembled  in  January.  They  were
prorogued  nominally  till  the  20th  of  March,  but  in
fact,  as  they  all  knew,  for  an  indefinite  time.

CHAP.

ii.

1769.

(

88

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  III.

book  Two  courses  were  now  open  to  the  Cabinet,  and  two

y  ^

_ _ F — -  only.  The  behaviour  of  the  House  of  Commons,  no-

A"u*  toriously  consequent  as  it  was  on  the  rejection  of  the
first  overtures  of  Lord  Shannon  and  Mr.  Ponsonby  to
the  Viceroy,  must  have  satisfied  the  most  obstinate
believer  in  Parliamentary  Government  that  Ireland
in  the  existing  circumstances  was  not  fit  for  it.
Free  constitutions  presuppose  in  the  leading  citizens
of  a  .country  at  least  some  degree  of  probity  and
patriotism.  When  the  ambition  of  individuals  never
reaches  beyond  personal  interest,  when  their  con¬
sciences  recognise  no  obligation  beyond  duty  to  them¬
selves  and  their  friends,  the  forms  of  liberty  are
travestied,  and  the  sooner  the  truth  is  recognised  and
acted  on  the  better  for  all  parties  concerned.  Town-
shend  had  been  sent  to  Ireland  to  put  an  end  to
jobbery,  to  clear  away  the  scandals  of  generations,
and  to  begin  a  new  era.  He  had  been  foiled  by  the
inveterate  dishonesty  of  the  principal  Irish  politicians,
nor  was  there  the  slightest  hope  of  finding  in  the
Irish  representatives  the  materials  of  an  honourable
party  on  whose  support  he  could  rely.  The  facts
of  the  case  being  undeniably  thus,  the  Viceroy
might  have  been  left  to  select  a  council  from  the
many  honest  and  loyal  men  who  had  held  aloof
hitherto  from  the  unwholesome  atmosphere  of  Par¬
liament;  and  with  their  help,  and  with  economic
management  of  the  hereditary  revenue,  he  might  have
enforced  order,  punished  fraud  and  swindling,  and

LORD  TOWNSEND'S  ADMINISTRATION.

89

opened  the  way  by  a  just  administration  towards
a  future  union  with  Great  Britain.  The  honest
course  would  in  the  end  have  proved  the  safest.
It  would  have  involved  sacrifices,  however,  on  the
part  of  England.  If  integrity  and  justice  were
to  be  the  rule  of  Government,  precept  would  have
to  be  attended  by  example.  The  Cabinet  could  not
any  longer  abuse  Irish  patronage  to  purchase  Par¬
liamentary  support  at  home,  or  quarter  favourites
on  the  Irish  establishment  whom  elsewhere  they
dared  not  recommend.  The  English  statesmen  of  the
eighteenth  century,  the  Graftons,  the  Weymouths,  the
Norths,  the  Shelburnes,  had  learnt  in  official  routine
to  regard  these  resources  as  indispensable  for  the
public  service.  They  were  incapable,  perhaps,  from
habit  and  training,  of  breaking  in  upon  established
precedent.  There  was  another  way  of  governing  Ire¬
land  :  it  was  also  possible  to  fall  in  with  the  national
ideas,  and  to  maintain  the  Parliament  as  a  form  ;  but
since  corrupt  it  was,  to  manage  it  through  and  by  the
corruptions  which  it  loved ;  to  dissolve  the  old  parties,
and  to  form  instead  a  new  combination  which  should
be  held  together  by  dependence  upon  the  Castle.

Of  the  alternative  policies  this  unhappily  was  the
one  on  which  the  Cabinet  resolved,  and  Townshend
remained  in  Ireland  to  become  the  most  unwilling
instrument  in  carrying  it  out.  He  set  himself  to  the
work  of  seduction  with  all  the  arts  which  he  possessed.
The  Dublin  tradesmen  had  suffered  by  the  premature
dispersion  of  the  Lords  and  Commons.  The  Viceroy
restored  them  to  good  humour  by  the  magnificence
of  the  Castle  hospitalities.  He  gave  masquerades  ;
he  gave  fancy  balls,  in  which  the  costumes,  with  a
skilful  compliment  to  Ireland,  were  made  only  of

CHAP.

ii.

~rm.

90

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Irish  manufacture.  The  members  of  the  Opposition

—Z — -  sneered,  and  would  have  staid  away;  the  wives  and

1 770  J

daughters  refused  to  exclude  themselves  from  assem¬
blies  of  which  the  capital  of  Ireland  had  never  seen
the  equal,  and  forced  their  husbands  and  fathers  into
submission.  The  gentlemen  could  not  resist  the  fas¬
cination  of  the  Castle  dinner  parties  where  the  wit  was
as  sparkling  as  the  champagne.  Townshend  laughed
at  everything — laughed  at  the  Opposition,  laughed  at
the  friends  of  Government,  laughed  most  of  all  at
himself.  With  his  light  good  humour  he  conquered
popularity,  while  more  subtly  he  secured  important
friends  by  working  substantially  upon  them  below  the
surface.  Hely  Hutchinson  was  attached  by  a  pension1
which  was  added  to  his  salary  as  Prime -Sergeant.
Pery  was  disarmed  by  similar  methods,  and  the
links  of  the  chain  were  strengthened  which  held
Tisdall.  Thus  by  the  time  March  came,  the  Viceroy
felt  himself  strong  enough  to  begin  the  serious  part
of  his  business.  To  gentle  seduction,  terrors  were  to
be  added.  The  Cabinet  had  given  him  the  permission
which  he  desired,  to  deprive  the  Shannon  party  of
their  offices ;  he  had  watched  his  opportunity  to  de¬
liver  the  blow,  and  now  it  fell.  They  had  believed
that  finding  themselves  in  difficulties  with  America,
the  Cabinet  would  not  venture  to  punish  them.
On  the  6th  of  March,  Shannon,  Lanesborough,  and
Ponsonby  were  undeceived  by  learning  from  the

1  Townshend  insisted  very
strongly  on  the  necessity  of  this
pension.  ‘  Nothing,’  he  said,  ‘  but
the  unrivalled  application  and  abili¬
ties  of  this  gentleman,  who  is  so
.  necessary  for  the  King’s  service,  and
to  be  detached  from  the  great  inte¬

rests  in  opposition  to  Government,
could  prevail  on  me  to  recommend
this  affair  so  strongly,  by  which  I
think  the  most  useful  man  in  this
Parliament  will  be  fully  secured.’
—  ‘  To  Weymouth,  March  7.
Secret.’

LORD  TOWNSIIEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

91

Viceroy  that  the  King  had  no  longer  occasion  for
their  services.  With  the  chiefs  of  the  Ordnance
Board  and  the  Revenue  Board  were  to  follow  all  the
subordinates  and  dependents.  The  entire  departments
were  to  be  changed  completely  to  the  very  last  man.
The  effect  was  ludicrous.  Lord  Loftus,  another,
though  less  inveterate  delinquent,  and  himself  the
possessor  of  a  lucrative  office,  waited  in  consternation
on  Townshend,  and  endeavoured  to  make  his  peace.
Townshend  put  him  on  his  good  behaviour.  If  he
tripped  again  into  opposition,  he  was  informed  that  he
and  all  who  belonged  to  him  would  have  to  make
way  for  trustier  men.  All  offices  at  the  disposition  of
the  Crown  from  highest  to  lowest  were  to  be  held
thenceforward  by  persons  who  would  place  their  votes
at  the  disposition  of  the  Viceroy,  and  by  no  others.

The  revenue  commission  had  been  the  scene  of
the  grossest  frauds  ;  not  only  was  the  whole  staff
to  be  replaced,  but  the  number  of  commissioners
was  to  be  increased:  Townshend  had  significantly  said
.  that  he  must  have  Englishmen  among  them,  men  of
integrity,  ability,  and  experience  unconnected  with
Ireland.1  The  patriots  looked  for  an  outbreak  of
indignation  at  the  dismissal  of  their  champions.
They  were  astonished  to  find  that  Dublin  cared  no¬
thing  after  all  for  the  oligarchy  with  whom  they
had  identified  themselves.  The  Opposition  majority
disintegrated  so  rapidly,  that  the  Viceroy  almost

1  The  addition  to  the  number  of
revenue  commissioners  in  Ireland
by  Townshend,  striking  as  it  did  at
the  root  of  an  established  and  lu¬
crative  form  of  peculation,  was  the
subject  for  many  years  of  the  most
passionate  declamation  in  the  Irish

Parliament.  .  .  By  allowing  the

new  commissioners  to  sit  in  the
House  of  Commons,  he  laid  himself
open  to  the  charge  of  adding  to  the
number  of  placemen.  .  .  But  his

private  letters  leave  no  doubt  of  the
real  motive  for  the  increase.

CHAP.

II.

7770.

92

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  contemplated  the  recall  of  the  Parliament.  4  No

— Zi — *  servants  of  the  Crown/  he  said,  4  had  ever  fallen  less

i  r*r*A

' '  *  regretted.’  But  he  preferred  to  prolong  the  suspense
to  make  sure  of  his  ground.  4  The  consequences  of
the  late  measures  had  not  had  time  to  operate  fully.’
Loftus  had  promised  to  behave  well.  Others  would
follow  if  not  pressed  too  hastily.  Prorogation,  there¬
fore,  followed  prorogation.  The  submission  of  the
same  Parliament  which  had  been  so  audaciously  de¬
fiant  would  be  a  greater  triumph  than  the  election  of
another  by  a  dissolution.  The  noble  lords  and  their
friends  seeing  the  game  go  against  them  lost  their
tempers.  Flood’s  eloquence  continued  to  stream
through  the  press,  but  it  fell  flat  upon  Dublin
society,  which  was  basking  in  the  sunshine  of  the
Castle  ;  and  his  invectives  read  by  the  light  of  Town-
shend’s  correspondence  are  absurd  to  childishness.
Sir  William  Mayne,  a  favourite  of  the  Duke  of  Leinster,
was  among  those  who  had  been  removed  from  the
Council.  He  had  been  one  of  the  most  violent  of  the
Opposition  members,  entirely  in  consequence  of  what
he  had  regarded  as  a  personal  affront.  On  Town-
shend’s  arrival  in  Ireland  4  Mayne  honoured  him  with
his  wishes  to  be  chief  secretary,’  his  qualifications  being
4  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  florid,  perpetual,  and
inept  orators  that  ever  performed  on  the  Irish  or  any
other  stage.’ 1  He  had  not  the  success  which  he  ex¬
pected.  He  then  offered  to  vacate  his  seat,  giving
the  Viceroy  the  nomination,  if  the  Viceroy  would
recommend  him  for  a  peerage.  4  I  own  to  your
lordship,’  the  Viceroy  said  in  a  letter  to  Weymouth,
4  the  proposition  rather  shocked  me ;  it  was  a  long

1  1  Townshend  to  Weymouth,  April  28.’

.  LORD  TOWNSHEND  S  ADMINISTRATION.

while  before  I  could  bring  myself  to  answer  it  with
temper.’  Mayne  could  not  have  his  peerage.  He
had  revenged  himself  in  the  usual  way,  and  had  now
been  punished.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  took  his
parasite’s  disgrace  as  personal  to  himself.  He  wrote
to  Townshend,  begging  that  when  the  Viceroy  erased
the  name  of  Sir  William  Mayne  he  would  erase  his
own  at  the  same  time.  Townshend  answered  cour¬
teously  that  the  Viceroy  had  no  authority,  as  the
duke  must  be  aware,  to  remove  a  Privy  Councillor
by  an  act  of  his  own.  If  the  duke  was  serious,  he
would,  with  great  concern,  ‘transmit  his  application.’
In  a  brief  note,  characteristic  alike  of  the  man,  and  of
the  elements  in  which  the  young  Fitzgeralds  were
being  educated,  the  duke  repeated  his  demand.
4  You  are  so  obliging  as  to  say,’  he  wrote,  ‘that  if  I
continue  to  desire  it,  you  will  transmit  my  letter  to
be  laid  before  his  majesty.  It  is  the  only  favour  I
ever  asked  of  your  excellency,  and  I  flatter  myself
that  your  excellency  will  take  such  steps  as  are  proper
to  have  my  request  complied  with,  as  it  will  save
me  the  necessity  of  doing  it  myself.’ 1

The  duke,  perhaps,  expected  Townshend  to  chal¬
lenge  him.  He  was  disappointed.  His  letter  was  for¬
warded  to  St.  James’s.  Sir  George  Macartney  was
instructed  to  communicate  that  the  request  had  been
complied  with ;  and  the  duke  closed  the  singular  cor¬
respondence  by  thanking  Macartney  for  the  trouble
which  he  had  taken,  ‘  particularly  as  it  had  prevented
him  taking  an  unprecedented  step,  and  perhaps
attended  with  some  consequences,  which,  however,  he
would  have  run,  for  the  ease  and  satisfaction  which

1  ‘  The  Duke  of  Leinster  to  Lord  Townshend,  April  23,  1770.’  S.P.O.

94

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  lie  now  felt  in  his  mind  of  being  no  longer  of  a  board

_ -V- — -  which  he  once  thought  most  honourable/

17  /0"  Swimming  in  a  base  and  sordid  element,  Towns-
hend,  like  Cornwallis  after  him,  detested  the  work  in
which  he  was  engaged  of  superseding  a  corrupt  oli¬
garchy  by  corrupt  Praetorians.  If  England  could  be
persuaded  to  treat  Ireland  with  real  justice,  better
things  might  still  be  possible.

4  The  general  disposition  of  his  majesty’s  subjects,’
he  wrote  to  Lord  Weymouth,  4  has  been  tried  and
found  faithful  at  this  crisis.  Unagitated  by  the  dis¬
appointment  of  the  leading  interests,  unprejudiced
by  the  insinuations  or  example  of  other  parts  of  his
majesty’s  dominions,  who  solicit  them  to  make  a
common  cause  to  distress  the  Government,  they  appa¬
rently  remain  at  their  homes,  a  distinguished  example
of  loyalty  and  confidence.  Therefore,  my  lord,  I  the
more  readily  solicit  such  indulgences  as  may  appear  on
better  deliberation  fitting  to  be  granted  to  them.  I
am  informed  that  there  is  a  species  of  coarse,  narrow
woollen  cloth  manufactured  in  this  country,  proper
for  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  markets,  and  that
none  of  the  same  quality  is  manufactured  in  Great
Britain.  I  submit  whether  the  free  exportation  of  that
article  might  not  be  given  to  Ireland,  as  it  would,  in
some  measure,  counteract  a  large  bounty  given  by  the
French  for  the  importation  of  wool  from  the  western
parts  of  this  kingdom.

4  It  seems  also  but  fair  to  this  country,  which  has
been  so  encouraged  to  cultivate  the  linen  manufac¬
ture,  to  extend  to  them  the  bounty  granted  last  ses¬
sion  of  Parliament  on  the  exportation  of  checks,  and
to  take  off  the  heavy  duty  of  30  per  cent,  which  they
now  pay  on  importation,  equal  to  a  prohibition  ;  and

LORD  TOWNSMEN!)’ S  ADMINISTRATION.

95

if  a  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  printed  linens  be
granted  as  a  further  encouragement  to  British  linen,
I  should  hope  it  may  be  thought  proper  that  the  same
should  be  extended  to  Ireland.

4  Follow  my  advice,  and  then  the  sooner  Parlia¬
ment  meets  the  better,  lest  the  country,  hitherto
affectionate,  and  contemning  the  private  views  of  our
opponents,  when  it  finds  itself  punished  for  its  indis¬
cretion,  through  disappointment  should  join  those
whom  it  at  present  rejects.’1

The  favour  so  modestly  requested  was  but  a
small  instalment  of  the  debt  of  justice  which  Eng¬
land  really  owed.  Had  it  been  freely  conceded  at  this
time,  what  mischief  might  not  have  been  prevented  !
Political  sagacity  may  be  baffled.  Political  conces¬
sions  may  aggravate  the  evils  they  are  meant  to  cure.
Justice  only  never  fails.  A  few  years  were  to  pass,
and  the  entire  fabric  of  commercial  disabilities  was  to
be  swept  away  from  its  foundations.  But  the  fall  of  it
was  to  bring  no  gratitude,  while  the  memory  of  the
wrong  was  to  remain  for  ever  uneffaced  and  unefface-
able.  The  chain  was  allowed  to  remain  till  it  was
broken  by  the  revolt  of  the  American  colonies,  and
Ireland  was  to  learn  the  deadly  lesson  that  her  real
wrongs  would  receive  attention  from  England  only
when  England  was  compelled  to  remember  them  by
fear.  North,  Weymouth,  Shelburne — any  one  of  whom
left  to  his  own  intelligence  would  have  seen  the  fit¬
ness  of  instant  consent — were  deaf  to  advice.  The
manufacturing  interests  in  Parliament  were  too
powerful.  Townshend’s  advice  could  not  be  followed.
The  bounties  of  which  he  spoke  were  violations  even

CHAP.

II.

1770.

1  1  To  Weymouth,  September  25.  Most  private  and  secret.’

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

look  of  the  miserable  compacts  to  which  Ireland’s  woollen
— / — '  trade  had  been  sacrificed.  Ireland  was  denied  the

I  770

benefit  of  them;  the  Viceroy  was  driven  back  on  the
only  remedy  which  remained — of  wholesale  and  sys¬
tematic  bribery  ;  while  the  essential  interests  of  the
island  were  contemptuously  neglected  or  forgotten.1

The  seizure  of  the  Falkland  Isles  by  Spain,  in  the
summer  of  1770.  created  a  sudden  danger  of  war.
Weymouth  ordered  Townshend  to  be  on  his  guard.
Townshend  had  to  reply  that  the  country  was  still  de¬
fenceless.  and  that  if  war  came,  he  could  not  answer  for
the  consequences.  The  Catholics  infinitely  exceeded
the  Protestants  in  numbers.  They  were  miserable,
mutinous,  and  devoted  to  their  priests.  Internal  peace
depended  on  4  the  submission  of  the  wealthy  Roman
Catholics  to  the  Government.’  As  to  foreign  ene¬
mies,  4  neither  Waterford,  Dungannon,  nor  Youghal
could  resist  a  frigate.’  4  Cork,  the  finest  harbour  in
the  world,  more  important  to  Great  Britain  than
Dublin,  was  defended  only  by  a  miserable  battery,
called  Cove  Fort.’2  4  Common  sense  and  common
justice  ’  had  been  so  long  forgotten  in  Ireland,  4  that

1  The  rise  in  the  price  of  farm
produce  had  not  remedied  the  po¬
verty  of  the  people,  for  the  land-
owners  and  middlemen,  when  they
were  not  held  in  check  by  the
Whitebovs,  had  secured  the  profit
to  themselves.  Townshend  was  no
more  of  a  sentimentalist  than  Eng¬
lish  statesmen  are  apt  to  be,  yet  he
summed  up  one  of  his  descriptive
letters  by  saying : — ‘  In  short,  my
lord,  the  distress  of  this  people  is
very  great.  I  hope  to  be  excused
for  representing  to  his  majesty
the  miserable  situation  of  the  lower
ranks  of  his  subjects  in  this  king¬
dom.  What  from  the  rapacious¬

ness  of  their  unfeeling  landlords
and  the  restrictions  on  their  trade,
they  are  among  the  most  wretched
people  on  earth.’ — 1  To  Weymouth,
November  23.’

2  Townshend  himself  examined
Cork.  ‘ It  must,’  he  says,  1  be  a
matter  of  curious  speculation  to
whoever  traces  the  old  works  about
the  harbour,  to  observe  how  much
abler  were  the  engineers  in  the
years  1602  and  1644,  when  Lord
Mount] oy  and  Prince  Rupert  com¬
manded  in  this  country.  Dugnose
and  Ramhead  were  better  positions
than  the  job  at  the  Cove.’ — ‘To
Weymouth,  October  16.’

97

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

the  powers  of  party  obliged  the  Government  to  mis¬
apply  the  purses  of  the  people  to  private  purposes.’

6  An  absurd  terror  had  been  inculcated,  that  every
useful  military  work,  wherever  placed,  was  intended
more  against  the  liberties  of  the  people  than  against
the  views  of  a  restless  enemy,  in  constant  correspond¬
ence  with  the  restless  and  bigoted  inhabitants  of
their  own  religion.’1  Every  Government  work
was  jobbed  4  to  gratify  individuals  whose  political
power  was  irresistible.’  Barracks  were  placed  where
soldiers  would  be  of  least  service.  Outlying
posts  had  been  destroyed  which  had  held  the
peasantry  in  check,  and  the  regiments  removed  to
towns  where  the  officers  learnt  or  practised  Irish
vices,  and  the  men  forgot  their  discipline  in  whisky
shops.

Of  the  condition  of  the  army  there  bad  been  re¬
cently  a  very  painful  illustration.  Major  Wrixon,  who
was  with  a  battalion  at  Limerick,  had  carried  off  a
young  lady  from  her  parents’  house  by  force,  and  had
kept  her  with  him  in  the  barracks.  He  was  tried  by
court-martial,  and  cashiered.  The  court,  however,

CHAP.

ii.

' — , — — '

1770.

1  Townshend  confirms  the  evi¬
dence  which  came  out  on  the  late
Whiteboy  trials  as  to  the  temper  of
the  Catholics  of  the  South : —

‘  The  remains  of  the  old  Popish
clans  keep  up  a  constant  corre¬
spondence  with  France  and  Spain,
for  smuggling,  for  recruits,  and  for
our  deserters.  They  are  a  very
lawless  people,  mostly  armed,  fre¬
quently  forming  themselves  into
banditti,  defying  law  and  magis¬
trates,  and  committing  the  greatest
outrages.  The  troops  are  called  for
to  secure  common  execution  of

criminals.  French  vessels  frequent
the  coasts,  and  the  great  supply  of
foreign  goods  into  the  south  of  the
kingdom  is  by  means  of  these  peo¬
ple.  It  is  amazing  that  all  the
posts  of  troops  which  King  William
established  in  the  country  to  civilize
the  people  should  have  been  re¬
moved  to  the  corporations  in  the
interior,  and  those  parts  left  in  as
uncivilized  and  dangerous  a  state
as  at  that  period.  When  the  moun¬
tains  are  occupied  the  revenue  will
be  increased  forty  or  fifty  thousand  a
year.’ — To  Weymouth,  October  16.

VOL.  II.

H

98

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

Y.

1770.

memorialized  the  Crown  in  his  favour,  on  the  ground
that  Major  Wrixon’s  dismissal  from  the  service  would
distress  his  sister  !

At  Rathdowney,  in  Queen’s  County,  there  had
been  a  scene  no  less  characteristic.  The  Viceroy  had
reported  that  1  there  was  a  wild  ungovernable  dis¬
position  in  the  people  of  many  parts  of  the  kingdom,
which  neither  the  common  law  nor  the  civil  magi¬
strates  were  able  to  restrain.’  The  military  had  to  be
called  in  at  Rathdowney,  but  the  military  power  was
as  little  to  be  trusted  as  the  civil  power  was  inadequate.
A  sergeant’s  guard  went  into  the  town  on  market-day,
apparently  to  buy  provisions.  Other  privates  of  the
regiment  at  the  station  followed  them,  and,  with  no
discoverable  provocation,  c  fell  promiscuously  on  the
inhabitants,  wounding  some  and  killing  others.’  Not
an  officer  was  to  be  found  in  the  place  but  the  quar¬
termaster.  It  was  proved  to  be  the  practice  of  the
officers  everywhere  to  4  appear  in  quarters  for  a  day,
sign  the  returns,  and  then  absent  themselves  till  the
next  return.’

Townshend  hurried  himself  to  the  spot,  and  or¬
dered  the  troops  to  be  paraded  without  arms.  Those
of  the  rioters  who  could  be  identified  were  handed
over  to  the  civil  authorities.  The  rest  were  marched
to  Dublin,  and  tried  by  a  general  court-martial.
The  officers  were  charged  with  being  absent  from
duty  without  leave.  They  were  found  guilty,  and
dismissed  the  service  ;  but,  like  Major  Wrixon,  were
recommended  to  mercy.  With  such  troops,  such
officers,  and  such  court-martials,  the  Viceroy  did  not
find  his  task  more  easy  of  defending  the  augmen¬
tation  of  the  army.  He  refused  to  listen  to  the

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

99

memorial.  In  both  instances  the  sentence  was  car¬
ried  out.  But  here,  too,  the  evil  could  be  traced  to
the  common  source  of  all  the  disorders  in  the  country.
4  The  necessity  of  yielding  to  powerful  parliamentary
interests  had  been  the  great  source  of  the  indiscipline
of  the  armv.’

CHAP.

ii.

177(1

100

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

/

SECTION  IV.

book  The  public  departments  bad  been  reorganized.  The

- — ^ — '  dependents  of  the  Boyles  and  the  Fonsonbies  had

1771  1  .  .  .

vanished  with  their  chiefs.  The  Customs  and  Excise

boards  had  been  re-filled  by  new  members,  who  could

be  relied  on  to  refuse  to  countenance  dishonesty,  and

whose  votes  could  be  depended  on  in  a  parliamentary

division.  The  great  Loftus  interest  had  been  brought

into  obedience,  and  the  support  of  the  independent

members,  who  had  held  aloof  in  the  last  session,  had

been  secured  by  the  only  means  which  were  capable

of  attaching  them.  It  was  said  afterwards  by  Lord

Clare,  that  half  a  million  in  all  was  the  price  which

they  had  placed  upon  their  services.  At  length,  in

the  spring  of  1771,  the  Viceroy  found  himself  once

more  prepared  to  meet  the  Parliament,  without  fear  of

the  renewal  of  the  scenes  of  the  late  session.  The

lowest  calculation  of  the  numbers  at  the  disposition

of  Government  anticipated  a  majority  of  at  least

twenty  in  the  same  House  and  among  the  same  men

who,  eighteen  months  before,  were  half  prepared  to

declare  the  independence  of  Ireland.  Lord  Towns-

hend’s  instructions  were  not  to  re-open  old  sores,  or  to

require  a  recall  of  the  hostile  resolution.  His  protest

had  sufficed.  He  was  now  to  conciliate,  to  hold  out

hopes  that  the  King  would  4  co-operate  ’  in  relieving

Irish  distress  ;  and  to  show  4  that  it  would  be  owins*

solely  to  the  rashness  and  folly  of  the  Opposition  if

101

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

they  and  their  fellow- subjects  were  deprived  of  those  chap.
advantages.’ 1  .. _

Once  more,  on  the  24th  of  February,  the  Viceroy  //A*
encountered  the  lords  and  gentlemen  who  had  sworn
to  drive  him  from  Ireland.  Without  referring  to
past  differences,  he  told  them  that  he  had  the  truest
satisfaction  in  obeying  his  majesty’s  commands  to
meet  them  again.  Knowing  something,  perhaps,  of
what  had  happened  in  the  interval,  but  ignorant
how  far  the  methods  employed  had  been  successful,
the  Opposition  declared  war  upon  the  instant,  and
an  address  was  moved  by  the  younger  Ponsonby,
in  which  the  usual  compliments  to  the  Lord-Lieu¬
tenant  were  pointedly  omitted.  An  amendment  was
proposed  to  replace  the  customary  words.2  A  debate
followed,  which  lasted  till  midnight,  and  the  fatal  truth
was  then  revealed  in  the  division,  that  the  power  of
the  Ponsonbies  had  passed  from  them.  They  were
defeated  by  132  to  107.  Their  own  arms  had  been
turned  against  them.  By  the  control  of  the  public
purse  they  had  hitherto  secured  a  monopoly  of  power.

Place,  pension,  promotion,  all  pleasant  things  which
Irish  politicians  entered  Parliament  to  gain,  were
thenceforward  to  be  the  reward  of  the  faithful  servants
of  the  Castle,  and  of  no  others.  Though  recovered
by  the  most  questionable  means,  the  authority  of
the  Crown  was  restored  to  its  visible  representative.

The  defeated  families  had  been  adroit  enough  to
represent  their  cause  as  the  cause  of  Ireland.  In
return  for  the  support  of  the  patriots  against  the
Viceroy  they  had  themselves  adopted  the  patriot

1  ‘  Lord  Rocliford  to  Townshend,  thanks  to  his  majesty  for  continue

February  9,  1771.’  ing  his  excellency  Lord  Townshend

2  1  To  return  our  most  humble  in  the  government  of  this  kingdom.’

102

BOOK

V.

Tttjl

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

cries;  and  when  it  was  plain  that  Parliament  had
deserted  them,  they  were  taken  np  as  martyrs  by
the  people.  A  furious  mob  assembled  the  next  day
at  College  Green.  Loftus  was  pelted  and  insulted  ;
suspected  members  of  the  Lower  House  were  caught,
and  oaths  of  fidelity  to  Ireland  were  thrust  into  their
mouths.  The  troops  were  called  out  to  disperse
the  rioters,  and  remained  on  guard  at  the  gates  when
the  business  of  the  morning  commenced.  Flood
started  to  his  feet  with  a  complaint  that  freedom  was
in  danger  from  the  presence  of  an  armed  force.  Fie
moved  a  resolution  that  the  House  was  being  over¬
awed.  Out  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  members,  fifty-
one  only  supported  him.  Still  unable  to  realize  what
had  happened,  he  returned  to  the  subject  on  which
before  he  had  achieved  so  splendid  a  triumph.  He
moved  that  it  was  necessary  to  declare  the  undoubted
privilege  of  the  Commons  to  originate  the  Money
Bills.  Here,  too,  his  strength  had  vanished.  He
forced  a  division,  and  Townshend’s  new  allies  were
true  to  their  engagements.  Flood’s  motion  was  lost
by  128  to  105.

But  humiliation  so  direct  was  naturally  painful.
The  Viceroy  had  desired  to  spare  his  new  supporters,
and  was  willing  to  allow  them  to  soothe  their  self-
respect  by  a  show  of  consistency.  Sexton  Pery
moved,  as  a  paragraph  in  the  address,  that  c  while
the  Commons  were  incapable  of  attempting  anything
against  the  rights  of  the  Crown,  they  were  tenacious
of  the  honour  of  being  the  first  movers  in  granting
supplies;  and  they  besought  his  majesty  not  to  con¬
strue  their  zeal  into  an  invasion  of  his  authority.’
To  Townshend,  Pery  represented  his  motion  as  an
apology  and  admission  of  fault.  Townshend  saw  that

103

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

it  was  an  indirect  assertion  of  the  disputed  right.
He  did  not  himself  quarrel  with  the  words  ;  but  the
King,  at  his  advice,  made  a  marked  allusion  to  them
in  his  reply ;  and  the  Commons,  by  inserting  the
reply  in  the  Journals,  without  comment  or  objection,
accepted  and  submitted  to  the  implied  reproof. 1

The  address  to  the  Crown  being  agreed  upon,  there
followed  next  the  address  to  the  Lord -Lieutenant,
the  double  ceremony  being  invariably  observed.
The  Opposition  saw  that  it  would  be  hopeless  to  re¬
sist.  The  address  to  Townshend  was  passed,  and
the  duty  of  presenting  it  fell  to  Ponsonby  as  Speaker.
It  was  too  much  for  him.  Driven  off  the  field,
utterly  and  finally  defeated,  he  could  not  be  the
person  to  place  the  laurel- wreath  on  the  brows  of
his  conqueror.  ‘  He  had  desired,’  he  said,  in  convey¬
ing  to  the  House  his  resignation  of  the  chair,  ‘  to
preserve  and  transmit  to  his  successor  the  rights  and
privileges  of  the  Commons  of  Ireland.  In  the  last
session  it  had  pleased  the  Lord- Lieutenant  to  accuse
the  Commons  of  a  great  crime.  In  the  present  ses¬
sion  it  had  pleased  the  Commons  to  take  the  first
opportunity  of  testifying  their  approbation  of  his  ex¬
cellency  by  voting  him  an  address  of  thanks.  Respect
for  their  privileges  prevented  him  from  being  the
instrument  of  delivering  such  address,  and  he  must
request  them  to  elect  another  Speaker.’ 2

He,  perhaps,  hoped  his  resignation  would  not  be
accepted.  The  Government,  in  fact,  narrowly  escaped
defeat  upon  it.  Sir  George  Macartney  proposed  Sexton

1  ‘His  majesty  is  well  pleased
with  the  assurance  given  by  the
House  of  Commons  of  their  regard
for  his  rights,  and  those  of  the
Crown  of  Great  Britain,  which  it  is

his  indispensable  duty  to  assert,  and
which  he  will  ever  think  it  incum¬
bent  on  him  to  maintain.’

2  Commons'  Journals ,  March  4,
1771.

CHAP.

II.

~V77h

104

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

V.

Tttl

Pery.  The  elder  Fitzgibbon  seconded  him.  Pery’s
election  in  a  full  House  was  carried  only  by  a  majo¬
rity  of  four.1  Ponsonby  had  a  vote  of  thanks  for
his  past  services,  and  the  House,  its  interests  being
no  longer  absorbed  in  quarrelling  with  the  Viceroy,
addressed  itself  to  practical  business.  Heads  of
bills  were  drawn  for  the  encouragement  of  agricul¬
ture,  for  the  repression  of  trade  combinations,  for  the
determination  of  wages  and  hours  of  work.  Drunk¬
enness  was  increasing  annually.  A  bill  was  devised
to  prevent  corn  from  being  wasted  on  whisky-mak¬
ing.  While  Townshend,  eager  on  his  side  to  en¬
courage  the  Irish  in  any  useful  exertion,  again  pressed
on  the  Home  Government  the  unfairness  of  giving
bounties  to  the  Manchester  manufacturers,  in  the
teeth  of  the  linen  compact,  and  pleaded  either  that
the  bounty  should  be  withdrawn,  or  Ireland  be  allowed
to  share  it.2

It  might  have  been  expected  by  the  least  sanguine
of  Ireland’s  real  friends,  that  when  the  Parliament
had  at  last  addressed  itself  to  real  business,  England
would  have  given  it  some  encouragement.  England
had  made  herself  responsible  for  Ireland  by  forcibly
annexing  it  to  the  empire.  She  had  just  completely,
if  scandalously,  recovered  her  constitutional  autho¬
rity.  We  find,  with  a  feeling  approaching  indigna¬
tion,  that  she  at  once  dismissed  the  wretched  country

1  Lord  Tyrone  wanted  his  bro¬
ther,  Mr.  John  Beresford,  to  be
chosen.  Beresford  had  been  al¬
ready  nominated  chief  of  the  new
commissioners  of  the  Revenue.
‘  The  envy/  said  the  Viceroy,
1  which  would  have  followed  a
young  man  so  likely  soon  to  be
at  the  head  of  the  Revenue,  hold¬
ing  the  chair  at  the  same  time,
the  effect  it  would  have  had  on  the

first  families  and  friends  to  Govern¬
ment,  and  the  revival  of  an  idea
that  English  Government  would
again  fall  into  the  hands  of  con¬
tractors,  was  so  strong  that  I  was
obliged  to  urge  Lord  Tyrone  to
withdraw  his  brother.  He  did  so
in  the  handsomest  manner,  and  sup¬
ported  Mr.  Pery.’ — Townshend  to
Rochford,  March  11.

2  ‘  To  Rochford,  March  24.’

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

out  of  her  mind,  and  relapsed  into  selfish  indiffer¬
ence.  Not  only  was  To wnsh end’s  caution  on  the
linen  compact  again  neglected,  the  bounties  main¬
tained  in  favour  of  Manchester  and  refused  to  Belfast,
but  even  the  heads  of  the  Agricultural  Bill  were
rejected,  because  it  would  add  to  the  expenditure.
The  Whisky  Bill  was  rejected,  because  the  Treasury
could  not  spare  the  few  thousand  pounds  which  were
levied  upon  drunkenness.1  The  alteration  in  the
Judges’  Tenure,  which  Townshend  had  promised,  had
been  lost  through  faction  and  misunderstanding.  The
House  expected  that  these  matters  would  now  re¬
ceive  attention,  but  they  expected  in  vain.  A  prudent
Government  would  have  remembered  that  corruption
is  as  dishonourable  to  those  who  employ  it  as  to  those
who  yield  to  it;  would  have  endeavoured  to  atone  for
its  own  share  in  that  bad  transaction,  and  to  reconcile
the  purchased  majority  to  their  shame,  by  at  least
assisting  them  to  confer  solid  benefits  on  their  country.
The  session  did  not  end  without  a  significant  expres¬
sion  of  regret  for  the  lost  opportunity.  Thanks  were
proposed  to  the  Viceroy  for  his  just  and  prudent  ad¬
ministration.  A  sarcastic  substitute,  proposed  by  a
hot  member  of  the  Opposition,  fell  unseconded.2  An
amendment  to  expunge  the  words  4  just  and  prudent  ’
found  fifty  supporters.

1  The  Viceroy  was  not  to  blame.
In  transmitting  the  heads  of  the
proposed  Act,  he  said  the  whisky
shop3  were  ruining  the  peasantry
and  the  workmen.  There  was  an
earnest  and  general  desire  to  limit
them.  ‘It  will  be  a  loss  to  the
revenue/  he  admitted,  ‘but  it  is
a  very  popular  bill,  and  will  give
general  content  and  satisfaction
throughout  the  kingdom.’

2  ‘  Proposed  to  give  the  Viceroy

our  special  thanks  for  having  ob¬
tained  for  this  country  a  law  se¬
curing  j  udges  in  their  offices  and  ap¬
pointments  during  good  behaviour,
in  pursuance  of  his  excellency’s
promise;  for  the  returning  of  the
law  for  the  restraining  of  the  distil¬
leries;  for  the  expected  alteration
of  other  laws ;  for  the  rise  in  the
value  of  lands.’ — Commons'  Jour¬
nals ,  May  1G,  1771.

105

CHAP.

II.

1771.

10G

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  V.

BOOK

V.

T77L

Corruption  unredeemed  by  integrity  of  purpose  be¬
comes  an  expensive  process.  The  more  complete  the
shame,  the  higher  the  price  that  must  be  paid  for  it.
The  Dublin  press  was  free,  and  Loftus,  Tyrone,  Tisdall,
Hutchinson,  and  the  other  apostates  from  the  patriot
band,  were  held  up  weekly  in  the  1  Freeman’s  Journal 7
to  public  scorn.  Back  stairs  Castle  scandals,  as  false
most  of  them  as  the  general  conception  which  the
patriots  had  formed  of  Lord  Townshend,  were  the
daily  amusement  of  the  coffee  houses.  Had  the
recovered  influence  of  Government  shown  itself  in
active  measures  for  the  relief  of  the  people,  the  igno¬
miny  would  have  been  less  bitter.  When  nothing
of  this  kind  appeared,  the  Viceroy  found  himself
beset  with  demands  which  he  dared  not  refuse,  lest
he  should  imperil  all  that  he  had  gained.  Viscounts
who  had  sons  and  nephews  in  the  Lower  House
wanted  earldoms.  Barons  wanted  to  be  viscounts,
Commons  to  be  barons.  Patrons  of  boroughs  re¬
quired  promotions  in  the  army  for  their  friends  ;
sinecures  and  offices  in  remainder  for  themselves  and
their  families.  The  really  important  reform  which
had  been  carried  out  in  the  Ordnance  and  Re¬
venue  departments  added  to  the  difficulties.  The
Viceroy  had  made  a  deadly  enemy  of  every  man  who
had  filled  his  pockets  under  the  old  system.  The
increase  expected  from  the  change  in  the  hereditary
revenue  had  offended  the  old  politicians,  who  desired

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

to  keep  the  Government  dependent.1  Mr.  Beresford,
who  was  to  succeed  Ponsonby  as  head  commissioner,
was  dissatisfied  to  find  that  he  was  not  to  succeed  to
Ponsonby’s  patronage.  Sir  William  Osborne  was
displeased  at  being  passed  over  in  Beresford’s  favour.
The  Earl  of  Tyrone  asked  for  a  marquis’s  coronet,  and
could  not  have  it.  The  promotion  of  his  second
brother  was  an  inadequate  compensation.  Another
brother,  William  Beresford,  had  married  old  Fitz-
gibbon’s  daughter.  Tyrone  applied  for  a  bishopric
for  him.  He  was  but  twenty-eight  years  old,  and  the
request  being  refused,  Eitzgibbon  conceived  himself
affronted  as  well.  The  price  of  dishonour  was  raised
so  high  that  the  income  and  patronage  of  England
would  not  have  satisfied  all  the  claimants;  and  as
England  would  give  nothing  except  rewards  for
political  service,  the  Viceroy  was  in  a  bad  position.

Money  was  wanted.  No  supplies  had  been  asked
for  in  the  spring,  and  Parliament  re-assembled  on  the
8th  of  October.  The  patriots  were  in  spirits  again.
The  address  was  fought  through  once  more,  paragraph
by  paragraph.  Lord  Kildare  moved  that  c  we  lament
that  we  cannot  enumerate  among  our  blessings  the
continuance  of  Lord  Townshend  in  the  government  of
this  kingdom.’  Flood  stoutly  seconded  him,  and  at
each  division  the  Government  majority  diminished.
The  traffic  with  Ireland’s  conscience  had  been  costly.
The  Money  Bill  of  1769  had  been  rejected,  and  the
expenditure  had  not  been  reduced.  On  the  12th  of
November,  Flood  called  scornful  attention  to  the

1  1  It  is  perceived  that  thereby  an
end  would  be  put  to  those  annual
bargains  which  Government  at  pre¬
sent  is  under  the  sad  necessity  of

making  with  ungrateful  servants  or
prostitute  opponents/ — Townshend
to  the  Earl  of  Rochford,  December
11.  Secret.

107

CHAR

II.

y

1771.

108

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

v.

1771.

deficit,  and  was  in  a  minority  of  not  more  than
twenty.  Following  up  his  campaign,  he  attacked
the  alteration  in  the  Revenue  Board,  on  the  ground
of  increase  of  English  influence  in  the  House
of  Commons  ;  and  on  the  16th  he  carried  his  reso¬
lution  by  a  majority  of  forty-six.  He  proposed  to
send  it  to  the  Viceroy  by  the  Speaker’s  hand,  and
was  successful  again.  At  the  back  of  this  came  a
job  of  Lord  North’s.  Lord  North,  for  reasons  of  his
own,  had  ordered  Townshend  to  place  a  certain  Jerry
Dyson  and  his  three  sons  on  the  Irish  Establishment
for  a  pension  of  a  thousand  a  year.  In  vain  Town¬
shend  had  protested  against  it  as  dangerous.  The
minister  persisted,  and  the  result  was  a  vote  of  censure.
4  In  spite  of  all  that  I  could  do,’  wrote  the  poor
Viceroy,  4  those  who  were  under  very  high  obliga¬
tions  to  Government  voted  against  us,  and  others
went  out.’  This  time  the  supplies  were  not  opposed,
but  to  his  disgust  rather  than  surprise,  the  Viceroy
found  4  that  there  was  once  more  a  general  design  to
distress  and  disgrace  the  English  Government.’  1
In  another  year,  unless  the  disorderly  spirit  could  be
controlled,  the  Money  Bills  would  be  again  in  danger.
Sadly  and  wearily  he  detailed  the  history  of  his  mis¬
fortunes.  Tisdall  and  Hely  Hutchinson  had  been
languid.  Malone  had  spoken  for  the  Opposition,  and
divided  with  them.  The  new-made  Privy  Councillors,
from  whom  so  much  help  had  been  looked  for,  had  been
found  wanting  at  the  hour  of  trial.  The  Beresford
faction  generally  had  been  vehement  and  violent  ;
and  of  the  rank  and  file  of  members  who  had  either
broken  their  engagements  or  had  presented  requests

1  1  Townshend  to  Eocliford,  December  5.  Most  secret.’

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

109

which  had  not  been  granted,  and  were  revenging
their  disappointment,  a  black  list  was  forwarded  to
London.1

So  dark  a  second  time  appeared  the  prospects  of  the

CHAP.

ii.

~rm.

1  The  list,  with  the  attached  re¬
marks,  is  curiously  instructive  on
the  working  Irish  Parliamentary

O  v

Government : —

‘  Members  considered  as  friends
who  have  voted  against  Govern¬
ment.

‘  Lord  Dunluce. — His  father  (the
Earl  of  Antrim)  asks  a  marquisate.
His  lordship  solicits  a  place  for  his
tutor.

‘  Hugh  Skeffington. — Obtained
through  me  a  pension  of  200/.  for
his  brother’s  widow.

‘  Win.  Skeffington. — Obtained  a
cornetcy  and  a  company  in  two
years.

‘Geo.  Montgomery. — I  gave  a
friend  of  his,  on  his  request,  an  em¬
ployment  of  80/.  a  year.

‘  Robert  Birch. — Solicits  a  resig¬
nation  of  ten  livings  from  the
Crown.

‘  John  Creighton. — Has  an  ap¬
pointment  of  250/.  a  year.  I  soli¬
cited  and  obtained  a  peerage  for  his
father,  who  promised  every  support,
but  is  always,  as  well  as  his  other
sons,  against  Government.

‘  Robert  Scott. — I  made  him  a
commissioner  of  the  Linen  Board,
and  he  has  since  asked  for  a  place.

‘  Sir  Arthur  Brooke. — I  procured
him  the  Privy  Council,  and  like¬
wise,  very  lately,  a  majority  of
dragoons,  without  purchase,  for  his
brother.

‘  Ric.  Gorges. — Is  connected  with
Lord  Tyrone.  He  has  asked  for  a
place.

1  Edward  Carey.  —  Brother-in-
law  to  Lord  Tyrone.  I  procured
him  the  Privy  Council,  and  several

things  have  been  done  to  oblige
him.

‘  James  Fortescue. — Lord  Cler¬
mont’s  brother.  I  procured  him
the  Privy  Council.  He  wants  a
peerage  in  remainder.

‘Colonel  Cunningham. — I  recom-
mended  him  for  the  first  regiment
that  falls  during  my  administration..

‘  Mr.Westenra. — Was  brought  in
by  Lord  Clermont,  and  promised
always  to  support  Government.  He
asks  for  a  place.

‘  Colonel  Pomeroy.  —  Obtained
leave  of  absence  from  America  to
attend  Parliament.  He  asks  for  a
regiment.

‘  Plenry  Pritty. — Asked  and  ob¬
tained  a  promise  of  Church  prefer¬
ment  a  few  days  before  the  division.

‘  Tb.  Coghlan. — I  made  him  com¬
missioner  of  the  Linen  Board.  He
asks  for  a  place.

‘  Hugh  Massey. — Solicits  a  peer¬
age  for  himself,  and  an  advance  in
the  Revenue  for  his  eldest  son.

‘  Ch.  Smith. — I  made  his  brother
a  judge.

‘  Thos.  Conolly. — A  deanery  was
given  to  this  gentleman’s  friend,  a
seat  at  the  Revenue  Board  to  his
brother-in-law,  and  several  other
things  in  the  armv  and  revenue.

‘  Colonel  W.  Bruton. — Wants  to
purchasetheoffi.ee  of  Quartermaster-
General,  and  to  sell  his  lieutenant-
colonel’s  commission  at  an  advanced
price.

‘  Anthony  Malone. — Has  been
obliged  in  everything  that  he  has
asked.

‘  Mr.  Malone. — Nephew  to  An¬
thony  Malone,’  &c.,  &c.

110

BOOK

V.

1771.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

Government,  that  Ponsonby  came  again  to  the  front.
The  new  Revenue  Board  was  naturally  the  object  of
his  attack.  He  felt  so  confident  of  success,  that  he  bet
500  to  3  that  he  would  destroy  it.  He  swore  c  that
he  would  never  quit  the  office  of  door-keeper  in  the
House  of  Commons  till  he  had  driven  Lord  Towns-
hend  out  of  the  country.’ 1  Lord  Townshend  re¬
quired  no  driving ;  he  would  have  been  heartily  glad
to  be  gone ;  for  the  Cabinet  left  nothing  undone  to
aggravate  his  difficulties.  Of  ‘  justice  to  Ireland ,
he  could  obtain  nothing,  and  for  his  real  reform  only  a
lukewarm  support.2  Of  wrong,  and  wrong  inflicted  in
the  most  insulting  form,  there  was  as  much  as  Ireland’s
worst  enemy  could  desire.  Notwithstanding  their
ill-humour,  the  Parliament  had  voted  the  supplies.
They  had  introduced  a  clause  among  the  additional
duties,  protecting  Irish  linen  from  the  importation  of
cotton  manufacture  from  the  Continent.  It  was  a
protection  to  which  Ireland  was  strictly  entitled.
The  Cabinet,  free-traders  when  only  Ireland’s  in¬
terests  were  at  stake,  struck  the  paragraph  out,  and
returned  the  Money  Bill  without  it.  There  is  no  folly
like  that  of  giving  an  unreasonable  antagonist  a  moral
advantage.  The  Commons  flung  the  Bill  out  in  a
rage  ;  they  said  distinctly  they  would  never  pass  a
Money  Bill  which  had  been  altered  in  England.
Heads  of  a  new  bill  were  drawn  in  which  the  clause  was
replaced,  and  were  sent  back  without  a  moment’s
delay.  The  Cabinet  swallowed  the  affront  and
yielded.  The  new  bill  was  returned,  compared  care-

1  1  Townshend  to  Rochford,  De¬
cember  12.’

2  1  The  Cabinet  had  begun  to
doubt  “  whether,  in  the  face  of  the

opposition,  it  was  prudent  to  carry
out  the  new  Revenue  Board.”  ’ —
Rochford  to  Townshend,  December
20.

Ill

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

fully  with  the  transmiss,  and  being  found  unchanged  chap.

was  passed.  But  the  Revenue  question  had  been  _ _ IL_

re-opened.  Flood’s  resolution  had  been  sent  to  the  1
King  for  consideration,  and  Townshend  had  but  small
confidence  in  Lord  North’s  resolution.  Nothing  had
been  allowed  which  ought  to  have  been  allowed.  His
hands  were  soiled  with  work  which  he  detested,  and
which,  after  all,  was  turning  out  useless.  He  longed
to  be  clear  of  it.  4  He  had  been  fighting  hard  for
four  years,’  he  said,  4  and  he  had  now  a  right  to  ask
for  repose/  He  thought  the  Cabinet  unwise  in  every
way ;  unwise  in  altering  the  Money  Bill ;  unwise  in
submitting  when  submission  wore  the  complexion  of
cowardice.  4  Concessions  to  popular  opinion,’  he  said
(and  the  history  of  Ireland  is  one  long  illustration
of  his  words),  4  are  seldom  repaid  with  gratitude.

They  have  been  interpreted  hitherto  as  foundations
only  for  further  claims.  It  is  only  by  a  determined
resolution  of  adhering  to  system,  and  by  constant
perseverance,  that  the  authority  of  the  English  Go¬
vernment  can  be  maintained  in  this  kingdom.’

Lord  North  proved  firmer  than  Townshend  ex¬
pected.  On  the  5th  of  February  the  answer  came,
that  notwithstanding  the  objections  of  the  House  of
Commons,  his  majesty  regarded  it  as  his  duty  to
maintain  the  changes  which  had  been  made  in  the
Revenue  department.  The  patriots,  of  course,  pursued
the  quarrel.  Sir  Charles  Bingham,  when  the  King’s
reply  was  delivered  in  the  House,  rose  and  moved  that
the  resolution  of  the  16th  of  November  should  be
read.  He  then  declared  that  the  maintenance  of  the
new  commissioners  was  an  indignity  to  the  Parlia¬
ment.  Ponsonby  following  him,  proposed  that  the
House  should  choose  a  committee  to  go  to  London

112

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1772.

and  lay  the  sentiments  of  the  Irish  Commons  before
the  King.  The  Cabinet,  provoked  into  resolution,
declined  to  be  visited  by  c  Irish  Parliamentary  Am¬
bassadors.’  They  bade  Townshend  prevent  the  ac¬
complishment  of  such  a  piece  of  foolery  at  all  hazards.
If  nothing  else  would  do,  he  must  prorogue.1  It
seemed  as  if  once  more  the  Viceroy  would  be  driven
to  this  alternative.  One  angry  motion  followed  upon
another.  Flood  carried  a  vote  that  the  House  should
record  its  dissent,  and  followed  it  with  a  proposal  that
members  of  the  House  who  had  accepted  seats  at  the
new  Board  were  guilty  of  contempt,  and  should  neither
sit  nor  vote  till  they  had  resigned.  This  was  too
violent,  and  was  rejected.  On  the  19th  of  February,
however,  the  patent  for  the  new  commissioners  was  read
aloud.  A  resolution  less  extreme  was  moved,  that
whoever  had  advised  the  increase  in  the  number  of
commissioners  had  advised  a  measure  contrary  to  the
sense  of  the  Irish  legislature.  The  numbers  on  a
division  were  equal — 106  in  favour,  106  against.
Again  a  question  in  which  the  Government  was
directly  assailed  turned  on  the  casting  vote  of  the
Speaker,  and  Sexton  Pery,  who  was  perfectly  well
acquainted  with  the  real  reasons  for  the  alterations  of
the  Board,  and  was  without  the  excuse  of  delusion,
did  as  Ponsonby  had  done  before  him,  and  divided
against  the  Government.

Prorogation  or  dissolution  !  To  one  of  these  two
the  Viceroy’s  choice  appeared  to  be  limited,  when
suddenly  the  ranks  of  the  Opposition  wavered  ;  a
combination  which  had  threatened  to  be  irresistible
dissolved  like  a  mist.  Neither  the  Commons’  Journals

1  ‘  Rockford  to  Townsliend,  February  12,  17727

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

113

nor  the  Irish  Histories  explain  the  change.  So  much
only  is  visible,  that  from  this  time  forward  the  Viceroy  ^
was  worried  with  no  more  adverse  resolutions.  The  1'72
new  Board  went  quietly  about  its  work,  and  for  the
present  no  further  effort  was  made  to  reduce  its  num¬
bers  or  drive  its  members  from  the  House.  Once
more  an  address  was  carried  to  the  Viceroy,  in  which
the  Commons  declared  their  entire  satisfaction  with  his
Excellency’s  administration,  and  an  amendment  con¬
veying  in  every  sentence  the  indignation  of  a  baffled
faction  conscious  of  defeat  was  rejected  without  a
division.1

The  interpretation  implied  in  the  language  of  the
amendment  is  the  increase  in  the  army  of  placemen
whose  votes  were  at  the  Viceroy’s  disposition.  But
though  the  Viceroy  had  not  again  appointed  to  offices
of  trust  men  who  had  divided  against  him  at  the  most
critical  moment,  the  Deus  ex  machina  who  rescued
him  from  his  difficulties  was  a  penitent  friend  of  the

1  Proposed  amendment  to  the
Address,  May  27 : — 1  And  we  can¬
not  sufficiently  congratulate  your
excellency  on  your  prudent  dispo¬
sition  of  lucrative  offices  among
the  members  of  this  House,  where¬
by  your  excellency  has  been  enabled
to  excite  gratitude  sufficient  to  in¬
duce  this  House  to  bear  an  honour¬
able  testimony  to  an  administration
which,  were  it  not  that  it  has  been
found  so  beneficial  to  individuals,
must  necessarily  have  been  repre¬
sented  to  his  majesty  as  the  most
exceptionable  and  destructive  to
this  kingdom  of  any  that  has  ever
been  carried  on  in  it.  The  carrying
into  execution  the  division  of  the
Revenue  Board,  contrary  to  the
sense  of  this  House,  we  should
have  considered  and  represented  as

VOL.  II.

a  high  contempt  of  Parliament.
But,  from  the  distribution  of  the
multiplied  seats  at  the  two  boards
now  instituted  among  members  of
this  House,  we  entertain  a  very
different  sense  of  that  measure,  and
conceive  that  it  was  carried  into
execution,  not  from  contempt,  but
the  highest  veneration  of  Parlia¬
ment,  the  indignation  of  which
you  dreaded,  and  therefore  thus
averted.  And  we  assure  your  ex¬
cellency  we  are  very  much  obliged
to  you  for  the  offices  which  you
have  bestowed  upon  us.  We  also
return  you  thanks  for  instituting
offices  for  us  at  a  new  Board  of  Ac¬
counts,  which,  however  unnecessary
for  the  public  service,  we  find  very
serviceable  to  ourselves.’ — Com-
mons'  Journals.

114

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  people,  no  less  a  person  than  Lord  Shannon.  When

- — ^ — '  the  storm  was  bemnnin^  there  had  come  from  that  un-

I??.)  o  ®

looked  for  quarter  a  partial  gleam  of  hope.  The
earl,  after  recovering  from  his  dismissal,  had  re¬
flected  that  the  English  interest  might  in  the  long
run  prove  the  strongest.  He  had  made  private
advances  to  Townshend.  Townshend  had  placed
him  in  communication  with  Lord  North,  and  had
been  anxiously  expecting  the  result.  A  few  days
after  the  Speaker’s  desertion  he  was  able  to  write  to
Lord  Kochford  that  Lord  Shannon  had  come  to
Dublin,  and  though  still  appearing  to  keep  aloof  from
the  Castle,  c  would  by-and-bye  support  the  Govern¬
ment  upon  any  terms  which  his  majesty  should  be
pleased  to  approve.’

‘  I  need  not  caution  your  lordship,’  he  continued,

‘  how  extremely  essential  it  is  to  the  King’s  service
here  that  this  transaction  with  Lord  Shannon,  so
critical  to  Government  at  this  period,  should  not
transpire,  as  its  enemies  would  not  fail  to  take
every  advantage  of  it,  and  to  revolt.  Lord  Shannon
appears  to  wish  to  return  as  early  as  possible  to  the
service  of  the  Crown  with  the  utmost  propriety  and
effect.  At  the  same  time,  in  justice  to  the  use
we  derive  from  his  conduct,  I  must  request  your
lordship  to  lay  the  circumstances  before  his  majesty,
that  it  may  have  its  due  weight.  It  will  account  in
great  measure  for  the  inaction  of  one  desperate  fac¬
tion,  and  the  disappointment  of  a  shameful  flying
squadron,  who  have  the  greatest  obligations  to  the
Crown.’ 1

1  1  Townshend  to  the  Earl  of  Rochford,  Feb.  29.’  Secret.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

115

SECTION  VI.

From  the  picture  of  this  astonishing  Parliament  we
turn  to  the  people  whom  it  represented.  England  in
her  better  days  had  planted  Ireland  with  Protestant
colonists,  who  were  designed  to  reclaim  and  civilize  it.
Of  these  colonists  the  natural  leaders  enjoyed  a  self¬
granted  and  perpetual  leave  of  absence.  The  mother
country  having  exchanged  Puritan  godliness  for  the
commercial  gospel,  thought  lit  to  paralyze  those  who
remained  and  were  industrious,  for  the  benefit  of  the
Scotch  and  English  manufacturers.  The  settlers,
finding  selfishness  and  injustice  the  rule  of  the
country,  followed  naturally  so  inviting  an  example.

Before  the  Whiteboy  agitation  had  abated  in  Tip¬
perary,  similar  disturbances,  rising  from  analogous
causes,  had  appeared  among  the  Presbyterian  farmers
of  Ulster.  In  the  south  the  especial  grievances  had
been  the  tithing  the  potato  gardens,  the  enclosure  of
commons,  and  the  raising  of  rents.  To  these,  which
existed  in  equal  force  in  the  north,  was  added  a  form
of  extortion  in  the  county  cess.

c  Neither  the  laws,’  wrote  Lord  Townshend  to  the
Home  Secretary,  4  nor  provincial  justice,  are  adminis¬
tered  here  as  in  England.  Neither  the  quarter  ses¬
sions  nor  the  grand  juries  give  the  counties  the  same
speedy  relief,  nor  maintain  the  like  respect,  as  with
us.  The  chief  object  of  the  grand  juries  is  so  to  dis¬
pose  of  the  county  cesses  as  best  suits  their  party
views  and  private  convenience.  The  sums  raised  by

i  2

CHAP.

ii.

Tt72^

116

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  these  gentlemen  throughout  the  kingdom  amount  to
-  not  less  than  130,000/.  per  annum,  which  is  levied
upon  the  tenantry,  the  lower  classes  of  which  are  in
a  state  of  poverty  not  to  be  described.  It  may  easily
be  imagined  what  the  poor  people  feel  when  these
charges  are  added  to  rents  already  stretched  to  the
uttermost.’ 1

The  Ulster  Protestants,  being  more  patient  and
law-abiding  than  the  Catholics  of  the  south,  had  been
peculiarly  exposed  to  these  exacting  and  oppressive
cesses.  4  It  is  notorious,’  Captain  Erskine  reported,
who  was  sent  by  Townshend  to  the  north  to  examine
into  the  complaints  which  were  brought  to  him,  4  what
use  is  made  by  grand  juries  of  the  powers  given  them
to  lay  cess  for  roads  and  bridges.  Jobs  upon  jobs,
one  more  infamous  than  another,  serve  to  support
the  interests  of  some  leading  men  in  the  country.  I
do  not  believe  the  roads  in  any  part  of  the  world  are
as  bad  as  in  these  five  counties;2  yet  I  am  told  they
have,  from  time  immemorial,  been  cessed  by  their
grand  juries  at  50,000/.  a  year,’ 3

In  1764  parties  of  the  poorer  tenants  collected
under  the  name  of  Oak  Boys,  to  bring  the  landlords
into  more  moderate  dealing  with  them.  Cattle  were
houghed  or  slashed.  Farmsteads  were  burnt.  Com¬
binations  were  formed  to  resist  cess  and  rent  and
tithe.  The  Oak  Boys,  however,  never  became  for¬
midable,  and  the  landlords  had  gone  on  in  the  high
oppressive  style  which  had  become  natural  to  them.
The  increase  of  the  linen  trade  in  the  first  years  of
Townshend’s  Government  gave  them  fresh  opportu-

1  ‘  To  Rochford,  March  18, 1772.’  .3  1  Captain  Erskine  to  Mr.  Lee,

2  Derry,  Armagh,  Tyrone,  Down,  April  10,  1772/  S.  P.  O.

and  Antrim.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

117

nities.  ‘  The  northern  Protestants,’  in  a  ‘  remon-  chap.
strance  ’  which  they  sent  up  to  the  Government,  drew  — _
an  instructive  picture  of  the  treatment  to  which  they  177^’
had  been  subjected.  During  the  first  half  of  the  cen¬
tury,  they  said,  ‘  the  wise  conduct  and  encourage -
•  ment  of  the  nobility  of  Ulster  ’  had  so  developed  the
flax  manufacture,  that  the  workpeople  ‘had  been
enabled  to  make  decent  settlements  and  live  com¬
fortably.’  The  arable  lands  were  all  occupied  and
well  cultivated.  The  inhabitants  multiplied,  the
country  prospered.  ‘  The  landlords  thirsted  to  share
the  people’s  benefits  by  raising  their  rents,  which
would  have  been  very  reasonable  in  a  moderate  degree,
but  of  late  they  had  run  to  great  excesses.’  ‘  When
the  tenant’s  lease  was  ended  they  published  in  the
newspapers  that  such  a  parcel  of  land  was  to  be  let,
and  that  proposals  in  writing  would  be  received  for
it.  They  invited  every  covetous,  envious,  and  ma¬
licious  person  to  offer  for  his  neighbour’s  possessions
and  improvements.  The  tenant,  knowing  he  must  be
the  highest  bidder  or  turn  out,  he  knew  not  whither,
would  offer  more  than  the  value.  If  he  complained
to  the  landlord  that  it  was  too  dear,  the  landlord  an¬
swered  that  he  knew  it  was  so,  but  as  it  was  in  a
trading  country,  the  tenant  must  make  up  the  defi¬
ciency  by  his  industry.  Those  who  possessed  the
greatest  estates  were  now  so  rich  that  they  could  not
find  delicacies  in  their  own  country  to  bestow  their
wealth  on,  but  carried  it  abroad,  to  lavish  there  the
entire  days’  sweat  of  thousands  of  their  poor  people.

They  drained  the  country,  and  neglected  their  own
duties.  Nature  assigned  the  landlord  to  be  a  father
and  counsellor  of  his  people,  that  he  might  keep
peace  and  order  among  them,  and  protect  them  and

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

encourage  industry.  Though  the  order  of  things  had
made  it  necessary  that  the  lower  should  serve  under
the  higher,  yet  the  charter  of  dominion  had  not  said
that  the  lower  should  suffer  by  the  higher.’1

Political  economy,  though  passing  into  practical
life,  had  not  yet  become  the  rule  of  administrations.
George  the  Third  ordered  Townshend  to  do  his  ut¬
most  to  convince  the  landlords  of  their  L  infatuation.’ 2
Townshend  himself  had  already  introduced  a  Ten¬
ants’  Protection  Bill  into  the  Irish  Parliament,
but  4  had  been  defeated  by  the  popularity-hunting
party  in  the  House  of  Commons.’3  At  length  a
flagrant  and  enormous  act  of  tyranny  set  light  to  the
fuel  which  was  lying  everywhere  ready  to  kindle.

Sir  Arthur  Chichester,  the  great  Viceroy  of  Ire¬
land  under  James  the  First,  was  of  all  Englishmen
who  ever  settled  in  the  country  the  most  useful  to
it.  His  descendant,  the  Lord  Donegal  of  whom  it
has  become  necessary  to  speak,  was,  perhaps,  the
person  who  inflicted  the  greatest  injury  on  it.  Sir
Arthur  had  been  rewarded  for  his  services  by  vast
estates  in  the  county  Antrim.  The  fifth  Earl  and
first  Marquis  of  Donegal,  already,  by  the  growth  of
Belfast,  by  the  fruits  of  other  men’s  labours  while  he
was  sitting  still,  enormously  rich,  found  his  income
still  unequal  to  his  yet  more  enormous  expenditure.
His  name  is  looked  for  in  vain  among  the  nobles
who,  in  return  for  their  high  places,  were  found  in
the  active  service  of  their  country.  He  was  one  of
those  habitual  and  splendid  absentees  who  discharged
his  duties  to  the  God  who  made  him  by  consenting

1  1  Remonstrance  of  the  Northern  6,  1772.’

Protestants.’ — Irish  MSS.,  1772.  3  ‘Townshend  to  Rochford,  March

S.  P.  0.  11.’  S.  P.  0.

2  ‘  Rochford  to  Townshend,  April

LORD  TOWNSIIEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

119

to  exist,  and  to  the  country  which  supported  him  by  chap.
magnificently  doing  as  he  would  with  his  own.  ^  IL  __

Many  of  his  Antrim  leases  having  fallen  in  simul-  1772<
taneously,  he  demanded  a  hundred  thousand  pounds
in  fines  for  the  renewal  of  them.  The  tenants,  all
Protestants,  offered  the  interest  of  the  money  in
addition  to  the  rent.  It  could  not  be.  Speculative
Belfast  capitalists  paid  the  fine,  and  took  the  lands
over  the  heads  of  the  tenants  to  sublet.  A  Mr.  Upton,
another  great  Antrim  proprietor,  imitated  the  ex¬
ample,  and  4  at  once  a  whole  country  side  were
driven  from  their  habitations. ’  The  sturdy  Scots,
who  in  five  generations  had  reclaimed  Antrim  from
the  wilderness,  saw  the  farms  which  they  and  their
fathers  had  made  valuable  let  by  auction  to  the
highest  bidder  ;  and  when  they  refused  to  submit
themselves  to  robbery,  saw  them  let  to  others,  and
let  in  many  instances  to  Catholics,  who  would  promise
anything  to  recover  their  hold  upon  the  soil.1

4  The  law  may  warrant  these  proceedings,  but  will
not  justify  them,7  wrote  Captain  Erskine,  when  the
evicted  peasants  and  artisans  were  meeting  to  ex¬
press  their  sense  of  them.  4  Should  the  causes  of
these  riots  be  looked  into,  it  will  be  found  that  few
have  had  juster  foundations.  When  the  consequences
of  driving  six  or  seven  thousand  manufacturing  and
labouring  families  out  of  Ireland  come  to  be  felt,  I
question  whether  the  rectitude  of  these  gentlemen’s  in¬
tentions  will  be  held  by  the  world  a  sufficient  excuse
for  the  irreparable  damage  they  are  doing.’2

1  I  am  not  ignorant  that  Arthur
Young  palliates  these  evictions.  He
wrote  before  the  consequences
which  extended  from  the  Old  World

to  the  New  had  distinctly  developed
themselves.

2  ‘  Captain  Erskine  to  Mr.  Lee,
April  10,  1772.’  S.  P.  0.

120

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  The  most  substantial  of  the  expelled  tenantry
- ,  gathered  their  effects  together  and  sailed  to  join

*  17 their  countrymen  in  the  New  World,  where  the
Scotch-Irish  became  known  as  the  most  bitter  of  the
secessionists.  Between  those  who  were  too  poor  to
emigrate,  and  the  Catholics  who  were  in  possession  of
their  homes,  there  grew  a  protracted  feud,  which  took
form  at  last  in  the  conspiracy  of  the  Peep  of  Day
Boys  ;  in  the  fierce  and  savage  expulsion  of  the  in¬
truders,  who  were  bidden  go  to  hell  or  Connaught ;
and  in  the  counter-organization  of  the  Catholic  De¬
fenders,  which  spread  over  the  whole  island,  and
made  the  army  of  insurrection  in  1798.  It  is  rare
that  two  private  persons  have  power  to  create  effects
so  considerable  as  to  assist  in  dismembering  an  em¬
pire,  and  provoking  a  civil  war.  Lord  Donegal  for
his  services  was  rewarded  with  a  marquisate,  and
Mr.  Upton  with  a  viscountcy.  If  rewards  were
proportioned  to  deserts,  a  fitter  retribution  to  both
of  them  would  have  been  forfeiture  and  Tower  Hill.

A  precedent  so  tempting  and  so  lucrative  was
naturally  followed.  Other  landlords  finding  the
trade  so  profitable  began  to  serve  their  tenants  with
notices  to  quit.  The  farmers  and  peasants  com¬
bined  to  defend  themselves.  Where  law  was  the
servant  of  oppression,  force  was  their  one  resource.
They  called  themselves  Hearts  of  Steel.  Their  object
was  to  protect  themselves  from  universal  robbery.
Their  resistance  was  not  against  the  Government — it
was  against  the  landlords  and  the  landlords’  agents,
and  nothing  else.  In  the  Viceroy  they  felt  rightly
that  they  had  a  friend,  and  they  appealed  to  him  in  a
modest  petition.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

121

4  Petition  of  those  persons  known  by  the  name

Hearts  of  Steel.

4  That  we  are  all  Protestants  and  Protestant  Dis¬
senters,  and  bear  unfeigned  loyalty  to  his  present
majesty  and  the  Hanoverian  succession.

4  That  we  who  are  all  groaning  under  oppression,
and  have  no  other  possible  way  of  redress,  are  forced
to  join  ourselves  together  to  resist.  By  oversetting  our
lands  we  are  reduced  to  poverty  and  distress,  and  by
our  rising  we  mean  no  more  but  to  have  our  lands,
that  we  could  live  thereon,  and  procure  necessaries
of  life  for  ourselves  and  our  starving  families.

4  That  some  of  us  refusing  to  pay  the  extravagant
rent  demanded  by  our  landlords  have  been  turned
out,  and  our  lands  given  to  Papists,  who  will  promise
any  rent.

4  That  we  are  sorely  aggrieved  with  the  county
cesses,  which,  though  heavy  in  themselves,  are  ren¬
dered  more  so  by  being  applied  to  private  purposes.

4  Yet  lest  it  should  be  said  that  by  refusing  to  pay
the  cess  we  fly  in  the  face  of  the  law,  which  we  do
not  intend,  we  will  pay  the  present  cess;  and  we  hope
the  gentlemen  of  the  county  of  Down  will  in  future
have  pity  on  the  distressed  inhabitants.

4  That  it  is  not  wanton  folly  that  prompts  us  to
be  Hearts  of  Steel,  but  the  weight  of  oppression.
Were  the  cause  removed  the  effects  would  cease,  and
our  landlords  as  heretofore  live  in  the  affection  of
their  tenants.

4  May  it  please  you  to  enquire  into  the  cause  of  our
grievances,  and  lend  your  hand  to  eschew  the  evils
which  seem  to  threaten  the  Protestants  of  the  North  ;
and  let  not  false  suggestions  of  men  partial  to  their
own  cause  inflame  your  wrath  against  innocent  and

Of  CHAP.
II.

122

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1772,

injured  persons,  who  are  far  removed  from  the  ear
of  Government  and  any  other  possible  means  of
redress.  Oh  that  the  cry  of  the  oppressed  might
reach  the  throne  of  Britain !  Our  mild  and  gracious
sovereign  from  his  well-known  goodness  would
extend  his  care  to  the  suffering  Protestants  in  the
north  of  this  kingdom.

4  By  the  Hearts  of  Steel.’  1

Unjust  laws  provoke  and  compel  resistance.  Vio¬
lence  follows,  and  crime  and  guilt;  but  the  guilt,  when
the  account  is  made  up,  does  not  lie  entirely  with  the
poor  wretch  who  is  called  the  criminal.  The  Hearts
of  Steel  destroyed  the  cattle  and  farmsteads  of
the  intruding  tenants.  They  attacked  gentlemen’s
houses  and  lawyers’  offices  chiefly  in  search  of  deeds
and  leases  ;  of  theft  they  were  never  accused.  Ma¬
gistrates  as  usual  would  not  act :  they  preferred  to
leave  to  the  Government  the  odium  of  repressing  riots
of  which  they  were  themselves  the  cause.  Juries,
after  the  time-honoured  fashion,  refused  to  convict,
and  witnesses  to  give  evidence.  The  Presbyterian
clergy  exerted  themselves  as  no  one  else  did,  but
they  did  not  conceal  their  opinion  that  the  people
were  in  the  right.2

Townshend  saw  the  phenomena  with  eyes  un-

1  Irish  MSS.,  1772.  S.  P.  0.

2  Address  of  the  Presbytery  of
Temple  Patrick,  forwarded  by
Townshend  to  London,  with  the
following  passage  underlined : —
‘  Now  though  we,  the  members  of
the  Presbytery,  cannot  but  lament
the  heavy  oppression  that  too  many
are  under,  from  the  excessive  price
of  land,  and  the  unfriendly  practices

of  many,  who  contribute  to  the  op¬
pression  by  proposing  for  their  neigh-
boxers'  possessions,  by  xvhich  means
they  are  too  often  deprived  of  the
improvements  made  by  their  fore¬
fathers  and  themselves,  which  may
be  the  occasion  of  the  present  ille¬
gal  measure — yet  we  are  convinced
that  violence  defeats  its  own  ends/
&c.

123

LOUD  TOWNSHEND’S  ADMINISTRATION.

jaundiced.  ‘  He  was  satisfied  that  the  disturbances  chap.
sprung  from  gross  iniquity,  and  that  they  could  be  ^ — A-
cured  only  by  the  lenity  of  the  proprietors,  who,  if
they  refused  to  let  their  lands  on  more  moderate
terms,  would  compel  their  tenants  to  go  to  America,
or  to  any  part  of  the  world  where  they  could  receive
the  reward  which  was  honestly  due  to  their  labours.’ 1
The  House  of  Commons  thought  differently.  The
gentry  of  the  north  petitioned  for  troops  to  defend
them,  and  the  House  appointed  a  committee  of
enquiry.  The  facts  were  on  the  surface,  and  might
have  been  comprehended  without  extreme  effort  of
genius.  The  Protestants  of  Ireland  were  as  one  to
four  of  the  entire  population.  •  They  were,  as  has
been  often  said,  a  garrison  set  to  maintain  the  law
and  the  English  connexion.  The  landlords  in  stupid
selfishness  were  expelling  their  Protestant  tenantry
because  Catholics  promised  them  a  larger  rent.  They
were  driving  the  very  flower  of  their  own  army  to  a
country  which  was  already  on  the  edge  of  rebellion,
and  uniting  in  sympathy  with  that  rebellion  their
comrades  who  were  left  behind.  An  act  of  such
obvious  insanity  might  have  been  expected  to  be
condemned  on  the  instant  by  the  united  voices  of  the
empire.  The  King  saw  the  infatuation  of  it  ;  the
English  Cabinet  saw  the  inconveniences  of  it,  and  the
Viceroy  the  iniquity.  The  Irish  Patriot  House  of
Commons  could  see  only  an  invasion  of  the  rights  of
landlords.  The  Committee  reported  that  the  increase
of  rents  demanded  was  not  exorbitant.  The  Hearts
of  Steel  by  their  resistance  were  dissolving  the  bonds
of  society.  The  disorders  of  Ulster  required  force  to

1  ‘  Townshend  to  the  Earl  of  Suffolk,  March  21.’

124

BOOK

V.

1772.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

check  them  ;  and  since  the  northern  juries  refused  to
do  their  duties,  it  was  only  necessary  that  prisoners
charged  with  a  share  in  the  riots  should  be  tried  in
counties  where  they  were  unknown.  In  this  spirit
an  Act  was  carried  through  Parliament.  The  Vice¬
roy  was  called  on  to  employ  the  army  to  restore
order,  and  General  Gisborne  was  sent  down  with  as
many  regiments  as  could  be  spared.

General  Gisborne  executed  his  orders  with  modera¬
tion.  He  was  received  by  the  people  as  a  friend.
They  had  petitioned  Parliament,  they  said,  but  Par¬
liament  would  not  answer  them.  4  The  supreme
Judge  himself’  had  at  length  looked  upon  their  dis¬
tresses  and  excited  them  to  commotion,  4  to  cause  the
landlords,  on  whom  no  mild  means  could  prevail,  to
observe  the  pale  faces  and  the  thin  clothing  of  the
honest  Protestant  subjects  who  had  enriched  the
country  by  their  industry.’  They  submitted  not  to
their  masters,  but  to  the  English  commander:  they
invited  him  to  restore  peace,  not  by  killing  them,
but  by  remedying  their  wrongs.1  Quiet  was  easily
restored.  The  Hearts  of  Steel  came  of  a  race  who
had  no  love  for  riots ;  and  if  redress  was  refused,  they
had  a  better  resource  than  rebellion.  The  exactions
had  not  been  universal,  and  where  attempted  were
not  everywhere  persevered  in ;  but  mischief  irretriev¬
able  had  been  already  done.  The  linen  trade  from
other  causes  had  entered  on  a  period  of  stagnation,
and  the  consequent  distress  gave  an  impetus  to  the
emigration  to  the  land  of  promise  which  assumed
presently  enormous  proportions.

Flights  of  Protestant  settlers  had  been  driven  out

1  Remonstrance  of  the  ‘Hearts  of  Steel/  enclosed  by  Townshend  to
Lord  Suffolk,  1772.

125

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

earlier  in  the  century  by  the  idiotcy  of  the  bishops,  chap.
Fresh  multitudes  now  winged  their  way  to  join  ^ —

them,  and  in  no  tender  mood  towards  the  institutions
under  which  they  had  been  so  cruelly  dealt  with.

The  House  of  Commons  had  backed  up  the  landlords.

The  next  year  they  had  to  hear  from  the  Linen  Board
that  4  many  thousands  of  the  best  manufacturers  and
weavers  with  their  families  had  gone  to  seek  their
bread  in  America,  and  that  thousands  were  preparing
to  follow.’  Again  a  committee  was  appointed  to
enquire.  This  time  the  blame  was  laid  on  England,
which  had  broken  the  linen  compact,  given  bounties
to  the  Lancashire  millowners  which  Belfast  was  not;
allowed  to  share,  and  4  in  jealousy  of  Irish  manu¬
factures  ’  had  laid  duties  on  Irish  sail  cloth,  con¬
trary  to  express  stipulation.  The  accusation,  as  the
reader  knows,  was  true.  Beligious  bigotry,  com¬
mercial  jealousy,  and  modern  landlordism  had  com¬
bined  to  do  their  worst  against  the  Ulster  settle¬
ment.  The  emigration  was  not  the  whole  of  the
mischief.  Those  who  went  carried  their  arts  and
their  tools  along  with  them,  and  at  the  rate  at  which
the  stream  wras  flowing  the  colonies  would  soon
have  no  need  of  British  and  Irish  imports.  In  the
two  years  which  followed  the  Antrim  evictions,  thirty
thousand  Protestants  left  Ulster  for  a  land  where  there
was  no  legal  robbery,  and  where  those  who  sowed  the
seed  could  reap  the  harvest.  They  went  with  bitter¬
ness  in  their  hearts,  cursing  and  detesting  the
aristocratic  system  of  which  the  ennobling  qualities
were  lost,  and  only  the  worst  retained.  The  south
and  west  were  caught  by  the  same  movement,  and
ships  could  not  be  found  to  carry  the  crowds  who
were  eager  to  go.  4  The  emigration  was  not  only

126

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

'vm.

depriving  Ireland  of  its  manufactures,  but  of  the
sinews  of  its  trade.’  4  Rich  yeomen  with  their  old
leases  expired  ’  refused  to  renew  them  in  a  country
where  they  were  to  live  at  other  men’s  mercy,  and
departed  with  their  families  and  their  capital.  Pro¬
testant  settlements  which  had  lingered  through  the
century  now  almost  disappeared.  Bandon,  Tullamore,
Athlone,  Ivilbeggan,  and  many  other  places  once  almost
exclusively  English  and  Scotch,  were  abandoned  to
the  priests  and  the  Celts.1  Pitiable  and  absurd  story,
on  the  face  of  which  was  written  madness  !

Industry  deliberately  ruined  by  the  commercial
jealousy  of  England  ;  the  country  abandoned  to
anarchy  by  the  scandalous  negligence  of  English
statesmen  ;  idle  absentee  magnates  forgetting  that
duty  had  a  meaning,  and  driving  their  tenants  into
rebellion  and  exile  ;  resident  gentry  wasting  their
substance  in  extravagance,  and  feeding  their  riot
by  wringing  the  means  of  it  out  of  the  sweat  of  the
poor  ;  a  Parliament  led  by  patriots,  whose  love  of
country  meant  but  the  art  to  embarrass  Government,
and  wrench  from  it  the  spoils  of  office  ;  Govern¬
ment  escaping  from  its  difficulties  by  lavishing
gold  which,  like  metallic  poison,  destroyed  the  self-
respect  and  wrecked  the  character  of  those  who
stooped  to  take  it ;  the  working  members  of  the  com¬
munity,  and  the  worthiest  part  of  it,  flying  from  a  soil
where  some  fatal  enchantment  condemned  to  failure
every  effort  made  for  its  redemption — such  was  the
fair  condition  of  the  Protestant  colony  planted  in
better  days  to  show  the  Irish  the  fruits  of  a  nobler
belief  than  their  own,  and  the  industrial  virtues  of  a

1  ‘Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons  as  to  Emi¬
gration,  1774.’ — Commons'  Journals.

LORD  TOWNSHEND’s  ADMINISTRATION.

nobler  race  !  Who  can  wonder  that  English  rule  in
Ireland  has  become  a  byeword?  who  can  wonder
that  the  Celts  failed  to  recognise  a  superiority  which
had  no  better  result  to  show  for  itself  ?

We  lay  the  fault  on  the  intractableness  of  the  race.
The  modern  Irishman  is  of  no  race,  so  blended  now
is  the  blood  of  Celt  and  Dane,  Saxon  and  Norman,
Scot  and  Frenchman.  The  Irishman  of  the  last  cen¬
tury  rose  to  his  natural  level  whenever  he  was
removed  from  his  own  unhappy  country.  In  the
Seven  Years’  War  Austria’s  best  generals  were
Irishmen.  Brown  was  an  Irishman;  Lacy  was  an
Irishman ;  O’Donnell’s  name  speaks  for  him  ;  and
Lally  Tollendal,  who  punished  England  at  Fontenoy,
was  O’Mullally  of  Tollendally.  Strike  the  names
of  Irishmen  out  of  our  own  public  service,  and  we
lose  the  heroes  of  our  proudest  exploits — we  lose  the
Wellesleys,  the  Pallisers,  the  Moores,  the  Eyres,  the
Cootes,  the  Napiers  ;  we  lose  half  the  officers  and
half  the  privates  who  conquered  India  for  us,  and
fought  our  battles  in  the  Peninsula.  What  the  Irish
could  do  as  enemies  we  were  about  to  learn  when  the
Ulster  exiles  crowded  to  the  standard  of  Washington.
What  they  can  be  even  at  home  we  know  at  this  pre¬
sent  hour,  when,  under  exceptional  discipline  as  police,
they  are  at  once  the  most  sorely  tempted  and  the
most  nobly  faithful  of  all  subjects  of  the  British  race.

4  Realms  without  justice,’  said  Henry  the  Eighth
long  ago,  writing  of  the  same  Ireland  which  is  still  an
unsolved  problem,  4  be  but  tyrannies  and  robories
more  consonaunt  to  beastly  appetites  than  to  the
laudable  liff  of  reasonable  creatures.’ 1  When  England

127

CHAP.

II.

1772.

1  ‘  Henry  VIII.  to  tlie  Earl  of  Surrey.’ — State  Papers ,  vol.  ii.  p.  52.

128

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

~vm.

learns  to  prefer  realities  to  forms,  when  she  recog¬
nises  once  for  all,  that  having  taken  possession  of
Ireland  for  her  own  purposes,  she  is  bound  before  God
and  man  to  make  the  laws  obeyed  there,  and  to  deal
justly  between  man  and  man,  disaffection  and  dis¬
content  will  disappear,  and  Ireland  will  cease  to  be  a
reproach ;  but  the  experiment  remains  to  be  tried.

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

129

CHAPTER  III,

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

SECTION  I.

Lord  Townshend  had  spoken  of  endeavours  to  unite  chap.
the  popular  party  in  Ireland  and  America.  There  » — r—
were  good  reasons  why  at  that  moment  these  two
countries  should  be  of  peculiar  interest  to  one
another.  Ireland  was  but  a  colony  of  longer
standing,  and  the  Americans  saw  a  picture  there
of  the  condition  to  which  an  English  colony  could
be  reduced  in  which  the  mother  country  had  her
own  way.  Their  trade  was  already  exclusively  in
English  hands.  In  a  little  while  they  too  might
have  an  established  church,  interfering  with  liberty
of  conscience ;  their  farms,  which  they  had  cleared
and  clothed  with  corn  and  orchards,  might  be
claimed  by  landlords.  The  Scotch-Irish  emigrants
especially  had  their  suspicions  on  the  alert,  whose
grievances  were  more  recent,  and  whose  bitter  feel¬
ings  were  kept  alive  by  the  continued  arrivals  from
Ulster.  None  of  the  Transatlantic  settlers  had  more
cause  to  complain,  for  none  had  deserved  so  well  of
the  country  from  which  they  had  been  driven.  The
Protestant  settlers  in  Ireland  at  the  beginning  of
the  17th  century  were  of  the  same  metal  with
those  who  afterwards  sailed  in  the  ‘  May  Flower’ —

VOL.  II.  k

130

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

y.

Presbyterians,  Puritans,  Independents,  in  search  of
wider  breathing  space  than  was  allowed  them  at  home.
By  an  unhappy  perversity  they  had  fallen  under  the
same  stigma  and  were  exposed  to  the  same  inconveni¬
ences.  The  bishops  had  chafed  them  with  persecutions.
The  noble  lords  and  gentlemen  of  the  Anglo-Irish  com¬
munion  looked  askance  at  them  as  republicans.  The
common  sufferings  of  all  orders  of  Protestants  in
1641  failed  to  teach  the  madness  of  divisions  in  so
small  a  body;  the  heroism  with  which  the  Scots  held
the  northern  province  against  the  Kilkenny  Parlia¬
ment  and  Owen  Roe  O’Neil  was  an  insufficient  offset
against  the  sin  of  nonconformity.  The  conquest  of
Ireland  was  achieved  finally  by  the  armies  of  the  Com¬
monwealth,  and  Leinster  and  Munster  were  occupied
by  Cromwell’s  troopers  as  an  armed  industrial  garrison.
The  shadow  which  fell  on  Puritanism  at  the  Restora¬
tion  once  more  blighted  the  new  colonies.  The  soldiers
of  the  Protector  changed  their  swords  into  plough¬
shares,  repaired  the  desolation  of  the  civil  war,  and  in  a
few  years  so  changed  the  face  of  Ireland,  that  the  growth
of  prosperity  there  stirred  the  jealousy  of  Lancashire.
Nonconformity  was  still  a  stain  for  which  no  other
excellence  could  atone.  The  persecutions  were  re¬
newed,  but  did  not  cool  Presbyterian  loyalty.  When
the  native  race  made  their  last  effort  under  James  the
Second  to  recover  their  lands,  the  Calvinists  of  Derry
won  immortal  honour  for  themselves,  and  flung  over
the  wretched  annals  of  their  adopted  country  a  soli¬
tary  gleam  of  true  glory.  Even  this  passed  for  no¬
thing.  They  were  still  Dissenters,  still  unconscious
that  they  owed  obedience  to  the  hybrid  successors  of
St.  Patrick,  the  prelates  of  the  Establishment ;  and
no  sooner  was  peace  re-established  than  spleen  and

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

131

bigotry  were  again  at  their  old  work.  William  had
•so  far  recognized  their  merits  as  to  bestow  on  their
ministers  a  small  annual  grant.  Vexed  with  suits  in
the  ecclesiastical  courts,  forbidden  to  educate  their'
children  in  their  own  faith,  treated  as  dangerous  to  a
state  which  but  for  them  would  have  had  no  exist¬
ence,  and  associated  with  Papists  in  an  Act  of  Par¬
liament  which  deprived  them  of  their  civil  rights,  the
most  earnest  of  them  at  length  abandoned  the  un-

CHAP.

in.

thankful  service.  They  saw  at  last  that  the  liberties
for  which  they  and  their  fathers  had  fought  were  not
to  be  theirs  in  Ireland.  If  they  intended  to  live  as
freemen,  speaking  no  lies,  and  professing  openly
the  creed  of  the  Reformation,  they  must  seek  a
country  where  the  long  arm  of  prelacy  was  still  too
short  to  reach  them.  During  the  first  half  of  the
eighteenth  century,  Down,  Antrim,  Tyrone,  Armagh,
and  Derry  were  emptied  of  Protestant  inhabitants,
who  were  of  more  value  to  Ireland  than  Californian
gold  mines  ;  while  the  scattered  colonies  of  the  south,
denied  chapels  of  their  own,  and,  if  they  did  not  wish
to  be  atheists  or  Papists,  offered  the  alternative  of
conformity  or  departure,  took  the  Government  at
their  word  and  melted  away.

As  the  House  of  Hanover  grew  firmer  in  its  seat,
the  High  Church  party  declined  in  power,  and  dis¬
sent  as  such  ceased  to  be  visited  with  active  penal¬
ties.  The  Test  Act  was  not  repealed.  The  municipal
offices  were  still  monopolized  by  members  of  the
Establishment.  The  State  continued  to  insist  on
conformity  as  a  condition  of  employment,  military  or
civil.  But  the  Ulster  Presbyterians  were  saved  by
the  exclusion  from  being  tainted  by  the  universal
corruption.  Their  numbers  were  repaired  with  the

K  2

132

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOIv

V.

growth  of  the  linen  trade.  They  were  frugal  and
industrious ;  their  looms  and  their  flax  fields  pros¬
pered  with  them.  Emigration  slackened,  and  the
Protestant  population  had  again  become  an  im¬
portant  feature  in  the  community,  when  the  ab¬
sentee  landlords  cast  their  eyes  on  the  wealth  which
had  been  silently  created,  and,  in  an  evil  hour,  put
out  their  hands  to  seize  it.  At  once  the  outflow  of
Protestants  recommenced  under  changed  and  far
more  dangerous  conditions.  A  large  commerce  had
grown  up  between  Belfast  and  the  American  planta¬
tions.  Relations  long  separated  renewed  their  ties.
Intercourse  brought  exchange  of  thought,  comparison
of  grievances,  and  common  schemes  of  redress.  The
pulses  of  the  industrial  classes  in  the  two  countries
began  to  beat  in  perilously  earnest  sympathy.

One  lesson  especially  the  mother  country  had  never
ceased  to  impress  upon  her  colonies,  that  they  existed
not  for  their  own  sakes,  but  for  hers.  Overlooking
the  circumstances  out  of  which  they  took  their  real
origin,  she  regarded  them  as  created  by  herself,  a&
outlets  for  her  own  productions.  They  were  strictly
forbidden  to  trade  with  any  countries  but  England
and  Ireland,  or  ship  their  cargoes  in  any  but  English
vessels.

To ,  these  conditions  the  American  colonies  had
hitherto  submitted,  as  the  price  of  English  protec¬
tion.  Their  ports  were  small,  the  population  sparse
and  generally  consisting  of  farmers,  and  the  articles
which  they  most  needed  England  could  best  supply.
Left  to  themselves,  they  might  have  been  worried  by
Spain,  and,  perhaps,  invaded  and  conquered  by
France.

Lord  Chatham  had  made  an  end  of  French  rivalry.

LORD  IIARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

133

The  Americans  shared  the  glory  of  a  war  of  which
the  benefit  was  so  largely  theirs.  Twenty-four  thou¬
sand  colonists  had  assisted  England  to  conquer  Canada.
Four  hundred  American  privateers  had  driven  the
French  from  the  coast  and  the  lakes.  The  war  had
left  England  with  a  debt  of  148  millions.  It  was
suggested  at  the  Peace  of  Paris  that  the  colonies
should  contribute  something  towards  the  interest  of  it,
and  the  colonists  did  not  dispute  their  equitable
liability.  Had  Pitt  been  still  in  power,  some  arrange¬
ment  might  perhaps  have  been  successfully  attempted.
Grenville’s  less  delicate  hand  provoked  the  first  dis¬
pute.  He  suggested  in  1764  the  extension  of  the
stamp  duty  to  America,  under  the  authority  of  the
English  Parliament.  From  authority  to  impose  a  tax
the  step  to  despotism  was  short,  and,  it  was  feared,
certain.  When  once  the  consent  of  the  taxpayer,
through  his  representative,  was  held  unnecessary,  no
second  barrier  remained.

America  remonstrated,  not  violently,  for  she  offered
to  find  a  substitute ;  but  she  stood  out  upon  the
principle.  Grenville  and  Charles  Townshend  stood
upon  principle  as  well.  In  1765,  in  spite  of  caution
from  wiser  heads,  the  colonial  stamp  duty  was  im¬
posed  by  Parliament ;  Charles  Townshend,  talking
of  £  our  American  children  planted  by  our  care,  nou¬
rished  by  our  indulgence,  now  fitly  contributing  to
the  necessities  of  the  State.’  ‘  They  planted  by  your
care !  ’  Colonel  Barre  replied;  ‘your  oppression  planted
them.  They  nourished  by  your  indulgence  !  they
grew  by  your  neglect  of  them.’  Both  positions  were
true.  But  for  Anglican  bishops  there  would  have
been  no  Puritan  exiles.  But  for  Pitt,  America
would  have  been  French.  The  remembrance  of  wrong

CHAP.

hi.

134

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

V.

is  longer  lived  than  gratitude  for  benefits  received.
Virginia  resisted.  New  England  resisted.  Congresses
met,  and  drew  declarations  of  colonial  rights.  The
Stamp  Act  was  disobeyed ;  business  wrent  on  as  if  the
Act  did  not  exist  ;  and  in  the  following  year,  being
obviously  useless,  it  was  abandoned.  The  Act  re¬
pealing  it,  however,  reasserted  the  right  of  England  to
tax  the  colonies,  if  she  pleased  to  exercise  that  right;
and  the  provincial  Legislature  of  New  York,  which
had  given  special  offence,  was  suspended,  as  an
admonition  to  the  rest.

America  having  secured  the  substance  of  the  vic¬
tory,  did  not  quarrel  about  words.  So  long  as  the
claim  was  not  enforced,  it  was  harmless.  The  colo¬
nists  did  not  anticipate  a  renewal  of  the  experiment;
but  England  had  been  touched  in  her  pride.  In  1767
Charles  Townshend  brought  the  question  to  an  issue
once  more.  A  Stamp  Act  could  be  evaded  without
serious  inconvenience.  Customs  duties  being  levied
at  the  ports  could  be  evaded  only  by  a  refusal  to
consume  the  articles  on  which  they  were  imposed.
A  small  tax,  just  sufficient  to  try  the  principle,  was
laid  on  glass,  paper,  and  tea.  The  Massachusetts
Chambers  passed  a  resolution  that  these  duties  should
not  be  levied.  Being  required  to  rescind  a  vote  which
was  held  an  act  of  rebellion,  they  re-affirmed  it  by  a
majority  of  92  to  17.  Ships  of  war  were  sent  out,  with
a  couple  of  regiments.  Boston  decided  to  arm  in
opposition ;  and  the  colonies  generally,  following  Irish
precedent,  came  to  a  common  resolution  that  they
would  import  nothing  of  any  kind  from  England  till
the  duties  were  abandoned.  To  the  restriction  of
their  commerce  they  had  submitted.  The  sea  might
be  part  of  the  British  dominions.  Taxation  they

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

135

would  not  submit  to  while  they  were  unrepresented
in  the  British  Parliament.

Half  alarmed,  half  exasperated,  the  English  Govern¬
ment  took  a  middle  course,  and  the  worst  which  they
could  have  chosen.  They  abandoned  the  duties  on
glass  and  paper;  they  retained  a  nominal  tea  duty.
Had  they  tried  force  at  once,  they  might  have  crushed
the  colonies  in  detail,  and  for  a  time  have  broken
them  down.  Had  they  made  a  frank  surrender,  the
colonies  for  a  time  also  would  have  refrained  from
raising  the  question  of  separation.  They  maintained
the  cause  of  the  irritation;  they  took  no  active  steps
to  compel  obedience.  Ill-feeling  grew  rapidly.  Bloody
riots  broke  out  in  Boston  between  the  garrison  and
the  citizens.  For  four  years,  through  the  thirteen
colonies,  in  town  and  village,  tea,  which  had  become
a  necessary  of  life,  disappeared  from  the  breakfast-
table.  At  length  the  decrease  of  consumption  having
created  a  glut  in  the  East  Indian  warehouses,  and  as
it  was  supposed  that  by  this  time  the  colonists  would
be  weary  of  the  strife,  it  was  determined  to  tempt  their
constancy  with  a  supply  of  the  coveted  luxury  at  a
price  which,  notwithstanding  the  duty,  was  still  lower
than  Americans  had  ever  paid  for  it  before.

The  tea  ships  generally  were  prevented  from
making  their  way  into  the  American  harbours,  or
else  were  sent  back  without  being  allowed  to  unload.
A  ship  which  entered  Boston  harbour  was  less  fortu¬
nate.  A  party  of  men,  disguised  as  Mohawk  Indians
in  their  war-paint,  stole  on  board  one  midnight,
overpowered  the  crew,  burst  the  chests  open,  and
emptied  them  into  the  sea.

Struck  thus  in  the  face,  England  lost  its  temper

CHAP.

in.

1773.

1774

136

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  and  its  prudence.  The  port  of  Boston  was  declared

—  ■- — "  to  be  closed  until  the  tea  was  paid  for.  The  Massa-

1774*  1

chusetts  charter  was  recalled,  and,  by  a  new  consti¬
tution,  the  colony  was  placed  under  the  Government
of  Quebec.  General  Gage  was  sent  out  in  haste  with
reinforcements,  attended  by  a  squadron,  to  take  charge
of  the  harbour.  He  landed  on  the  13th  of  May,  took
military  possession  of  the  town,  and  fortified  the  penin¬
sula  to  which  it  was  then  confined.  The  colonial
Legislature,  not  recognizing  the  dissolution,  assem¬
bled  a  few  miles  off  at  Concord,  organized  a  separate
administration,  and  called  the  settlers  to  arms.  All
down  the  seaboard  to  the  Carolinas  the  alarm  spread
of  danger  to  liberty.  If  Massachusetts  was  over¬
whelmed,  each  state  knew  that  its  own  turn  would
follow.  A  Congress  met  at  Philadelphia.  The  de¬
puties  of  thirteen  states  agreed  that  they  would  pay
no  taxes,  direct  or  indirect,  to  which  their  consent
had  not  been  asked.  They  stood  by  their  non-import¬
ation  agreement.  They  appealed  to  the  British
nation,  and  to  Britain’s  Sovereign  and  theirs.  To  the
British  people  they  said,  c  Place  us  as  we  were  when
the  war  ended,  and  we  shall  be  satisfied.’  To  the  Kins*
they  said  that  in  peace  they  cost  Great  Britain  no¬
thing  ;  in  war  they  had  contributed  hitherto  to  the
imperial  expenses,  and  would  continue  to  contribute:
they  asked  nothing  but  that  their  rights  under  the
constitution  should  not  be  invaded.

1775.  Hr.  Franklin,  who  had  been  long  in  England,  and
was  personally  intimate  with  many  of  the  chief  Eng¬
lish  statesmen,  took  charge  of  the  address  to  the
Crown.  Fie  was  leaning  on  the  bar  of  the  House  of
Lords  when  the  question  was  debated  in  that  assem¬
bly  whether  he  should  be  allowed  to  present  it.  At

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

137

that  great  crisis  in  his  country’s  future,  Chatham
came  once  more  to  the  front.

Si  Pergama  dextra

Defendi  possent  etiam  hac  defensa  fuissent.

Chatham’s  name  was  honoured  in  America  beyond
that  of  every  other  Englishman.  He  insisted  on  the
madness  or  the  wickedness  of  using  force  in  an  un¬
natural  quarrel.  America  was  willing  to  admit  the
supremacy  of  the  Imperial  Parliament.  America
would  not  refuse  to  contribute  of  her  own  accord  for
the  interest  of  the  war  debts.  England  must  meet
her  with  a  frank  confession  that  if  she  was  to  be  taxed,
her  own  consent  was  necessary ;  that  it  was  unlawful
to  employ  the  army  to  destroy  the  rights  of  the
people  ;  the  port  at  Boston  must  be  thrown  open
again,  and  Gage  and  his  troops  must  be  recalled.

So  advised  the  greatest  of  living  Englishmen,  who
had  raised  his  country  to  the  proudest  eminence
which  she  had  attained  since  the  death  of  the  Pro¬
tector.  But  Lord  North  and  his  Cabinet  desired  to
be  thought  better  patriots  than  Chatham.  Lord
Sandwich  moved  that  Chatham’s  propositions  could
not  be  entertained.  Glancing  at  Franklin,  he  said
that  he  had  in  his  eye  the  person  by  whom  they  had
been  drawn  —  the  most  mischievous  and  bitterest
enemy  the  country  had  ever  known.

Franklin  could  not  answer,  but  Chatham  did.
His  words  were  his  own,  he  said.  He  had  given
the  liouse  his  own  opinion  ;  but  had  he  needed  help,
he  would  not  have  been  ashamed  of  asking  it  4  from
one  whom  all  Europe  esteemed,  who  was  an  honour
not  to  the  English  nation  only,  but  to  human  nature.’
The  House  of  Lords  went  with  Sandwich,  and  de¬
termined  by  a  great  majority  that  the  colonists  should

CHAP.

in.

1775.

138

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  be  taught  their  duties.  The  Cabinet  felt  more  un-
v.  .  °

— ^ — '  certainty  than  they  confessed.  Private  conferences
1775  J  J

were  held  with  Franklin;  and  Franklin,  to  whom,  as
to  those  by  whom  he  was  employed,  a  dismemberment
of  the  empire  was  no  trifling  thing  to  be  rushed  after
with  foolish  haste,  was  most  earnest  to  suggest  means
by  which  the  catastrophe  could  be  averted.  He
undertook  that  the  tea  should  be  paid  for ;  and  that  the
colonies  should  contribute  to  war  expenses.  If  Eng¬
land  would  relinquish  her  monopolies  and  give  them
free  trade,  they  would  contribute  in  peace.  On  the
other  hand,  as  Chatham  had  said,  the  duties  must  be
abandoned  and  the  troops  be  withdrawn.  The  Imperial
Parliament  must  disclaim  a  right  to  legislate  for  the
internal  regulation  of  the  colonies,  and  the  cancelled
charter  must  be  restored  to  Massachusetts.

To  most  of  these  conditions  Lord  North  was  ready
to  agree.  The  negociation  went  off  upon  a  point  of
honour.  All  else  might  be  conceded,  but  England
could  not  humble  herself  before  Massachusetts.  At  all
risks  the  new  Constitution  must  be  upheld.  For
this  feather  terms  infinitely  more  favourable  than  we
now  dare  demand  from  our  remaining  dependencies
were  idly  rejected.  Franklin  carried  back  the  news
that  he  had  failed,  and  a  new  page  was  turned  in  the
history  of  mankind.

Both  sides  had  paused  upon  their  arms  till  the  answer
came.  Debate  was  then  over.  It  was  now  for  action  to
decide  between  them.  The  Massachusetts  Congress  had
employed  the  winter  in  collecting  stores  at  Concord.
Gage  finding  the  issue  to  be  war,  resolved  on  dealing
a  vigorous  blow.  On  the  night  of  the  18th  of  April
he  despatched  Colonel  Smith  with  800  grenadiers  to
destroy  the  magazines.  Concord  is  twenty  miles

L0KD  HAKCOUKT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIEEE.

139

from  Boston.  Lexington  is  a  village  on  the  road  a  chap.
few  miles  short  of  it.  In  Lexington  Street,  at  five  in  * — A-
the  morning  of  the  19th,  a  party  of  Massachusetts  1775*
militia  were  assembled,  uncertain  (as  before  the  first
blood  is  shed  in  a  civil  war,  men  always  are  uncertain)
what  they  were  precisely  to  do.  The  troops  settled
the  question  by  firing  on  them.  They  scattered.

Colonel  Smith  went  on,  accomplished  his  work,  and
was  again  returning  on  the  same  road  when  he  found
the  houses  in  Lexington,  and  the  walls  and  hedges
outside  it,  lined  with  riflemen.  The  soldiers,  tired
with  a  thirty-mile  march  and  encumbered  with  their
knapsacks,  found  themselves  received  with  a  close
and  deadly  fire  from  practised  marksmen.  Their
enemies  were  country  farmers  and  farm  servants,
trained  as  hunters  in  the  woods,  and  light  of  foot  as
they  were  skilful  in  aim.  They  would  have  been
destroyed  without  a  chance  of  defending  themselves,
had  not  Gage,  who  had  heard  of  what  had  passed
in  the  morning,  sent  forward  reinforcements.  Fresh
troops  arriving  on  the  scene  drove  the  Americans
off,  and  the  shattered  grenadiers  reached  Boston  at
sunset  with  a  loss  of  nearly  half  their  strength.

The  effect  of  the  battle  of  Lexington  was  to  en¬
close  the  British  within  the  lines  of  the  city.  The

«/

head- quarters  of  the  Americans  were  pushed  forward
to  Cambridge,  four  miles  only  outside  all  the  walls,  and
Gage’s  communications  with  the  country  were  wholly
cut  off.  The  inglorious  investment  it  was  thought
could  be  but  of  short  duration.  Regiments  were
pouring  in  from  England.  General  Howe  arrived
at  the  beginning  of  the  summer,  and  decided  to
give  the  colonists  a  decisive  lesson  without  loss  of
time.  The  Peninsula  of  Charlestown  is  divided

I

140

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

17757

from  that  of  Boston  Proper  by  six  hundred  yards  of
water  which  are  now  bridged  over.  The  Charlestown
ridge  ascends  with  a  gentle  slope  from  the  shore,  com¬
manding  the  harbour  and  the  city  opposite.  The
highest  points  of  it,  known  as  Breed’s  Hill  and
Bunker’s  Hill,  are  nearly  two  hundred  feet  above  the
sea.  The  Americans  pushing  forward  from  Cambridge
had  entrenched  themselves  on  the  brow  of  this  ridge.
They  had  brought  up  cannon  which  distressed  the
ships  in  the  harbour,  and  threw  shot  into  the  army
quarters  in  the  town.  The  entire  American  force
amounted  to  no  more  than  1,500  men,  and  those
only  untrained  militia.  Such  a  body  was  thought
unable  to  resist  even  for  a  moment  a  superior  number
of  regular  troops.  On  the  17th  of  June  Sir  William
Howe  crossed  over  with  3,000  men  to  drive  them  off.
Covered  by  a  heavy  fire  from  the  guns  of  the  fleet,

he  advanced  with  easv  confidence.  The  Americans

•/

waited  till  the  English  were  close  upon  their  lines,  and
then  poured  in  a  fire  so  deadly  that  they  reeled  back¬
wards  down  the  hill  in  astonished  confusion.  They
rallied  rapidly,  again  charged,  and  again  retired
before  the  tremendous  reception  which  they  encoun¬
tered.  Determined  to  win  the  hill  or  die,  they  rushed
up  a  last  time  and  plunged  over  the  breastwork  ;  and
then,  but  only  then,  and  at  leisure  and  in  good  order,
the  Massachusetts  farmers  withdrew.  That  one  sum¬
mer  afternoon’s  work  had  cost  the  British  army  more
than  eleven  hundred  men,  of  whom  ninety  were
officers.  Sir  William  Howe  might  have  said,  like
Pyrrhus,  that  a  few  more  such  victories  would  end  the
dream  of  the  conquest  of  America.

AnA  who  and  what  were  these  provincial  militia
who  had  given  the  soldiers  of  England  so  rude  a

L011D  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

141

lesson?  Most  of  them,  no  doubt,  were  descendants
of  the  ancient  Puritan  stock,  reinforced  from  the  old
country  from  time  to  time  by  men  who  had  the  same
quarrel  as  their  fathers  with  the  constituted  au¬
thorities  in  Church  and  State.

But  throughout  the  revolted  colonies,  and,  therefore,
probably  in  the  first  to  begin  the  struggle,  all  evidence
shows  that  the  foremost,  the  most  irreconcilable,  the
most  determined  in  pushing  the  quarrel  to  the  last  ex¬
tremity,  were  the  Scotch  Irish  whom  the  bishops
and  Lord  Donegal  and  Company  had  been  pleased
to  drive  out  of  Ulster.  4  It  is  a  fact  beyond
question,’  says  Plowden,  4  that  most  of  the  early
successes  in  America  were  immediately  owing  to  the
vigorous  exertions  and  prowess  of  the  Irish  emigrants
who  bore  arms  in  that  cause.’ 1  Ramsay  says  the
Irish  in  America  were  almost  to  a  man  on  the  side  of
Independence.  4  They  had  fled  from  oppression  in
their  native  country,  and  could  not  brook  the  idea
that  it  should  follow  them.  Their  national  prepos¬
sessions  in  favour  of  liberty  were  strengthened  by
their  religious  opinions.  They  were  Presbyterians,
and  therefore  mostly  Whigs.’ 2

There  is  a  Bunker’s  Hill 3  close  outside  Belfast.
Massachusetts  tradition  has  forgotten  how  the  name
came  to  the  Charlestown  Peninsula.  It  is  possible
that  the  connection  with  Ireland  is  a  coincidence.
It  is  possible  that  the  name  of  a  spot  so  memorable
in  American  history  was  brought  over  by  one  of  those

1  Flowden,  yoI.  ii.  p.  178.

2  History  of  the  American  Revo¬
lution ,  p.  597.

3  Bunker’s  Hill  is  supposed  to  be
a  corruption  of  Brunker’s  Hill.

Captain  Brunker  was  an  officer  who
came  to  Ulster  with  Lord  Essex  in
1572,  and  received  a  grant  of  land
in  Antrim.

CHAP.

HI.

* - - - '

1775.

142

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

N-.

BOOK

V.

17757

exiles,  whose  children  saw  there  the  beginning  of
the  retribution  that  followed  on  the  combination  of
follies  which  had  destroyed  the  chance  of  making  Ire¬
land  a  Protestant  country,  and  had  filled  Protestant
Ulster  with  passionate  sympathy  for  the  revolted
colonists.

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

143

SECTION  II.

George  the  Third  had  intended  to  end  corrup¬
tion  in  the  Irish  Parliament.  The  effect  of  Lord
Townshend’s  efforts  had  been  to  make  it  more
corrupt  than  before.  Where  the  laws  by  which  a
country  is  to  be  governed  depend  on  the  voices  of
representatives,  and  where  these  representatives  ac¬
knowledge  no  motive  but  private  interest,  bribery  is
the  only  method  by  which  the  administration  can
be  carried  on.  The  House  of  Commons  had  been
controlled  hitherto  by  an  oligarchy,  who  shared  the
patronage  of  Ireland  among  them  as  if  it  had  been
a  family  inheritance.  The  Viceroy,  with  the  assist¬
ance  of  the  rank  and  file,  had  wrested  the  public
offices  out  of  the  hands  of  the  men  who  had  preyed
on  the  revenue  so  long  and  so  systematically;
but  he  had  bought  his  victory  by  borrowing  his
adversaries’  weapons,  making  office  the  reward  of
Parliamentary  subserviency  ;  and  when  preferments
could  not  be  had  to  feed  the  voracity  of  his  sup¬
porters,  he  had  added  further  to  the  bloated  Pen¬
sion  List.  Success  so  purchased  can  be  continued
only  by  the  means  by  which  it  has  been  obtained.
The  interesting  lords  and  gentlemen  who  constituted
the  two  Houses  of  the  Irish  Legislature  understood
the  value  of  their  assistance  from  the  Viceroy’s
eagerness  to  secure  it.  Those  who  had  sold  their
votes  for  a  single  measure  or  group  of  measures  were
like  the  possessors  of  some  fatal  secret,  whom  a
person  afraid  of  disclosure  has  been  rash  enough  to

CHAP.

hi.

144  THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  bribe  to  silence.  The  claimants  for  Crown  favour
Y

- — ^ — •  could  not  all  be  satisfied,  but  neglect  to  satisfy  them
brought  immediate  retribution.  Townshend’s  ma¬
jorities  dwindled,  and  at  length  disappeared.  With
disgust  he  drew  out  the  list  of  the  traitors  who  had
.  disowned  their  obligations.  He  found  he  could  rely
on  them  no  more,  and  in  despairing  contempt  he  fell
back  on  the  most  powerful  of  the  aristocracy  whom
he  had  defeated.  Lord  Shannon  returned  with  a
smile  to  the  assistance  of  a  Yiceroy  who  had  been
the  victim  of  a  delusion  that  Ireland  could  be  honour¬
ably  governed  by  a  Parliament  of  its  own.  The
Opposition  was  disarmed,  and  Ponsonby  was  obliged
to  part  with  his  hope  of  driving  the  Yiceroy  in  dis¬
grace  from  the  country.

Townshend,  however,  was  himself  disinclined  to
bear  longer  a  burden  which  had  become  hateful  to
him.  For  four  years  he  had  been  attempting  a  task
which  it  was  impossible  to  accomplish.  He  petitioned
to  be  allowed  to  resign,  and  his  request  was  granted.
He  retired  with  the  thanks  and  compliments  of  the
Parliament,  his  relations  with  which  had  undergone
such  strange  vicissitudes.  He  left  behind  him  one
work,  though  one  work  only,  of  permanent  improve¬
ment.  His  new  Revenue  Board  was  soon  abandoned
to  clamour.  But  the  great  families  were  no  longer
allowed  to  abuse  the  authority  of  the  Crown  under
the  name  of  Lords  Justices.  The  Viceroy  of  Ireland
was  henceforth  to  be  resident  through  his  term  of
office,  unless  for  brief  intervals  and  on  unforeseen
occasions.

Townshend’s  successor  was  a  nobleman  the  very
reverse  of  himself  in  every  feature  of  intellect  and
temperament.  Townshend  was  energetic,  brilliant,

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

and  in  the  prime  of  his  years,  and  Harcourt  was  over
sixty,  decorous,  dignified,  inured  by  habit  to  the  ,
inanities  of'  Courts,  with  views  generally  honourable,
but  pursuing  them  with  languor,  with  the  smallest
imaginable  insight  into  Ireland  and  its  conditions,  and
with  an  indolent  cunning  in  the  place  of  statesmanship.
He  had  been  for  nine  years  tutor  to  the  King  before  his
accession.  He  had  negociated  the  alliance  between
his  master  and  the  Princess  Charlotte.  He  would
have  passed  as  no  more  than  an  ornamental  lay  figure
through  a  life  which  he  ended  strangely  by  falling
down  a  well  at  Nuneham,  except  for  his  Irish  vice¬
royalty,  which  falling  to  him  at  an  unlucky  time
brought  his  figure  into  distinct  visibility.

With  Lord  Harcourt  came  a  satellite  very  far  more
interesting  than  his  primary,  the  Secretary,  John  de
Blaquiere,  himself  a  Colonel  of  Dragoons,  descendant
from  a  Huguenot  family,  who  had  come  to  England
at  the  beginning  of  the  century.  De  Blaquiere’s
character  will  reveal  itself  in  the  progress  of  the
story.  To  Lord  North  he  writes  with  a  confiden¬
tial  familiarity  which  shows  that  they  were  on  terms
of  closest  intimacy.  He  describes  himself  in  one  of
his  letters  to  Lord  North  as  c  your  threadpaper  friend,'
which,  perhaps,  sufficiently  expresses  his  appearance.

Like  his  predecessor,  the  new  Viceroy  was  directed
4  absolutely  to  discourage  all  applications  for  pensions,
salaries,  and  offices,  for  new  peerages,  or  advance¬
ment  of  peers  already  existing  to  higher  titles ;  ’  to
prohibit  c  the  sale  of  offices  or  employments,  notwith¬
standing  the  present  proprietor  may  have  purchased
the  same.’1  The  era  of  purity  was  at  last  to  begin.

1  1  Rochford  to  Lord  Harcourt,  October  26,  1772.  Secret  and  con¬
fidential.’

145

CHAP.

III.

1772.

VOL.  II.

L

146

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Lord  Harcourt  landed  at  Ringsend  on  the  30th  of
— ^ — '  November,  1772,  with  a  year  of  quiet  still  before
17  him,  Parliament  not  meeting' till  the  beginning  of  the
following  autumn.  A  week  later  Townshend  left
Dublin  amidst  general  acclamations,  Harcourt  being,  as
he  confessed,  glad  to  be  rid  4  of  his  rather  overpowering
presence.’  For  himself  he  described  his  prospects  as
.  most  flattering.  The  Duke  of  Leinster,  to  mark  his
delight  at  the  change,  wrote  to  him  most  affection¬
ately.  Kildare  stood  at  his  side  in  the  viceregal  box
the  first  evening  on  which  he  was  at  the  play.  Shan¬
non  was  4  most  polite.’  John  Ponsonby  had  been  at
the  levee,  ‘perhaps  determined  by  Lord  Shannon.’
Flood  had  been  there  also,  indicating  that  he  was
not  unwilling  to  be  taken  into  service.  It  appeared
that  Flood,  the  most  eloquent  and  passionate  of
Townshend’ s  opponents,  had  already  been  feeling  his
way  towards  employment  with  Lord  Frederick  Camp¬
bell,  Townshend’s  secretary.  Campbell  had  mocked
him  with  promises  which  had  been  left  unfulfilled.
Like  so  many  of  his  countrymen,  his  chief  ambition
was  to  hold  office  under  the  rule  which  he  affected
to  execrate,  but  he  was  wary  of  being  again  deceived.1

The  compliments  of  the  reception  being  over,  the
realities  followed.  The  noble  lords  were  well  dis¬
posed,  but  on  their  own  conditions.  A  few  days  after
the  new  Viceroy’s  arrival,  Lord  Shannon  asked  for  a
private  interview,  to  submit  as  usual  the  terms  on
which  the  Government  might  have  his  support.

1  Harcourt,  writing  afterwards  to  been  treated  extremely  ill  by  Lord
Lord  North,  said  that  Flood  told  Frederick  Campbell  in  Lord  Towns-
him  that  ‘  he  had  been  determined  head's  time / — f  Harcourt  to  Lord
never  more  to  have  any  dealings  1  North,  July  8, 1774.  Most  private
with  the  Castle,  that  paid  so  little  and  confidential.’
regard  to  engagements.  He  had

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

147

Two  of  the  St.  Legers,  it  will  be  remembered,  were  chap.
claimants  for  the  Doneraile  title.  Townshend,  after
playing  with  both,  had  recommended  one  of  them,  1772,
though  the  decision  had  been  postponed.  Shannon
recommended  the  other,  who  was  his  own  cousin.  Mr.

St.  Leger  St.  Leger  must  be  created  Lord  Doneraile.

Mr.  Denham  J ephson,  of  Mallow,  must  have  a  pen¬
sion  of  600/.  a  year.  Mr.  Lysaght  must  be  governor
of  Cork,  with  the  rank  of  major-general.  Mr.  James
Dennis,  M.P.  for  Youghal,  must  be  Prime  Sergeant,
or  Attorney  or  Solicitor-General,  whichever  office
should  first  fall  vacant.1  Mr.  Townshend,  member
for  Cork,  must  be  a  Commissioner  of  the  Revenue  ;
and  the  Dean  of  Cork  must  have  a  bishopric  on  the
first  opportunity.

Lord  Shannon,  the  Viceroy  wrote,  4  was  extremely
candid  and  explicit.’  He  went  to  the  point  without
circumlocution.  His  ultimate  attitude  was  to  depend
on  the  treatment  which  he  received  ;  but  he  promised
at  any  rate  to  stand  by  Government  for  one  session.

The  Viceroy  4  pleaded  hard  ’  4  for  400/.  a  year  for  Mr.
Jephson,  but  Lord  Shannon  said  he  could  not  pre¬
vail  on  Mr.  Jephson  to  accept  less  than  600/.’  4  Lord
Shannon,’  Harcourt  concluded,  4  is  very  powerful,  and
it  may  be  well  to  secure  his  support.’

While  the  Viceroy  was  being  introduced  to  the
mysteries  of  corruption,  his  secretary,  Colonel  de
Blaquiere,  was  passing  through  an  ordeal  of  a
more  fiery  kind.  The  secretary  being  the  channel
through  which  applications  for  favours  generally
passed,  Irish  society  was  anxious  to  learn  the  quali¬
fications  of  the  new  arrival.  Mr.  Beauchamp  Bagenal,

1  Dennis  was  made  Prime  Sergeant  in  1774.

l  2

148

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

"  1773.

member  for  Carlow,  a  notorious  duellist,  with  a  re¬
putation  almost  European,  wrote  to  De  Blaquiere  for
leave  of  absence  for  a  relation  who  was  with  his  re¬
giment  in  America.  De  Blaquiere  replied  politely
that  to  give  leave  to  officers  on  service  did  not  lie
within  the  Viceroy’s  province.  To  his  extreme  sur¬
prise,  Bagenal  instantly  challenged  him.  When  Irish
gentlemen  made  requests  they  were  to  be  granted.
Inability  was  no  answer.  De  Blaquiere  understood
the  situation  in  a  moment.  He  had  no  knowledge  of
his  fire-eating  antagonist,  nor  had  he  dreamt  of  offend¬
ing  him;  but  in  compliance  with  the  universal  sen¬
timent  of  the  whole  kingdom,  he  saw  that  he  must
acquiesce.  They  met  the  next  morning  at  the  thorn-
trees  in  the  Phoenix,  the  usual  trysting  place.  At
Mr.  Bagenal’ s  request,  they  were  placed  4  nearer  than
usual.’  De  Blaquiere  fired  in  the  air.  His  adversary
took  a  deliberate  aim ;  his  pistol  missed  fire ;  he  re¬
cocked  it  a  second  and  again  a  third  time,  with  the
same  result.  De  Blaquiere  advised  him  to  look  at  his
flint.  He  rapped  the  edge  of  it  with  a  key,  and
drew  the  trigger  once  more,  but  once  more  unsuc¬
cessfully.

4  At  the  colonel’s  request  Mr.  Bagenal  then  changed
his  flint.’  This  time  the  pistol  went  off,  the  ball  pass¬
ing  through  the  colonel’s  hat  and  grazing  his  temple.
De  Blaquiere  took  his  second  pistol,  and  was  about
to  fire  in  the  air  again.  Bagenal  graciously  insisted
that  he  should  aim  at  him.  De  Blaquiere  said  he  had
no  quarrel  with  Mr.  Bagenal,  and  could  not  think  of
it.  Mr.  Bagenal  4  behaved  with  great  politeness
and  intrepidity,’  entreating  that  the  colonel  would
not  refuse  him  the  honour  of,  &c.  &c.  It  was  in  vain.
De  Blaquiere  would  not  do  him  the  honour  at  all.

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

149

Bagenal  would  have  made  a  new  quarrel  of  it,  but
the  seconds  interfered.  It  was  agreed  that  De  Bla-
quiere  had  behaved  ‘astonishingly  well.’  The  affair
ended,  and  the  colonel  was  the  most  popular  secre¬
tary  that  had  ever  held  office  in  Dublin.1

Preliminaries  over,  it  was  now  time  for  business.
Townshend’s  operations  in  Parliament  had  been
frightfully  costly.  The  Treasury  was  300,000^.  in
arrear.  The  revenue  was  falling  off,  owing  to  the  stop¬
page  of  the  colonial  trade.  The  expenditure  seemed
to  admit  of  no  reduction,  except  in  the  Pension  List,
but  in  this  direction  there  was  small  likelihood  of  re¬
form.  The  King  was  alive  to  the  impropriety  of
granting  pensions  in  Ireland,  but  was  less  scrupulous
with  his  own  relations.  North,  with  acknowledged
reluctance,  had  to  inform  Lord  Harcourt  that  the  King
had  determined  to  place  the  Queen  of  Denmark
on  the  Irish  establishment.2  It  had  been  found  neces¬
sary  to  suspend  all  payments  except  to  the  army.
Some  provision  must  be  made  before  the  meeting  of
Parliament.  From  the  earliest  times  Irish  patriotism
had  clamoured  against  the  absentees.  Popularity
might  be  acquired,  the  revenue  might  be  increased,
and  a  real  injury  brought  in  the  way  of  redress,  if
the  remarkable  lords  and  gentlemen  who  had  for
generations  been  receiving  their  incomes  for  duties
unperformed  were  to  be  made  to  choose  between
residence  and  parting  with  a  tenth  of  their  spoils  to
the  State.  The  remaining  nine-tenths  they  might
still  keep  to  themselves.

Lord  North  gave  his  cordial  approval.  The  cen¬
tral  fountain  of  Irish  misery  had  been  for  the  moment

1  ‘Lord.  Harcourt  to  the  Earl  of  2  ‘  Lord  North  to  Harcourt,  March
Rochford,  March  4,  1773.’  29,  1773.  Most  secret.’

CHAP.

1773.

150

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

1773.

recognised  by  him.  Those  in  whose  behalf  the  land
of  Ireland  had  been  taken  from  its  owners  to  provide
better  government  for  the  people,  had  forgotten  as
much  as  if  it  had  never  existed,  that  any  such  obliga¬
tion  attached  to  them.  A  faint  far  off  glimmer  of  the
truth  had  broken  upon  an  English  Prime  Minister.
As  there  was  no  land  tax  in  Ireland,  the  absentees,
in  fact,  contributed  nothing  for  those  vast  possessions
of  theirs.  It  was  time  to  call  upon  them.

The  tax  was  to  have  been  proposed  as  a  Govern¬
ment  measure  at  the  autumn  Irish  session.  Unluckily
the  design  leaked  out  prematurely,  and  was  received
in  England  with  a  shout  of  indignation.  Great  Eng¬
lish  noblemen  conceived  apparently  that  they  did
Ireland  too  much  honour  already  in  consenting  to
own  part  of  her  soil.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire,  Lord
Bessborough,  Lord  Rockingham,  Lord  Fitzwilliam,
and  Fitzpatrick  of  Upper  Qssory,  entered  an  ironical
protest.  4  They  had  estates  in  England  as  well  as
in  Ireland/  they  said.  4  They  could  not  reside  on
both,  and  they  were  not  to  be  punished  for  exercising
their  natural  right  to  reside  where  they  pleased.’
In  days  when  high  offices  of  State  wrere  held  as
sinecures,  when  pluralism  was  permitted  in  the
Church,  and  duties  were  held  adequately  discharged
when  one  man  did  the  work  and  another  received
the  pay  for  it,  landlords  might  naturally  be  surprised
when  brought  to  account  so  sharply.  4 1  hear/  wrote
Lord  North,  4  that  Lord  Shelburne  and  some  others
declare  that  a  Minister  deserves  to  be  impeached
who  advises  his  majesty  to  return  such  a  bill  to
Ireland.  Lord  Mansfield  has  told  some  of  the
Cabinet  in  confidence  that  he  thinks  we  are  in  a
scrape,  from  which  he  would  advise  us  to  get  out  as

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

soon  as  possible.  If  way  is  given  to  this  measure,
we  may  expect  similar  proposals  from  all  our  colo¬
nies,  who  will  be  earnest  to  load  with  impositions
such  of  their  countrymen  as  prefer  to  reside  in  Great
Britain.’

‘  Notwithstanding  the  clamour,’  Lord  North  said
he  was  prepared  to  stand  by  his  proposition  on  cer¬
tain  conditions.  The  Absentee  Tax  was  part  of  a
general  scheme,  by  which  Townshend’s  reforms  were
to  be  made  permanent  realities,  and  the  Irish  revenue,
especially  the  hereditar}^  branch  of  it,  was  to  be
protected  from  peculation.  This  must  be  the  work
of  the  Irish  Parliament,  and  if  fairly  taken  up  and
carried  through,  would  enable  him  to  encounter
Lord  Shelburne  and  his  friends’  displeasure.

But  ‘nothing  less,’  he  said,  ‘  than  consenting  to
the  whole,  can  enable  us  to  stand  the  odium  of  as¬
senting  to  so  Anti- British  a  measure.  We  must  be
able  to  say  we  found  Ireland  400,000/.  in  debt,  and
running  annually  120,000/.  in  arrears ;  that  a  plan
was  sent  over  by  the  Irish  Parliament  which  would
provide  for  the  debt,  and  render  the  income  for  the
future  equal  to  the  establishment ;  that  the  tax  on
absentees  was  so  blended  with  the  rest  of  the  plan,
that  whatever  we  might  think  of  it  separately,  we
could  not  resist  it  without  risking  the  whole.  If  the
Irish  gentlemen  adopt  your  proposals,  I  for  one  shall
be  ready  to  meet  all  this  noise  and  clamour.’1

Lord  North  was  really  in  earnest,  but  neither  his
wishes  nor  his  courage  were  shared  by  the  rest  of
the  Cabinet.  Absenteeism  had  been  for  centuries
the  popular  grievance  of  Ireland.  Now  at  length,

1  ‘  Lord  North  to  Harcourt,  October  29,  1773.’

152

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1773.

when  it  was  about  to  be  attacked,  Ireland  seemed
scarcely  to  know  its  own  mind.  The  absentees  were
powerful  through  their  property.  Lord  Bessborough,
one  of  the  five  protesting  lords,  commanded  the
great  Ponsonby  interest.  Worried  by  letters  from
England,  perplexed  by  the  division  among  his  Irish
advisers,  and  though  himself  in  favour  of  the  tax,
without  resolution  to  stand  by  it,  Harcourt  consi¬
dered  he  would  best  consult  Lord  North’s  comfort
if  he  could  quietly  let  the  matter  drop,  and  use  the
Irish  Opposition  to  get  rid  of  it.  It  was  a  delicate
manoeuvre.  Constant  in  little  else,  Irish  politicians
never  varied  in  their  jealousy  and  suspicion  of  Eng¬
land.  Absenteeism  had  been  valuable  to  them  as  a
grievance  while  it  could  be  used  against  the  British
connection — more  useful,  perhaps,  for  this  object,
while  it  flourished  unchecked,  than  if  diminished  or
assailed  by  England  itself.  While  England  was
ready  to  offer  an  Absentee  Tax,  they  hesitated
whether  to  receive  it.  If  they  were  allowed  to  sup¬
pose  that  England  was  withdrawing  it,  their  eagerness
would  infallibly  revive.

The  Viceroy  opened  the  Parliament  on  the  26th
of  October.  His  speech  was  looked  for  with  anxiety.
Would  or  would  not  the  Absentee  Tax  be  mentioned
in  it  ?  The  speech  was  general  —  the  subject  was
not  touched  on.

4 1  admire  your  lordship’s  fortitude  in  supporting
the  tax,’  the  Viceroy  wrote  to  Lord  North, 4  and  value
your  kindness.  The  opinion  of  some  of  the  wisest
and  most  experienced  men  in  this  kingdom,  the  gene¬
ral  wishes  of  the  people  for  half  a  century  past,  and
the  exigencies  of  the  Government,  led  me  to  press  it
on  your  lordship.  This,  however,  like  every  other

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

153

mode  of  taxation,  must  naturally  irritate  those  whose
hitherto  untaxed  estates  would  principally  be  affected
by  it,  and  be  attended  with  inconveniences,  though
inadequate  to  the  advantages  it  must  produce.
Not  to  embarrass  your  lordship,  as  soon  as  I  saw
how  things  were  going,  with  the  help  of  our  friends
here,  I  have  obstructed  the  progress  of  the  tax  for
the  present.  We  mean  to  allow  it  to  be  moved  in
the  House  by  a  certain  wild  inconsistent  gentleman,1
who  has  signified  such  to  be  his  intention.  This  will
be  sufficient  to  damn  the  measure,  though  no  other
means  be  employed  against  it.’ 2

4  Other  means,’  however,  were  not  neglected.  4  The
letter  of  the  five  lords,’3  Lord  Harcourt  said,  he  could
have  used  with  effect,  if  he  had  wished  the  bill  to  pass,
to  create  exasperation  against  the  absentees.  4  Having,
or  at  least  wishing,  to  give  up  that  object,’  he  had  tried
to  spread  a  fear  that  an  Absentee  Tax  might  be  only
a  preliminary  to  a  general  Land  Tax.  And  if  he
could  only  appear  neutral,  if  he  could  only  persuade
the  House  of  Commons  that  he  had  no  wishes  save
that  they  should  decide  entirely  for  themselves,

4  such  was  their  capricious  instability,  that  he  ima¬
gined  this  much  sough t-for  boon  would  die  of  itself.’ 4

To  create  the  desired  impression  some  active  steps
were  necessary.  Though  the  measure  was  not  yet
formally  before  the  House,  it  had  been  already  touched
upon.  De  Blaquiere,  ready  for  any  emergency  in  field
or  council,  rose  to  speak  upon  it.  For  himself  he
said  he  was  a  warm  advocate  of  a  proposal  which
he  believed  would  be  the  salvation  of  Ireland,

1  The  journals  do  not  permit  the  3  The  protest  of  the  Duke  of  De¬
identification  of  this  gentleman.  vonshire,  &c.

2  1  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  No-  4  Ibid,
vember  9.’

CHAP.

III.

1773.

154

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

hook  but  bad  been  staggered  by  the  variety  of  opinions
'  which  he  had  lately  heard.  They  had  not  convinced
him;  he  adhered  to  his  own  impression;  but  he
desired  the  House  to  understand  that  the  adminis¬
tration  would  be  guided  entirely  by  the  judgment  of
the  Irish  Parliament.  They  wished  not  to  lead  but
to  follow.  The  wisdom  of  the  House  would  alone  in¬
fluence  the  Government,  and  should  determine  his  own
personal  conduct.  He  laid  his  heart  upon  their  table,
and  he  placed  himself  at  their  disposition:  4  under
the  strange  revolution  of  sentiment  which  the  subject
had  undergone,  it  should  surprise  no  one  if  he  and
his  best  friend  divided  on  different  sides  of  the
House.’

Lord  North  meanwhile  assisted  the  illusion.  He
had  replied  to  the  five  protesting  noblemen  that  the
Absentee  Tax  was  part  of  a  scheme  for  the  reorganisa¬
tion  of  Irish  finance,  and  as  such  he  intended  to  support
it.  The  answer  gave  universal  satisfaction  in  Dublin.
Here  at  any  rate  was  a  really  honest  English  minister.
4  The  generality  of  people  took  another  turn.’  The  fear
of  the  Land  Tax  might  perhaps  be  chimerical.  The
tax  after  all  was  a  desirable  one,  and  England  evidently
desired  to  carry  it.  Towards  the  end  of  the  month
the  Viceroy  began  to  fear  that  his  part  had  been
overacted,  and  that  he  might  be  unable  to  prevent  the
bill  from  being  carried  4  without  betraying  a  degree
of  inconsistency  which  might  be  prejudicial  to  his
majesty’s  affairs.’ 1  The  Viceroy  assumed  in  his  letters
that  Lord  North  agreed  with  him  in  the  desire  that
the  measure  should  be  checked.  Lord  North’s  own
expressions  show  rather  that  his  own  personal  wish  was

1  1  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  November  22.  Private.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

155

to  see  it  successful,  and  regretted  sincerely  the  Eng¬
lish  opposition.  He  complained  that  the  Irish  were
cutting  their  own  throats  by  hesitating  about  it.
4  The  lords  and  gentlemen  who  had  estates  in  Ireland
and  reside  here/  he  wrote  on  the  23rd  of  November,
4  have  held  a  meeting  and  retained  Mr.  Dunning  and
Mr.  Lee  to  plead  before  the  Privy  Council.  The
city  of  London  are  preparing  their  Recorder  for  the
same  purpose.  I  do  not  fear  the  eloquence  of  these
gentlemen  so  much  as  the  universal  prejudice  which
prevails  against  the  measure,  and  the  want  of  argu¬
ment  to  defend  it  and  reconcile  people’s  minds  to  it.’ 1

Amidst  cross  purposes  in  which  Lord  North  and
a  handful  of  the  Irish  members  were  alone  honest,
the  question  came  directly  before  the  House  of
Commons  on  the  25th  of  November.  4  The  wild
inconsistent  gentleman/  to  whom  the  conduct  of
the  measure  had  been  relegated  that  he  might  de¬
stroy  it,  moved  in  the  usual  language  of  vague
vituperation  that  it  was  expedient  that  a  tax  should
be  imposed  upon  Absentee  landowners.  This  was  at
once  rejected  as  too  indefinite.  Mr.  Oliver,  member
for  Limerick,  proposed  that  a  tax  of  two  shillings
in  the  pound  should  be  laid  on  all  net  rents  and
profits  payable  to  persons  who  did  not  reside  in
Ireland  six  months  in  the  year.  On  this  the  debate
was  described  as  4  very  warm  and  able.’  The  usual
combinations  were  broken  up.  Pery,  Flood,  Tisdall,
Bushe,  Longfield,  Dennis,  the  popular  leaders  of  the
Opposition,  were  strongly  in  favour  of  the  motion.  The
patrician  pseudo-patriots,  the  landed  magnates,  who
were  allied  with  the  English  aristocracy,  John

1  1  Lord  North  to  the  Earl  of  Harcourt,  November  23.  Most
private  and  confidential.’

CHAP.

Ill,

1773^

J

I

A

156

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

V.

1773.

Ponsonby,  Tom  Conolly,  Sir  Charles  Bingham,  and
the  members  returned  by  the  Duke  of  Leinster  spoke
on  the  side  of  the  party  who  were  looked  on  generally
as  satellites  of  the  Castle.  The  equity  of  the  tax
was  admitted  universally.  The  opposition  turned
4  on  the  impolicy  of  irritating  against  Ireland  people
of  high  rank  in  England/  the  probability  that  it
would  lower  the  value  of  land,  that  the  absentees
would  throw  their  estates  upon  the  market,  and  that
Ireland  would  be  invaded  by  flights  of  foreign  pur¬
chasers.  Lord  Harcourt’s  treacherous  suggestions
too  were  not  forgotten.  4  They  did  unanimously  and
in  the  most  violent  manner  inveigh  against  the  in¬
sidious  and  deep  designs  of  the  English  Government
to  introduce  by  these  means  a  general  Land  Tax.’

Blaquiere  spoke  again  to  protest  against  so  unjust
a  suspicion.  Flood  argued,  and  the  Attorney-General
with  him,  that  if  an  Absentee  Tax  was  adopted,  other
taxes  could  be  taken  off ;  and  that  Ireland  would  be  no
loser  by  the  sale  of  the  absentees’  estates.  4  They
would  be  sold  probably  in  small  portions  to  Irish  gen¬
tlemen  of  moderate  means,  and  produce  that  division
of  property  and  residence  of  proprietors  which  the
legislature  ought  to  desire.’  Pery,  the  Speaker,
urged,  with  great  justice,  that  the  absentees,  though
paying  ten  per  cent,  on  their  income,  would  still  con¬
tribute  less  to  the  Irish  revenue  than  the  resident
gentry  who  were  burdened  with  the  Customs  and
Excise.  At  two  in  the  morning  the  House  divided,
and  the  motion  was  lost  by  120  to  106.  ...  4  Thus,’
wrote  Lord  Harcourt,  4  the  long-expected  measure
which  for  ages  has  been  the  constant  topic  of  their
discourse,  the  warmest  object  of  their  complaints
and  wishes,  and  till  within  these  three  months  con-

LORD  HARCOUKT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

sidered  as  too  important  an  acquisition  ever  to  be
hoped  for  by  their  country,  has  been  rejected  by  a
majority  of  fourteen.’

Had  he  been  as  eager  for  the  success  of  the  attempt
as  he  avowedly  had  maneuvered  to  defeat  it,  he
could  not  have  spoken  more  bitterly  of  a  Parliament
which,  for  once,  and  with  a  small  effort,  he  might
have  persuaded  to  do  right.  4  Such  an  instance,’  he
said,  4  of  caprice  and  instability  is,  perhaps,  hardly
to  be  met  with,  and  will  mark  the  temper  of
the  gentlemen  of  this  country  which  every  Lord-
Lieutenant  has  to  encounter.’ 1

157

CHAP.

III.

"ml

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  November  26.’

158

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

I

SECTION  III.

book  An  act  which  would  have  induced  the  London  Com-

_ -  panies  to  part  with  their  estates,  and  have  either  com-

17  pelled  the  absentees  to  return  or  have  led  them  to  the
same  alternative,  would,  on  many  accounts,  have  been
of  priceless  service.  Not  the  least  so,  that  as  Catholics
were  still  unable  to  hold  real  property  in  Ireland,  it
would  have  recruited  the  ranks  of  the  Protestant
gentry  with  new  and  wholesome  elements.  The
House  of  Commons  were  not  happy  over  their  work,
and  many  a  gentleman  who  had  voted  in  the  majority
would  have  gladly  seen  the  measure  passed  in  spite
of  him.  The  members  re-assembled  the  next  day  in
ill-temper  with  themselves  and  one  another.  Mr.
O’Neil,  of  Shane  Castle,  Lord  O’Neil  afterwards,
though  he  had  been  an  active  opponent,  had  now
changed  his  mind,  and  moved  that  the  question  should
be  reconsidered.  At  once  4  a  frenzy  ’  in  favour  of  a
proposal  which  had  been  maturely  debated  and  de¬
liberately  rejected  4  seemed  suddenly  to  possess  every
member  present.’  4  Mr.  Flood  was  violent  and  able
in  a  degree  surpassing  everything  which  he  had
uttered  before.  It  appeared  as  if  he  meant  to  crush
to  destruction  the  Duke  of  Leinster’s  party  and  Mr.
Ponsonby,  against  whom  he  made  such  a  personal
attack  as  the  poor  gentleman  would  never  recover.’ 1

4  With  a  satisfaction  that  he  could  ill  express,’  the

1  (  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  November  27.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

159

Viceroy  was  able  to  assure  Lord  North  three  days
later  that  all  was  again  over,  and  this  time  finally.
He  had  discovered,  or  thought  he  had  discovered,
that  sinister  influences  were  at  work  under  the  sur¬
face,  and  that  the  opposition  to  the  bill  and  the  effort
to  reinstate  it  was  due  rather  to  political  faction
than  to  any  care  for  Ireland’s  welfare.  There  was
again  a  nine  hours’  debate,  and  at  the  end  of  it  the
motion  for  re-consideration  was  rejected  without  a
division.

4  We  last  night,’  reported  the  Viceroy  on  the
30th,  4  defeated  the  boldest  and  deepest  attack  made
on  the  administration  of  both  countries,  and  con¬
ducted,  surprised  as  you  may  be  to  hear  it,  by  his
majesty’s  Attorney-General.  We  laboured  with  all
our  might  to  save  appearances  in  the  conduct  of  those
faithful  friends  of  the  administration  who  were  obliged
to  adopt  to  a  certain  extent  the  other  side  of  the
question.’  1

Most  brilliant  and  never  sufficiently  to  be  admired
dexterity.  A  difficulty  had  been  got  rid  of  which
might  have  raised  differences  between  the  cabinet

o

and  its  English  friends,  while  the  Irish  Government
had  gained  the  credit  of  seeming  to  favour  an  im¬
portant  popular  measure.  Lord  North’s  congratu¬
lations  were  warmer  than  might  have  been  ex¬
pected  from  his  previous  language.  Ireland’s  great
measure  had  been  thrown  out  by  Ireland  herself,
and  still  more  satisfactorily,  4  without  any  pro¬
mises  of  peerage  or  pension.’  4  Your  Excellency’s
campaign/  said  the  premier,  4  has  been  most  glorious
and  successful.  The  Irish  Government  will  now  be

CHAP.

1773,

1  1  To  Lord  North,  November  30.’

160

i

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

y.

^1773?

carried  on  with  credit  and  tranquillity.  His  majesty
is  extremely  pleased  with  you.’ 1

His  majesty  probably  knew  as  much  about  the
matter  as  his  ministers  told  him.  The  secret  history,
if  any  one  cares  to  look  further  into  so  dirty  a  busi¬
ness,  appears  to  have  been  this.  Lord  Rockingham
had  supposed  that  Lord  North  really  desired  the
Absentee  Tax  to  be  carried,  and  had,  therefore,
entirely  irrespective  of  whether  the  measure  was  good
or  bad,  advised  his  friends  to  oppose  it.  The
truth  had  come  to  be  suspected  in  Ireland,  and  a
change  of  front  had  been  attempted  too  late.  ‘  If,’
wrote  the  Viceroy,  4  the  marquis  and  his  friends  pre¬
tend  to  suppose  you  are  greatly  hurt  and  disappointed
at  what  has  happened  in  Ireland,  they  ought  not  to
be  undeceived.  The  more  that  idea  prevails,  the
greater  credit  and  honour  will  be  derived  from  it,  and
the  shame  and  disgrace  will  fall  to  the  share  of  others.
On  the  whole,  the  late  event,  which  could  have  no
other  object  than  throwing  everything  into  confusion,
has  proved  fortunate.  It  has  strengthened  the
hands  of  the  administration,  and  has  afforded  matter
of  caution  against  the  machinations  of  restless  and
ambitious  men.’ 2

Successes  dishonestly  gained  seldom  come  to
much.  Political  secrets  known  to  many  are  never
secrets  long,  and  the  Viceroy’s  expected  tranquillity  for
the  rest  of  the  session  proved  an  illusion.  Once  more
the  House  of  Commons  was  set  vibrating  on  the  vital
question  of  the  initiation  of  money  bills.  Blackstone
had  just  commended  the  jealousy  with  which  the  Eng¬
lish  Commons  maintained  their  privileges  when  a  grant

1  1  Lord  North  to  Lord  Harcourt,  2  1  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  to  Lord
December  9.’  North,  December  15/

>1

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

was  made  to  the  Sovereign.  That  Ireland  should  be
denied  the  same  honour  was  a  badge  of  dependency;
and  the  meddling  of  the  English  Council  with  the  Bills
of  Supply  was  intended  and  was  felt  as  a  perpetual
reminder  of  their  chains.  The  heads  of  the  three
Supply  Bills  of  1773  had  been  voted  and  sent  to  Eng¬
land  as  usual.  The  substance  was  satisfactory,  for
on  the  loss  of  the  Absentee  Act  the  Customs  duties
had  been  raised  to  cover  the  deficit.  But  to  maintain
the  English  assumption  a  few  verbal  changes  were
nevertheless  again  introduced  by  the  English  Council,
and,  either  by  accident  or  mere  ill-judged  purpose,
one  of  these  changes  was  in  the  tea  duties.  Al¬
though  the  chests  had  not  yet  been  emptied  into
Boston  Harbour,  the  ominous  word  acted  as  a  trumpet
call  to  patriotism.  Here  at  least  there  was  no  un¬
certainty  as  to  England’s  real  intentions.  The
familiar  scenes  were  again  enacted.  Two  of  the  Bills
were  unanimously  rejected.  The  Yiceroy  found
that  it  was  impossible  to  stem  the  torrent.  The
Duke  of  Leinster,  to  recover  his  credit  for  opposing
the  Absentee  Tax,  would  have  rested  on  the  negative
vote  and  given  no  supplies  at  all.  The  majority,
less  extreme  in  their  violence,  drew  the  heads  a
second  time,  and  sent  them  over.  But,  4  soured  and
inflamed  ’  as  the  House  was,  the  Viceroy  had  to
warn  the  Cabinet  that  if  altered  again  they  would
certainly  again  be  thrown  out,  and  would  not  after¬
wards  pass  in  any  shape  whatever.1

This  was  not  all.  The  sour  humour  had  other
and  juster  causes  which  Harcourt  was  too  ignorant
to  apprehend.  Lord  Townshend  understood  Ire-

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  to  Lord  Rochford,  December  27.’

VOL.  II.  M

161

CHAP.

III.

> - - - -

In  n  Q

77o.

162

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1773.

land’s  case.  He  recognised  her  wrongs.  He  had
studied  her  disorders,  and  he  had  thought  about
them  with  serious  alarm.  His  letters  contain  the
serious  reflections  of  a  high-minded  and  far-seeing
statesman.  Harcourt  could  look  no  further  than  the
problem  of  the  moment,  the  immediate  measures
necessary  to  rig  an  adequate  majority.

While  bringing  up  for  transmission  the  heads  of  the
new  Money  Bill  the  Commons  presented  a  second
complaint,  which  would  not  have  been  heard  of  had
the  Cabinet  listened  to  Townshend.  From  the  first
week  of  the  session  committees  had  been  enquiring
into  the  meaning  of  the  torrent  of  emigration  which
was  still  streaming  out  of  Ulster  to  the  American
plantations.  They  had  excused  and  covered  the
landlords,  but  England  as  well  as  the  landlords  was
to  blame.  The  linen  trade  had  alarmingly  decreased.
The  best  artisans  were  going  now  because  there  was
no  work  for  them,  and  one  cause  at  least  was  the  arti¬
ficial  encouragement  given  to  rival  English  manufac¬
tures,  and  the  duties  now  levied  on  the  coarse  kinds
of  Irish  linen  fabrics  in  direct  breach  of  the  engage¬
ment  for  which  their  woollen  weaving  had  been
sacrificed.

With  a  temperate  good  sense,  which  shows  that
the  remonstrance  had  been  drawn  by  rational  men
instead  of  by  tempestuous  orators,  the  House  of  Com¬
mons,  by  the  hands  of  the  Speaker,  presented  their
case  to  the  Viceroy.

They  had  been  confined  by  law  to  the  manufac¬
ture  of  flax  and  hemp.  They  had  submitted  to  their
condition,  and  had  manufactured  those  articles  to
such  good  purpose  that  at  one  time  they  had  supplied
sails  for  the  whole  British  navy.  Their  English  rivals

LORD  IIARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLA^UIERE.

163

had  now  crippled  them  by  laying  a  disabling  duty  on
their  sail  cloths,  in  the  hope  of  taking  the  trade  out
of  their  hands;  but  they  had  injured  Ireland  without
benefiting  themselves.  The  British  market  was  now
supplied  from  Holland,  and  Germany,  and  Kussia,
while  to  the  Empire  the  result  was  only  the  ruin  of
Ulster  and  the  flight  of  the  Protestant  population  to
America.  ‘  If,’  they  said  in  modest  irony,  4  Great
Britain  reaped  the  fruits  of  this  policy,  the  commons
of  Ireland  would  behold  it  without  repining  and  sub¬
mit  to  it  without  complaining  ;  but  it  aggravates  the
sense  of  their  misfortunes  to  see  the  rivals,  if  not  the
enemies,  of  Great  Britain  in  the  undisturbed  posses¬
sion  of  those  advantages  to  which  they  think  them¬
selves  entitled  on  every  principle  of  policy  and  justice.
It  is  the  expectation  of  being  restored  to  some,  if  not  all,
of  those  rights,  and  that  alone,  which  can  justify  to  the
people  the  conduct  of  their  representatives  in  laying
additional  burdens  on  them.  No  time  can  be  more
favourable  to  give  effect  to  their  wishes  than  the
present,  when  the  public  councils  are  directed  by  a
Minister  who  has  the  courage  to  pursue  the  common
interest  of  the  British  Empire.’1

One  more  point  of  difference  arose  on  another  se¬
rious  question.  The  whole  country,  the  north  espe¬
cially,  was  still  agitated.  Taxes,  hitherto  irregu¬
larly  paid,  were  now  being  collected  more  reso¬
lutely  by  the  help  of  the  increased  military  force ;  the
soldiers  were  doing  the  duty  of  police,  and  when
work  of  this  kind  is  done  by  soldiers  it  is  done  always
roughly  and  sometimes  unjustly.  Ireland  had  many
times  petitioned  for  an  extension  thither  of  the  Habeas

CHAP.

hi.

1774.

1  Commons’  Journals ,  Ireland,  December  25,  1773.

m2

164

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Corpus  Act.  Many  times  tlie  heads  of  such  a  Bill
^ '  had  been  transmitted,  but  had  never  been  returned.

17  '4‘  The  Habeas  Corpus  Act  4  was  held  irreconcilable  with
the  idea  of  a  dependency,’  and  notice  had  been  at
last  sent  to  the  Irish  Council  4  to  transmit  the  Bill  no
more.’ 1  Under  the  pressure  of  outcries  which  had
risen  perhaps  out  of  the  Hearts  of  Steel  movement
and  the  measures  taken  to  repress  it,  the  House  of
Commons  made  their  demand  once  more,  and  under
the  circumstances  the  Viceroy  threw  the  responsibility
of  the  refusal  on  England.

On  the  great  Money  Bill  question  the  Cabinet  had
this  time  to  yield.  Where  feeling  ran  so  strong,  a
majority  was  too  expensive  an  article  to  be  purchased,
except  occasionally.  Compliance  even  with  Lord
Shannon  would  not  secure  support  in  these  excep¬
tional  cases.  The  trade  complaints  were  doggedly
dismissed,  to  add  to  the  pile  of  wrong  which  was
fast  rising  to  a  height  when  England  would  be  com¬
pelled  to  attend  to  it.  The  Habeas  Corpus  Act  was
refused,  as  Harcourt  knew  it  must  be,  on  grounds
which  throw  light  on  the  practical  working  of  the  Irish
Constitution.  It  was  held  4  a  solecism  in  politics  to
make  the  constitution  of  a  colony  the  same  as  that  of
the  mother  country.’  4  The  Catholics  must  either  be
admitted  to  the  protection  of  it  or  be  excluded.’  If
they  were  admitted  the  peace  of  the  country  could
not  be  secured.  If  they  were  excluded  four-fifths  of
the  people  would  be  deprived  of  their  constitutional
rights.  A  power  of  suspension  must  exist  some¬
where  to  provide  for  emergencies.  In  England  that

1  *  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  Rochford,  March  6, 1774.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

165

power  was  in  the  Parliament.  In  Ireland,  where  Par¬
liament  met  only  in  alternate  years,  it  must  vest  in
Government ;  and  if  the  4  innovation  ’  was  sanctioned
and  the  Act  conceded,  the  Government  would  be  in
continual  danger,  either  of  provoking  the  Catholics
by  suspending  it  or  of  provoking  the  Protestants  by
refusing  to  suspend  it.1

The  Commons  acquiesced,  but  finding  their
other  grievances  unheeded,  acquiesced  with  despond¬
ing  disapproval.  The  usual  thanks  were  given  to
the  Viceroy  at  the  end  of  the  session,  not  however
without  the  suggestion  of  an  amendment,  which,
though  it  was  rejected,  expressed  the  thoughts  of
the  better  part  of  the  country.

4  But  although  in  compliance  with  the  modern  prac¬
tice  of  Parliament,  and  from  a  veneration  of  your
Excellency’s  private  virtues,  which  we  sincerely
respect,  we  thus  address  your  Excellency  at  the  close
of  this  session,  yet  we  cannot  but  recollect  with  the
deepest  concern  that  under  your  Excellency’s  admi¬
nistration  taxes  have  been  imposed  on  our  constituents
in  this  time  of  profound  peace  more  grievous  in  their
nature,  and  greater  in  their  extent,  than  have  been
required  or  granted  in  this  country  for  a  century
past,  merely  to  support  overloaded  and,  in  many
parts,  unnecessary  establishments,  and  particularly  an
odious  and  enormous  list  of  absentee  pensions  and
places  ;  so  that  this  kingdom  is  now  not  only  incapaci¬
tated  from  contributing  to  the  support  of  a  war,  but
even  debilitated  in  peace  by  the  impoverishment  and
consequent  emigration  of  our  people.  A  system  of

CHAP.

HI.

T77L

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Harcourt  to  the  Earl  of  Rochford,  March  6/  S.P.O.

166

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  taxes  the  more  intolerable  to  a  free  people  from  the
— ^ — ✓  unconstitutional  mode  of  levying  them  with  the  assist-
177i*  ance  of  the  military  power,  first  attempted  and
finally  effected  in  this  kingdom  under  your  Excel¬
lency’s  administration.’ 1

1  Commons'  Journals ,  June  1,  1774.

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

167

SECTION  IY.

The  student  of  the  Parliamentary  records  of  Ire¬
land  still  discovers  two  parties  there — a  party  of
noisy,  self-called  patriots,  catching  at  imaginary
wrongs  for  factious  or  interested  purposes  ;  and  a
party  of  reasonable  men,  in  each  session  unfortunately
growing  smaller,  who  understood  what  was  amiss
with  their  country,  and  were  trying  in  vain  to  make
the  Government  listen  to  them.  It  was  not  yet  too
late  to  stem  the  current  of  disaffection  could  England
have  been  persuaded  to  act  fairly.  Lord  North  and
Lord  Harcourt  knew  that  the  Absentee  Bill  ought  to
have  been  passed.  They  could  have  passed  it  with
ordinary  courage.  Every  English  administration
was  aware  of  the  iniquity  of  the  Pension  List.  Hardly
any  single  Minister  would  have  defended  in  private
the  prostitution  of  Irish  patronage  to  buy  corrupt  sup¬
port  in  the  House  of  Commons.  Could  Cabinets  have
retained  their  conscience  in  their  collective  capacity,
and  determined  resolutely  to  do  what  was  right  in
Ireland  and  nothing  else,  they  would  have  met  even
now  with  few  serious  difficulties.  They  might  have
gone  for  a  year  or  two  without  the  supplies  ;  but  there
yet  remained  in  the  Parliament  there  a  knot  of  upright
men  who  would  have  stood  by  any  Government
that  was  acting  resolutely  on  true  principles.  Lord
Townshend  would  have  won  his  battle  without  bri¬
bery,  and  his  reforms  would  have  remained,  had  he
been  allowed  to  commence  with  restoring  Free  Trade.

The  worst  effect  of  a  vicious  system  is  the  difficulty

CHAP.

m.

Hth.

168

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

1774.

of  leaving  it,  the  difficulty  of  seeing  that  it  ought  to
be  left.  English  statesmen  were  allowing  much
which  they  knew  to  be  wrong  in  Ireland.  The  worst
wrongs  of  all — the  restrictions  on  industry — had  con¬
tinued  so  long  that  their  character  could  no  longer
be  recognised.  Both  sections  in  the  Parliament  were
giving  trouble — English  Cabinets  thought  unreason¬
able  trouble — and  they  did  not  care  to  look  closely  at
the  grounds  of  complaint.  The  better  sort  of  men  could
be  silenced  only  by  abolishing  commercial  abuses  and
stirring  hornets’  nests  at  Bristol  and  Manchester.  It
was  easier  a  great  deal  to  lead  patriots  by  the  nose  by
the  old  methods  which  had  never  been  known  to  fail.
Not  therefore  to  making  crooked  things  straight,  but,
as  usual,  to  the  better  organising  a  majority,  the
labour  of  the  Castle  was  addressed  in  the  recess.

Hely  Hutchinson  had  continued  faithful  since
Townshend  had  gained  him  over,  but  he  was  still  fed
of  4  the  chameleon’s  dish.’  His  wife  was  not  yet
ennobled.  He  himself  was  Prime  Sergeant  and
Privy  Councillor,  and  had  obtained  besides  a  sinecure
of  1,800£.  a  year,  but  his  sons  were  unprovided  for,
and  his  claims  were  still  waiting  for  adjustment.  Mr.
Flood  had  shown  his  capacity  of  being  mischievous,
but  he  had  let  the  Viceroy  know  that  he  was  willing
to  come  to  terms.  He  had  supported  the  Govern¬
ment  on  the  whole  during  the  last  session,  and  Har-
court  had  been  looking  out  anxiously  for  means  of
providing  for  him.1  There  were  unusual  difficulties,
for  Flood  was  not  at  the  bar,  and  the  lines  of  the
professions  were  therefore  closed  against  him.  In  June

1  ‘  Among  the  many  embarrass-  proper  provision  for  Mr.  Flood.’ —
ments  of  my  situation,  I  have  found  (  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  Rochford,
none  more  difficult  than  to  make  a  June  19,  1774.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

169

1774  Dr.  Andrews,  the  Provost  of  Trinity  College,
died.  By  statute  the  office  could  be  held  only  by  an
ecclesiastic.  But  a  dispensing  power  lay  in  the  Crown.
The  Viceroy  saw  in  the  vacancy  an  opportunity  of
satisfying  one  at  least  of  the  expectants.  From  a
disinterested  desire,  as  he  professed,  to  help  the  Vice¬
roy  out  of  his  embarrassment  with  Flood,  Hely  Hut¬
chinson,  who  had  been  himself  educated  at  Trinity,
intimated  that  if  he  might  have  the  Provost  ship  he
would  retire  from  the  bar,  and  would  place  the  offices
which  he  already  held  at  the  Viceroy’s  disposition.
He  would  lose  a  professional  income  of  nearly
5,000/.  a  year,  ‘  but  his  taste  for  literature  and  the  pos¬
session  of  a  considerable  estate  in  the  country  disposed
him  to  a  sacrifice/  He  was  Prime  Sergeant,  and  he
was  Alnager  besides,1  with  a  salary  for  doing  no¬
thing  of  1,800/.  a  year.  Both  these  places  would  be
vacated.  Lord  Shannon  might  be  gratified  by  mak¬
ing  his  friend  Mr.  Dennis  Prime  Sergeant,  Mr.  Flood
might  be  Alnager  with  a  thousand  a  year  ;  the  Pro¬
vost’s  place  being  worth  but  two  thousand,  Hely
Hutchinson  might  himself  reasonably  keep  the  other
eight  hundred,  and  his  two  sons,  for  whom  he  had
been  anxious  before,  being  now  boys  of  sixteen  and
seventeen,  might  be  appointed  to  the  office  of  ‘  Search¬
ers  of  the  Port  of  Strangford,  now  vacant,  with  a  salary
of  a  thousand  a  year.’  By  this  little  arrangement  the
Viceroy  would  be  able  to  gratify  three  considerable
members  of  the  House  of  Commons,  please  Lord
Shannon,  and  greatly  strengthen  the  Administration.2

The  Viceroy  was  well  contented.  He  discovered

1  An  officer  whose  duty,  dis-  2  ‘  Lord  ITarcourt  to  Lord  Rocli-
chargedbv  deputy,  was  to  measure  ford,  June  19,  1774/
cloth  by  the  ell,  and  fix  the  assize.

CHAP.

III.

Tttl

170

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  that  4  the  situation  of  a  university  in  the  metropolis

_ ,  required  more  experience  and  knowledge  of  the  world

than  was  to  be  found  in  a  clergyman.’  The  parties
interested  were  communicated  with,  and  all  were
satisfied  except  one,  the  person  in  whose  behalf  the
changes  were  professedly  to  be  made.  Flood  could
not  conceal  his  indignant  disappointment.  That  he,
the  first  orator  in  Ireland,  who  had  blazed  for  ten
years  as  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude,  should  be  put
off  with  the  place  of  Alnager,  shorn  too  of  half  its
profits,  approached  to  insult.  Lord  Frederick
Campbell  had  trifled  with  him.  De  Blaquiere  had
promised  him,  he  said,  4  the  first  great  office  that
should  be  vacant,’  and  was  now  trifling  with  him  also.
He,  too,  had  set  his  heart  on  the  Provostship  of
Trinity.  He,  not  Hutchinson,  ought  to  have  it.  Har-
court,  to  whom  he  poured  out  his  complaints,  pointed
out  to  him  that  Hutchinson  was  resigning  two  im¬
portant  offices  in  exchange.

4  And  have  I  resigned  nothing  ?’  whimpered  Flood
with  pretty  naivete .  4  Have  not  I  made  as  great  or  a

greater  sacrifice,  my  popularity  and  reputation,  which  I
have  risked  in  support  of  a  Government  that  now  treats
me  with  contempt  ?  ’  He  flung  away  in  a  rage.  He
would  have  no  more  to  do  with  the  Castle,  he  said.
His  treatment  would  be  a  lesson  to  everybody.  But
for  him  Lord  Harcourt  would  have  been  as  badly
treated  as  his  predecessors.  4  For  himself,  he  was  now
reduced  to  a  most  humiliating  and  perplexed  state,
either  to  become  a  humble  suppliant  for  favour,  or
give  up  all  hopes  of  it,  and  submit  tamely  to  every
species  of  ridicule  and  contempt.’

For  a  politician  to  sell  his  services  was  not  con¬
temptible,  it  appeared,  but  to  sell  them  and  be

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

171

cheated  of  the  price.  The  Provost  ship  was  a  situa¬
tion  for  life.  The  object  was  to  find  something  for
Flood  which  could  be  taken  away  if  he  fell  off,
something  which  would  he  a  security  for  his  good
behaviour.  4  To  have  made  Mr.  Flood  Provost  of
Trinity/  Harcourt  said,  4  would  have  placed  him  in  a
station  of  independence  that  might  have  made  him
extremely  troublesome  and  formidable/  Prudence,
however,  required  that  he  should  not  be  flung  back
into  opposition.  The  Viceroy  enquired  what  his  own
views  were.  Flood  intimated,  as  a  matter  of  favour,
that  he  would  consent  to  accept  a  Vice-Treasurership.
The  three  Vice-Treasurerships  were  sinecure  offices
with  salaries  attached  .to  them  of  3,500/.  a  year.
They  were  reserved  in  general  for  special  favourites;
unfortunately,  for  persons  out  of  Ireland.  Harcourt
mildly  remonstrated.  Mr.  Flood  might  be  contented
to  begin  at  a  lower  level.  Finding  Flood  immovable,
he  consented  at  last  to  recommend  him.  4  It  may  be
better,’  he  said,  in  reporting  the  conversation,  4  to
secure  Mr.  Flood  almost  at  any  expense  than  risk  an
opposition  which  may  be  most  dangerous  and  mis¬
chievous.’  1

Lord  North  would  have  been  willing,  but  he  had
England  to  care  for  as  well  as  Ireland.  4  My  ob¬
jection,’  he  replied,  4  to  Mr.  Flood’s  having  a  Vice-
Treasurership  is  that  I  fear  much  blame  here,  and
no  small  difficulty  in  carrying  on  the  King’s  busi¬
ness,  if  I  consent  to  part  with  the  disposal  of  these
offices,  which  have  been  so  long  and  uniformly  be¬
stowed  on  members  of  the  British  Parliament.  I
acknowledge  the  Irish  members  had  a  right  to

CHAP.

hi.

mT

1  ‘  To  Lord  North,  Juljr  8.  Most  private  and  confidential.’

172

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  complain  when  two  gentlemen  who  had  no  permanent

_ _ ✓  connection  with  Ireland  were  appointed  Chancellor

17 of  the  Exchequer  and  Master  of  the  Rolls  for  life,
but  .  .  .  /  In  short,  Harcourt  was  not  to  think

of  it.  The  Cabinet  had  great  respect  for  Mr.  Flood,
but  it  could  not  be  done.1

As  a  possible  alternative  Lord  North  suggested
reviving  the  old  office  of  President  of  Munster,  with
a  salary  of  2,000/.  a  year.  Harcourt  objected  that
if  the  Presidency  was  made  a  reality  it  would  give
Flood  too  much  consequence.  To  revive  it  as  a
sinecure  would  be  a  job  too  gross  even  for  Ireland.
It  would  be  less  objectionable  to  raise  the  salary  of
some  insignificant  place  already  subsisting,  or  to  give
Flood  a  handsome  pension.  Mr.  Flood  denounced  the
pension  system  generally,  but  would  doubtless  accept
one  for  himself.  A  provision  of  one  kind  or  another
must  be  made  for  him  4  on  mere  grounds  of  economy.’
4  Was  it  worth  while  to  hazard  the  stamp  and  other
duties  so  lately  effected,  and  put  an  able  and  active
man  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  opposition  to  save  a
thousand  a  year  for  one  life,  and  that  perhaps  not  a
good  one,  besides  the  other  mischief  which  a  despe¬
rate  and  disappointed  man  might  devise  ? 7  2

After  much  deliberation,  the  Cabinet  at  length
consented  that  Flood  should  have  his  Vice- Treasurer-
ship  ;  but  now  a  difficulty  rose  with  Flood  himself.
The  Vice-Treasurership  was  held  4  during  pleasure.’
Flood  said  he  made  no  doubt  of  Lord  Harcourt’s  good
disposition  towards  him,  but  Harcourt  could  not
answer  for  his  successor,  who  might  dismiss  him  with¬
out  ceremony  from  an  office  of  precarious  tenure.  He

1  1  Lord  North  to  the  Earl  of  Harcourt,  July  23.’

2  ‘  To  Lord  North,  September  3.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

173

had  been  promised  4  the  first  great  employment  that
should  be  vacant.  He  ought  to  have  succeeded  to
the  Provostship  or  to  some  situation  which  would  have
placed  him  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  great  officers
of  the  Crown.’

The  Viceroy  said  that  Flood  had  himself  named
the  Vice-Treasurership.  He  had  done  his  best  to
oblige  him,  but  he  would  go  no  further.  Flood  must
accept  what  was  now  offered,  4  or  the  Castle  would
hold  itself  discharged  of  its  promises.’

4  When  he  saw  that  his  arts  and  his  arguments  made
no  impression,  he  said  that  out  of  his  consideration  for
Lord  Harcourt  he  would  waive  his  claims  to  a  more
desirable  situation.’  He  would  accept  a  Vice-Trea¬
surership,  provided  it  involved  no  charge  on  Ireland  ;
provided,  i.e.,  his  salary  was  paid  from  the  English
Exchequer.

This  was  too  much.  The  Viceroy  said  he  could
not  ask  Lord  North  to  relieve  the  Establishment  at
the  expense  of  Great  Britain.  The  negotiation  was
suspended.  4  Mr.  Flood  had  so  high  an  opinion  of
his  Parliamentary  abilities  that  he  thought  England
must  submit  to  anything.’  The  vacant  office  was
hung  up  as  a  prize  for  good  behaviour  to  keep  the
patriots  in  order  for  the  next  year.  The  Viceroy
particularly  begged  that  it  might  not  be  given  away,

4  because  it  would  deprive  him  of  the  means  of  making
arrangements  that  would  remove  any  material  diffi¬
culty  that  could  arise  in  the  ensuing  session  of  Par¬
liament.’  1

Months  now  were  allowed  to  pass,  Flood  believing
that  as  the  time  of  danger  approached  nearer  the  Vice-

CHAP.

H.

~1774~

1  (  To  Lord  North,  September  3.’

174

BOOK

V.

"r775~

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

roy  would  give  way.  It  would  have  been  a  proud  posi¬
tion  for  him  could  he  have  told  his  countrymen  that
he  had  compelled  England  to  engage  his  services
without  entailing  fresh  burdens  upon  them.  Finding
the  Castle  gave  no  sign,  he  reopened  the  correspond¬
ence  himself,  and  intimated  his  willingness  to
accept.  He  did  not  want  money,  but  he  was  sensi¬
tive  of  ridicule.  He  had  offended  his  patriot  allies
by  the  course  which  he  had  already  taken.  It  must
not  be  said  of  him  that  he  had  been  duped  out  of  his
reward.  He  consented  to  take  his  place  when  Par¬
liament  next  opened  among  the  avowed  1  servants  of
the  Crown.’  He  had  been  so  late  in  yielding,  how¬
ever,  that  the  session  had  begun  before  the  King’s
letter  arrived  confirming  his  appointment,  and  during
the  first  few  days  he  was  obliged  to  be  absent  from
his  seat.  4  Till  the  letter  arrives,  in  fact,’  Lord  Har-
court  said,  4  his  situation  is  awkward  enough.  Since
I  was  born  I  never  had  to  deal  with  so  difficult  a  man,
owing  principally  to  his  high-strained  ideas  of  his
own  influence  and  popularity.’ 1

As  the  dispute  with  America  threatened  to  take  a
violent  form,  it  was  watched  in  Ireland  with  increas¬
ing  eagerness,  and  when  the  attempt  at  coercion  was
followed  by  the  news  of  Lexington  and  Bunker’s  Hill,
domestic  differences  were  suspended  in  the  passionate
anxiety  with  which  the  evolution  of  the  drama  was
observed.  The  question  in  both  countries  was  sub¬
stantially  the  same — whether  the  Mother  Country
had  a  right  to  utilise  her  dependencies  for  her  own
interests  irrespective  of  their  own  consent  ?  The
wrongs  which  America  had  taken  arms  to  redress

1  1  Harcourt  to  North,  October  9,  1775/

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

175

were  trivial  compared  to  the  wrongs  of  Ireland.  If
America  obtained  free  trade  and  self-government,
the  Irish  might  claim  and  hope  for  the  same  privi¬
leges,  and  the  chains  once  broken  in  one  colony  might
be  broken  in  all.  The  Northern  Presbyterians  looked
on  the  revolt  as  the  revival  of  the  conflict  of  the  pre¬
ceding  century.  They  were  personally  interested
in  a  struggle  in  which  so  many  of  their  own  kindred
were  engaged  ;  while  the  Americans,  alive  to  the  value
of  support  and  sympathy  so  near  at  home,  had  made
untiring  efforts  to  enlist  Ireland  in  support  of  their
cause.

The  Ireland  of  which  the  Americans  were  thinking,
the  Ireland  which  alone  as  yet  had  a  political  exist¬
ence,  was  Protestant  Ireland.  The  Catholics  might
have  looked  on  with  indifference,  or  perhaps  with
pleasure,  at  a  contest  in  which  their  enemies  were
destroying  one  another.  Of  them  few  or  none  had
as  yet  sought  a  Transatlantic  home — when  they  emi¬
grated  it  was  to  France,  or  Austria,  or  Spain.  Ame¬
rica  was  the  creation  of  Nonconformity,  and  was  as
yet  the  chosen  home  of  principles  which  Catholics
held  most  in  abhorrence.  To  them  therefore  it  mat¬
tered  little  in  itself  whether  England  got  the  better  of
her  colonies  or  the  colonies  of  England.  But  the
friends  of  the  Americans  in  Ireland  were  their  own
worst  foes,  who,  but  for  England,  would  have  put  the
penal  laws  in  force  against  them.  In  the  last  war,  in
which  their  sympathies  might  have  naturally  been
enlisted,  part  of  the  Catholic  body  had  made  de¬
monstrations  of  loyalty.  The  present  was  a  fairer
opportunity  of  earning  favour  at  the  Protestants’
expense,  perhaps  emancipation  from  their  chains.  The
Catholic  gentry  and  clergy  came  forward  with  an

CHAP.

III.

T7757

176

BOOK

V.

1775T

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

offer  of  a  subscription,  and,  when  their  money  was  de¬
clined,  with  the  earnest  desire  of  ‘  two  million  faithful
Irish  hearts, ’to  be  alio  wed  a  chance  of  showing  their  de¬
votion  to  their  Sovereign  by  taking  arms  in  his  cause.1

‘  The  allegiance  of  the  Papists,’  De  Blaquiere  said,
added  nothing  to  the  strength  of  Government  in  Par¬
liament.  The  Catholic  interest  could  command

1  The  petition  of  the  Catholics  in
Ireland  in  1775  has,  I  believe,  never
been  published.  When  I  mentioned
it  in  America,  I  was  met  by  a  flat
denial  that  any  such  petition  had
been  presented.  I  therefore  give
this  most  curious  and  important
document  entire.  It  is  addressed
to  Sir  John  de  Blaquiere  : —

*  Sir,— We  flatter  ourselves  that
the  occasion,  the  motives,  and
your  goodness  will  engage  you  to
excuse  this  trouble.  As  we  are  in¬
formed  that  an  intended  subscrip¬
tion  among  us,  his  majesty’s  affec¬
tionate,  loyal,  and  dutiful  Roman
Catholic  subjects  of  his  kingdom  of
Ireland,  to  raise  a  fund  among  our¬
selves  for  encouraging  recruits  to
enlist  for  H.M.’s  service,  was  not
judged  necessary  by  Government,
yet  being  desirous  to  give  every
assistance  in  our  power,  and  to  give
every  proof  of  our  sincere,  affec¬
tionate,  and  grateful  attachment  to
the  most  sacred  person  and  govern¬
ment  of  the  best  of  kings,  and
justly  abhorring  the  unnatural  re¬
bellion  which  has  latelv  broken  out

%/

among  some  of  his  American  sub¬
jects  against  H.M.’s  most  sacred
person  and  government,  impressed
with  a  deep  sense  of  our  duty  and
allegiance,  and  feeling  ourselves
loudly  called  on  by  every  motive
and  by  every  tie  that  can  affect  the
hearts  of  good  and  loyal  subjects,
we  take  the  liberty  to  make  on
this  interesting  occasion  a  humble

tender  of  our  duty,  zeal,  and  affec¬
tion  to  our  good  and  gracious  King ;
and  we  humbly  presume  to  lay  at
his  feet  two  millions  of  loyal,  faith¬
ful,  and  affectionate  hearts  and
hands,  unarmed  indeed,  but  zealous,
ready  and  desirous  to  exert  them¬
selves  strenuously  in  defence  of
H.M.’s  most  sacred  person  and  go¬
vernment  against  all  his  enemies,
of  what  denomination  soever,  in
any  part  of  the  world  where  they
may  be ;  and  to  exert  in  an  active
manner  a  loyalty  and  an  obedience
which  hitherto,  though  always
unanimous  and  unalterable,  from
our  particular  circumstances  and
situation  hare  been  restrained  with¬
in  passive  and  inactive  bounds — a
loyalty  which  we  may  justly  say
is,  and  always  was,  as  the  dial  to
the  sun,  true  though  not  shone
upon.  And  we  take  the  liberty  to
request,  sir,  that  you  will  be  so
good  as  to  represent  to  his  Excel¬
lency  our  Lord  Lieutenant  these
our  dispositions  and  sentiments,
which  we  well  know  to  be  those
also  of  all  our  fellow  Roman  Ca¬
tholic  Irish  subjects,  with  an
humble  request  to  his  Excellency
that,  if  he  think  proper,  he  may  be
so  good  as  to  lay  them  before  his
majesty.

‘  Fingall,  Trimleston,  J.  Barne-
wall,  B.  Barnewall,  &c.  &c.  121.’

Enclosed  in  a  letter  from  Har-
court  to  Lord  Rochford,  September
30,  1775.

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

177

neither  speech  nor  vote.1  Their  demonstrations,  and
the  gracious  reception  of  them,  inflamed  rather  than
soothed  the  Puritans  and  Presbyterians;  andHarcourt,
baffled  after  all  his  efforts  by  the  effect  of  the  American
successes,  looked  forward  to  the  session  with  great  un¬
easiness.  The  Opposition  were  acting  in  concert  with
the  English  Whigs.  He  discovered  that  they  meant
to  bring  the  subject  of  the  colonies  before  Parliament,
backed  by  the  entire  body  of  the  Northern  Protes¬
tants.2  They  were  gaining  strength  rapidly,  and  his
best  chance  was  to  press  the  subject  to  an  immediate
vote  by  introducing  the  subject  into  the  speech.  He
complimented  Ireland  from  the  throne  on  her  good
behaviour  while  America  was  in  rebellion.  A  friend
of  the  Castle  in  moving  the  address  invited  the  Com¬
mons  in  return  to  assure  the  King  c  that  while  his
Government  was  disturbed  by  a  rebellion,  of  which
they  heard  with  abhorrence  and  felt  with  indigna¬
tion,  they  would  themselves  be  ever  ready  to  show
the  world  their  devoted  attachment  to  his  sacred
person.’  3

Ponsonby,  who  recovered  his  patriotism  when  the
Absentee  Rents  were  no  longer  in  danger,  rose  im¬
mediately  to  move  an  amendment.  4  The  Commons
of  Ireland,  confiding  in  his  majesty’s  tenderness  for

1  1  Sir  John  Blaquiere  to  Lord
North,  October  11,  1775.’

2  1  The  Presbyterians  of  the
North,  who  in  their  hearts  are
Americans,  were  gaining  strength
every  day ;  and,  by  letters  written
by  designing  men,  whom  I  could
name,  from  your  side  of  the  water,
have  been  repeatedly  pressed  to  en¬

gage  Ireland  to  take  an  adverse  part

VOL.  II.

in  the  contest,  telling  them  the  ba¬
lance  of  the  cause  and  the  decision
of  the  quarrel  was  on  this  side  St.
George’s  Channel.  The  subject
would  then  have  been  pressed  upon
me  with  such  advantage  as  I  should
have  had  difficulty  in  resisting.’ —
‘  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,
October  11,  1775.’

3  Commons'  Journals ,  1775.

N

173

BOOK

V.

1775?

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

his  subjects,  and  relying  on  his  wisdom  for  bringing
these  difficult  matters  to  a  happy  issue,  had  been  silent
hitherto  during  the  agitation  of  a  dispute  which  could
not  but  deeply  affect  them.  Finding  the  event  not
answerable  to  their  wishes,  they  would  be  wanting  to
their  own  interests  and  the  general  welfare  if  they
longer  hesitated  to  express  their  hopes  that  a  differ¬
ence  might  be  amicably  terminated  which  they  feared
could  not  be  ended  otherwise/

A  debate  followed  which  lasted  till  the  next  even¬
ing.  The  Irish  cause  was  openly  identified  with  the
American.  Denis  Daly  said  that  if  America  was
beaten,  30,000  English  swords  would  impose  the
Irish  taxes.  Hussey  Burgh,  a  rising  orator,  who
will  be  heard  of  again,  said  England  meant  to
reduce  her  dependencies  to  slavery.  Flood  luckily
for  himself  was  absent.  Had  he  spoken  he  must
have  been  false  either  to  his  principles  or  to  his  Castle
engagements.  The  weight  of  defence  was  thrown
on  De  Blaquiere,  the  Viceroy  being  unable  to  trust
4  the  independent  persons  ’  whom  he  had  bought,  on  a
question  where  feeling  ran  so  high.  4  Your  thread-
paper  friend/  De  Blaquiere  told  Lord  North,  4  lost
flesh  which  he  could  not  well  spare  ’  in  the  long  pro¬
tracted  fight.  It  was  uncertain  to  the  last  how  the
division  would  turn,  but  the  first  octennial  Parlia¬
ment  was  drawing  near  its  end.  .  .  .  De  Blaquiere
hinted  that  an  adverse  vote  might  lead  to  an  imme¬
diate  dissolution,  and  4  the  apprehension  of  rotten
eggs  and  an  approaching  election  ’  turned  the  scale
in  favour  of  the  Castle.  The  Viceroy  said  he  4  never
was  so  happy  in  his  life  as  when  the  question  was
decided/  In  the  first  blush  of  triumph  he  flattered
himself  that  4  his  victory  would  give  peace  to  Ireland,

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

179

carry  terror  to  America  and  despair  to  Chatham  and
the  English  malcontents.’

The  keener-eyed  De  Blaquiere  indulged  in  no  such
illusions.  4  Judging  from  the  asperity  of  expression
among  the  Outs  and  the  avaricious  coldness  and
jobbery  among  the  Ins,’  he  looked  for  a  stormy
session,  and  saw  rough  water  on  all  sides.

He  had  reason  for  his  fears.  When  the  Irish  Par¬
liament  consented  to  the  increase  of  the  army,  they
exacted  a  condition  that  not  less  than  12,000  men
should  always  be  kept  in  Ireland.  The  excuse  for
and  motive  of  the  augmentation  was  the  better  se¬
curity  of  life  and  property,  and  a  smaller  number  had
been  proved  to  be  unequal  to  the  work.  Lord  North
now  required  4,000  of  these  troops  for  service  in
America.  He  offered,  if  Ireland  wished  it,  to  send
4,000  Hessians  to  take  their  place  at  the  cost  of
England.

Again,  the  army  in  America  was  to  receive  its  sup¬
plies  from  Ireland.  To  keep  the  prices  of  provisions
down  theViceroy  was  told  that  he  must  lay  an  embargo
on  the  Irish  ports,  and  shut  off  the  farmers  from
other  markets.  It  was  a  measure  of  direct  spolia¬
tion,  as  the  ATceroy  acknowledged,  yet  it  was  to  be
imposed  by  sovereign  authority,  while  he  was  to  apply
to  Parliament  to  sanction  the  removal  of  the  troops.
If  the  removal  was  to  be  accompanied  with  an  embargo,
the  Viceroy  4  confessed  with  shame  and  concern  that
there  was  not  one  of  the  confidential  servants  of  the
Crown  whom  he  could  trust  in  such  a  matter  without
the  risk  of  having  the  measure  defeated.’1  A  disso¬
lution  would  not  mend  matters.  Forty  Castle  seats

1  1  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  October  17  and  237

CHAP.

III.

~1775T

180

BOOK

V.

1775.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

were  threatened.  Every  loose,  unprincipled  member
was  watching  to  make  his  bargain  when  the  Govern¬
ment  should  be  in  difficulties.  Lord  Massereene  had
a  brother,  Major  Skeffington,  in  the  House  of  Com¬
mons,  and  two  nephews.  Major  Skeffington  was  a
bad  officer.1  Massereene  had  applied  for  a  colonelcy
for  him,  and  had  been  refused.  The  three  votes  were  in
consequence  given  against  the  Government  on  the
American  question.  After  the  division  Skeffington
renewed  his  request.  It  was  understood  that  unless
it  was  granted  the  process  would  be  repeated  through
the  session.  With  infinite  disgust  the  Government
was  obliged  to  yield.

c  You  must/  wrote  De  Blaquiere — these  details  are
essential  to  a  comprehension  of  the  working  of  the
Irish  legislature — ‘  you  must  by  pension  or  place
sink  a  sum  of  not  less  than  9,000?.  per  annum,  ex¬
clusive  of  the  provision  that  may  be  found  requisite
for  rewarding  or  indemnifying  those  who  are  con¬
nected  by  office  with  the  Administration.  There
are  no  less  than  from  thirty  to  forty  members  that  if
not  assisted  cannot  secure  their  re-elections.  Many
of  them  hold  small  employments  or  pensions  of  from
two  to  three  hundred  pounds  a  year.  Their  seats  in
the  new  Parliament  cannot  be  purchased  at  less  than
2,000  guineas.  Their  past  services  entitle  them  to
what  they  now  hold,  and  an  addition  of  pension  or
salary,  as  circumstances  may  require,  is  scarce  an
adequate  compensation  for  the  advance  and  loss  of  so
large  a  sum.  Other  gentlemen  have  had  promises
made  them  which  must  be  fulfilled  in  some  way.  Let
it  suffice  that  for  carrying  on  the  public  business  a

1  ‘  There  is  an  appearance  of  in-  ought  not  to  be  patronised.’  -  1  To
activity  in  him  which  certainly  Lord  North,  October  27.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

181

charge  not  less  than  I  have  stated  is  indispensable.
I  have  already  been  obliged,  with  my  Lord-Lieuten¬
ant’s  leave,  to  promise  additional  salaries  or  pensions
to  Messrs.  Blakeney,  Fitzgerald,  Tighe,  Sandford,
Pennefather,  O’Brien,  Coghlen,  Malone,  Cane,  and
Fetherstone,  most  of  whom  were  wavering  in  their
faith.’ 1

With  a  horizon  overcast  and  every  moment  growing
darker,  De  Blaquiere,  on  the  23rd  of  November,  pre¬
sented  the  request  for  the  removal  of  the  troops.  The
embargo  had  been  declared  ;  the  House  was  sullen.
The  American  question  was  at  once  revived.  Pon-
sonby  protested.  Fitzgibbon  (the  father)  said  that  if
Ireland  refused  consent  the  King  would  reconsider  his
course.  Hussey  Burgh  said  that  Ireland  ought  not
to  help  in  cutting  the  throats  of  the  Americans.  If
the  principle  of  taxation  was  established  against
America  there  would  be  an  end  of  Irish  liberty.
Consent  was  given,  but  with  extreme  reluctance.
Hessians  or  Brunswickers  the  House  flatly  refused  to
admit,  and  the  objection  to  receive  them  must  have
been  serious,  for  Lord  North  had  been  attacked  at
Westminster  for  having  proposed  to  supply  the  gar¬
rison  of  Ireland  at  the  cost  of  the  British  Treasury.2
Was  Ireland  safe  with  her  garrison  reduced  so  far?
That  was  a  further  question  of  which  Lord  North  and
the  Viceroy  were  better  able  to  feel  the  importance
than  the  House  of  Commons.  There  it  was  be¬
lieved  that  when  the  4,000  men  were  sent  away  8,000
at  least  would  remain.  Those  who  were  behind
the  scenes  knew,  unhappily,  that  the  truth  was  far
otherwise.  The  King  had  insisted  on  better  order

1  1  De  Blaquiere  to  Lord  North,  2  ‘  Lord  North  to  Lord  Harcourt,

November  1775.’  S.  P.  0.  December  1,  1775.’

CHAP.

III.

1775.

182

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  being  observed  in  these  matters.  Nothing  ever  re-

_ 3‘ _ '  mained  in  order  in  Ireland.  On  the  1st  of  November

177°-  the  actual  number  of  soldiers  there  all  told  amounted
but  to  9,200.  The  directions  given  were  to  pick  the
best  men  from  all  the  regiments  for  the  American
service.  The  force  that  would  remain  would  be  a
shadow.  Under  these  circumstances  Lord  North
appeared  to  think  that  he  might  as  well  take  all  the
troops  that  could  go.  No  sooner  had  he  received
notice  that  the  Parliament  had  consented,  than  he
sent  orders  to  embark  eight  regiments  instead  of  the
six  which  would  have  made  up  the  allotted  number.
Har court,  who  had  endured  much,  replied  that  if  eight
regiments  were  to  go,  4  he  must  request  his  majesty
to  appoint  some  other  person  to  execute  a  command
which  would  be  fatal  to  the  kingdom.’  He  described
his  situation  4  as  the  most  cruel  and  unmerited  that
ever  fell  to  the  share  of  a  man  whose  life  had  been
devoted  to  his  prince.’ 1

Across  this  scandalous  trifling  came  a  fresh  protest
on  the  state  of  Irish  trade.  The  Speaker  before  the
Christmas  recess  presented  one  more  remonstrance
against  the  wrongs  of  the  Irish  manufacturers.

Will  you  at  last,  the  Commons  said  in  substance,
repent  of  your  misdeeds  to  us  while  there  is  time?
We  have  parted  with  our  garrison  at  the  hazard  of
our  safety.  We  have  granted  supplies  beyond  the
limit  of  our  means.  May  we  hope  in  return  that  the
light  will  break  at  length  through  the  cloud  which
has  so  long  overshadowed  us?  Will  you  under¬
stand  now  that  the  prosperity  of  Ireland  is  the
strength,  and  not  the  weakness,  of  Ireland  ?

To  have  assented  even  then  at  the  eleventh  hour

\  *■  V

1  ‘Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  December  and  January,  1775  and
1776.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

would  have  been  worth  more  to  England  than  all  the
majorities  which  all  her  wealth  could  purchase — but
it  was  not  to  be.  The  Cabinet  could  never  rise  be¬
yond  the  thought  how  with  least  difficulty  to  meet
the  trials  of  the  current  session.  The  country  might
continue  to  tread  her  miserable  round  from  year  to
year,  from  century  to  century.  They  had  bought
Flood  and  they  were  satisfied.  Unknown  to  them
there  had  entered  into  this  very  Parliament,  in  this
December,  by  a  casual  vacancy  in  the  borough  of
Charlemont,  a  youth,  who  had  come  into  notice  as  a
contributor  to  4  Baratariana,’  more  dangerous  than  a
thousand  Floods,  because  alone  of  Irish  patriots  he
was  incorruptible.  In  five  years  Henry  Grattan  was
to  wrest  out  of  England’s  hands  the  power  which  she
had  so  long  abused,  to  give  back  to  his  country  her
birthright  of  free  trade,  and  to  give  her  with  it  the
fatal  privileges  of  constitutional  self-government,
which  she  wanted  honesty  to  use,  and  which  plunged
her  into  a  deeper  abyss  of  ruin  than  she  had  escaped.
His  voice  was  first  heard  beside  Hussey  Burgh’s  de¬
nouncing  the  iniquity  of  the  embargo.  But  neither
could  the  embargo  be  prevented  nor  any  measure
passed  of  real  consequence,  not  even  those  which  Eng¬
land  knew  to  be  necessary  and  had  confessed  to  be
desirable.

The  first  question  after  the  winter  recess  was  the
defence  of  the  country.  England  was  at  war.
Ireland  was  denuded  of  troops,  the  defences  of  her
harbours  in  ruins,  and  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  pri¬
vateers.  In  this  situation  the  Parliament  offered  the
national  remedy  of  a  militia,  and  drew  the  heads
of  a  Bill  for  transmission.  The  important  thing  was
to  get  a*  force  of  some  kind  that  could  be  relied  on,

184

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

Y.

"me.

and  a  militia  at  all  events  would  have  been  under  the
control  of  the  Crown.  Lord  North  had  no  objection,
hut  acting  on  the  old  and  fatal  maxim  of  4  divide  et
impera,’  he  saw  in  the  establishment  of  a  militia  an
opportunity  of  gratifying  the  Catholics  and  rewarding
the  display  of  their  loyalty.  They  were  willing  to  be
enrolled  ;  and  Lord  North  stipulated  that  their  enlist¬
ment  must  be  accompanied  with  4  indulgences  in  the
exercise  of  their  religion.’  Such  indulgences  would
have  followed  as  a  matter  of  course,  had  there  been
no  formal  demand  for  them.  But  the  prominent  men¬
tion  of  a  tender  subject  at  once  exasperated  Protestant
prejudice.  Harcourt  felt  his  way,  but  found  that  the
proposal  to  admit  the  Catholics  would  ruin  a  measure
which  was  otherwise  urgently  desirable.  4  There
was  no  point,’  he  said,  4  on  which  gentlemen  were  so
sensitive,  or  the  country  in  general  so  jealous.  No¬
thing  more  was  needed  to  throw  Ireland  into  a
flame.’  1  The  heads  of  the  Bill  went  on  as  they  were
first  drawn,  containing  no  mention  of  the  Catholics.
With  an  infatuation  which  brought  rapid  penalties
after  it  the  Bill  was  not  returned,  and  instead  of  a
militia  which  would  be  in  the  hands  of  the  com¬
mander-in-chief,  the  Government  were  to  reckon  with
the  volunteers.

The  same  perversity  attended  the  revival  of  the
Judges’  Tenure  Bill.  Ireland  was  naturally  anxious
for  the  removal  of  the  Bench  from  the  influence  of
jobbery.  Townshend  had  recommended  the  change
from  the  throne,  and  in  Townshend’s  time  it  had
been  prevented  only  by  the  introduction  of  a  clause
reserving  a  power  of  removal  to  the  British  Parlia-

1  ‘  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  North,  February  28,  1776.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

185

ment.  The  Irish  Commons,  as  a  last  act  before  the
dissolution,  made  another  attempt  to  bring  it  about.
The  heads  of  the  Judges’  Tenure  Bill  were  brought
to  the  Viceroy  to  be  sent  over.  Lord  Harcourt,  un¬
willing  in  his  embarrassment  to  part  with  any
influence  by  which  he  could  work  on  the  fears  or
hopes  of  the  baser  members  of  the  Lower  House,
himself  entreated  the  Cabinet  to  refuse  consent.

4  The  state  of  the  country  duly  considered,’  he
said,  4 1  am  persuaded  it  would  be  very  undesirable
to  make  the  commission  of  judges  to  continue  during
good  behaviour.  So  many  inconveniences  would  in¬
fallibly  result  from  such  a  bill,  that  I  trust  it  will  not
be  deemed  proper  to  return  it  to  Ireland.’1

These  proceedings  may  be  described  as  a  very
effective  sowing  the  wind,  the  more  so  as  the
parties  concerned  were  innocently  unconscious  of
what  they  were  doing.  On  the  5th  of  April  the
session  closed,  and  with  it  the  Parliament.  4  Our
business  ended,’  De  Blaquiere  reported,  4  with  temper
and  satisfaction.  We  had  a  sharp  debate  on  the
address.  Mr.  Grattan,  Mr.  Bushe,  and  Mr.  Yelverton
were  particularly  violent;  but  we  shamed  them  even
in  argument,  and  in  point  of  numbers  were  so  strong
that  they  dared  not  divide.’  2

It  would  be  curious  to  know  what  the  4  arguments  ’
were.  A  case  could  be  made  on  the  Money  Bill,  on
Irish  rights,  and  the  American  war  ;  but  the  attack
turned  largely  on  the  defences  of  the  country,  the

1  1  Lord  Harcourt  to  Lord  Wey¬
mouth,  February  5,  1776.’  The
Harcourt  correspondence  in  the
State  Paper  Office  is  preserved  in
copies  made  and  annotated  by  Sir
John  Blaquiere.  To  the  present

production  of  his  chief  he  appends
as  a  remark :  1 1  was  in  the  country
when  this  extraordinary  letter  was
written.  J.  B.’

2  ‘  To  Lord  North,  April  7.’

CHAP.

III.

~rmf

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

increasing  debt,  the  corrupt  expenditure,  the  mon¬
strous  Pension  List,  and  the  loading  the  Establish¬
ment  with  sinecures  as  the  price  of  political  support.
On  these  points  what  answers  could  have  been  made
which  were  not  lies  ?

Harcourt’s  term  of  office  was  now  running  out.
One  duty  only  remained  to  him — to  superintend  the
general  election;  to  see  the  new  Parliament  installed,
and  its  composition  tested  by  the  election  of  a  Speaker.
It  was  then  to  be  prorogued  for  fifteen  months.  The
Viceroy  was  to  go  to  England.  His  successor  was
not  yet  determined  on.  He  might  himself,  perhaps,
be  asked  to  return,  and  if  Lord  North  so  wished  it
he  was  ready  to  sacrifice  himself,  or,  as  he  put  it,
4  he  was  not  disposed  to  turn  his  face  from  the  evil,
or  suffer  the  bitter  cup  to  pass  from  his  lips.’

De  Blaquiere  had  already  explained  the  steps
which  the  election  rendered  necessary.  The  esti¬
mate  fell  far  short  of  the  requirements.  Eighteen
members  of  the  Lower  House  insisted  that  they  had
earned  peerages.  If  they  received  their  coronets,
they  undertook  to  fill  the  seats  which  they  had
vacated  with  men  on  whom  the  Castle  might  rely.
But  they  refused  to  be  paid  in  promises.  They  must
have  their  price  on  the  spot.  Besides  these,  de  Bla¬
quiere  recommended  a  long  list  of  persons  for  pensions
and  places.  He  represented  compliance  as  4  indis¬
pensable  for  the  public  service.’  And  here  again  delay
was  unpermitted,  for,  as  he  observed,  4  Many  of  our
grants  are  always  mortgaged  in  part  for  the  purchase
money  of  our  seats.’1  4 1  have  but  three  words  for

1  1  Sir  John  Blaquiere  to  Lord  North,  May  4.’

LORD  HARCOURT  AND  COLONEL  BLAQUIERE.

you,’  he  wrote  in  a  companion  note  to  Secretary
Robinson — 4  Dispatch,  dispatch,  dispatch,  for  the  ex¬
istence  of  your  future  views  depends  upon  it.'

Under  these  influences  the  memorable  Parliament
was  chosen  which  was  to  revolutionise  the  Irish  Con¬
stitution.  Little  could  its  future  career  have  been
conjectured  from  its  first  performance.  It  assembled
in  force  to  choose  its  Speaker.  Pery,  as  before,  was
the  Government  candidate.  Ponsonby  was  again  the
choice  of  the  patriots.  It  appeared,  when  the  trial
came,  that  Lord  Shannon  and  the  Elies  had  fallen  off
again.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  had  forgotten  the  old
feud,  and  supported  Ponsonby  with  all  his  weight.
But  corruption  for  the  present  proved  too  strong  for
aristocracy  and  patriotism  combined.  Pery  was
elected  by  141  votes  to  98,  and  the  Castle  won  a
glorious  victory  in  its  own  imagination.

Public  confidence,  which  had  been  shaken,  was  re¬
stored.  Government  debentures  rose  from  90  to  101.
Lord  Harcourt  not  being  required  to  drink  any
deeper  of  his  4  bitter  cup/  resigned  with  an  aureole
about  his  head,  and  returned  to  England,  to  fall  into
the  Nuneham  well.  De  Blaquiere,  who  resigned  with
him,  preferred  to  remain  in  a  country  where  his  com¬
posure  under  fire  had  made  him  popular,  and  where
he  conceived  that  by  his  political  dexterity  he  had
fixed  the  authority  of  Government  on  a  basis  of  rock.

4  In  retiring  from  my  public  station  in  this  king¬
dom/  he  wrote  to  Lord  North,  ‘permit  me  most  sin¬
cerely  to  congratulate  your  lordship  on  the  unshaken
loyalty  and  perfect  tranquillity  that  have  been  pre¬
served  in  it  at  a  period  when  so  much  pains  had  been
taken  to  lessen  the  one  and  disturb  the  other.  I

188

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

V.

77767

mention  the  situation  of  this  kingdom  with  so  much
confidence  and  pleasure  because  there  is  not  a  part
of  his  majesty’s  dominions  where  I  would  be  so
happy  to  spend  the  remainder  of  a  private  life  as  in
Ireland.’ 1

1  ‘  Sir  John  Blaquiere  to  Lord  North,  July  4, 1776.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

189

i

BOOK  VI.

%

CHAPTER  I.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION,

SECTION  I.

Ninety  years  had  passed  since  Aghrim  and  the  sur-  chap.
render  of  Limerick  had  laid  the  Irish  race  once  more  v  L  _  ^
prostrate  at  the  feet  of  England.  The  time  had  come,  1776*
as  it  comes  with  all  nations  and  with  all  men,  when
England  was  to  be  called  to  account  for  the  trust
which  had  been  committed  to  her.  She  had  sown
with  poison  weeds  the  draggled  island  which  lay  in
the  rear  of  her  imperial  domain.  The  crop  had
sprung  up  and  ripened,  and  now  the  harvest  was  to
be  gathered.  When  circumstances  compel  a  strong
nation  to  deprive  a  neighbour  of  political  indepen¬
dence,  that  nation  is  bound  to  confer  on  the  inferior
country  the  only  reparation  in  its  power — to  share
with  it  to  the  utmost  its  own  material  advantages — to
justify  its  assumption  of  superiority  by  the  equity
and  wisdom  of  its  administration.  England  had
discharged  her  sovereign  duties  to  Ireland  by
leaving  her  to  anarchy  masked  behind  a  caricature
of  the  forms  of  her  own  constitution.  With  an  inso¬
lent  mockery  she  had  refused  her  request  for  incor-

190

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1776.

poration  in  the  empire.  She  had  left  her  the  name  of
a  separate  kingdom  and  a  separate  nationality  as  her
excuse  for  withholding  from  her  the  equal  rights  to
which  she  was  entitled.  The  nationality  which  she
insisted  on  preserving  was  to  become  a  thorn  in  Eng¬
land’s  side — the  instrument  of  a  merited  humiliation.

The  Protestant  colonists  implanted  as  her  repre¬
sentatives  by  James  and  Cromwell,  finding  that  trans¬
portation  to  Ireland  implied  the  sacrifice  of  their
rights  as  English  citizens,  became  Irish  in  sentiment,
and  trod  again,  step  for  step,  the  same  road  which
had  been  travelled  by  the  Norman  conquerors.  They
adopted  Irish  habits  ;  they  adopted  the  Irish  ani¬
mosity  against  their  oppressors.  In  the  collapse  of
nobler  purpose  they  had  come  to  regard  their  position
as  an  opportunity  for  plunder,  and  to  consider  the
proceeds  of  the  soil,  whether  in  the  shape  of  public
revenue  or  private  rent,  as  so  much  booty  to  be
seized  and  divided.

In  the  misappropriation  of  the  revenue  England
herself  set  the  ignoble  example.  The  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  became  simply  the  arena  for  the  partition  of
the  spoil.  The  English  Cabinet  retained  the
Pension  List  for  corruption  or  for  questionable  court
favourites.  They  retained  the  high  offices  of  State
as  sinecures,  to  keep  in  good  humour  their  Parlia¬
mentary  friends  at  home.  As  the  price  of  connivance,
they  left  to  the  Irish  leaders  all  else  that  could  be  col¬
lected  as  cess  or  tax  to  be  absorbed  by  themselves,  or
to  be  disposed  of  among  their  dependents  or  kinsmen.
Public  interests  meanwhile  went  to  ruin.  The  army
was  neglected,  the  police  was  unexistent.  Smug¬
glers,  houghers,  Whiteboys,  and  women  ravishers
pursued  their  calling  unmolested,  till  familiarity

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

191

with  their  atrocities  raised  them  into  the  rank  of  na-  chap.
tional  institutions.  The  harbour  defences  crumbled  > — b —

1  77fi

and  disappeared,  the  military  stores  were  stolen.

From  Dublin  Castle  to  the  lowest  custom-house  the
public  service  was  pervaded  with  peculation,  the
Viceroys  themselves  playing  the  first  part  in  the
disgraceful  spectacle — superior,  doubtless,  themselves
to  unworthy  influences,  but  setting  the  example  of
buying  the  consciences  of  those  who  were  nearest  to
them.

The  least  evil  of  bad  government  is  the  immediate
consequence.  The  worst  curse  of  it  is  the  effect
upon  the  characters  of  the  people  who  grow  to  man¬
hood  in  so  detestable  an  atmosphere.

The  attempts  of  George  the  Third  to  introduce
reforms  had  only  shown  the  hopelessness  of  the
problem.  Townshend  and  Harcourt  had  broken  the
power  of  the  great  nobles,  but  they  had  broken  it
only  by  more  indiscriminate  and  lavish  bribery.

They  had  taught  the  so-called  independent  members
that  the  service  of  the  Castle  was  a  safer  road  to
fortune  than  the  service  of  the  Leinsters  and  Pon-
sonbies.  The  discovery  once  made,  the  hunger  grew
by  what  it  fed  on,  till  corruption  became  a  thing  of
course,  and  honour  and  principle  were  words  which
ceased  to  have  a  meaning,  except  in  rounding  the
periods  of  some  fluent  orator  who  laughed  at  them  in
his  sleeve.

In  their  social  relations  the  Irish  gentry  were
scarcely  more  satisfactory  than  in  politics.  Owner¬
ship  of  soil  had  descended  from  a  time  when  the  lord-
ship  of  a  manor  was  a  military  command.  Services
due  to  the  Crown,  both  in  England  and  Ireland,  had
longbeen  compounded  for;  and  the  distinction  between

192

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  real  and  personal  property,  so  far  as  positive
v — — '  was  supposed  to  attach  to  one  rather  than  the  other,
17  7  6*  was  fast  disappearing.  But  in  England  the  spirit  of
the  old  form  survived  the  letter  of  it.  The  great
families  remained  objects  of  affectionate  allegiance
to  the  tenantry.  They  administered  justice  ;  they
officered  the  army  and  militia ;  they  commanded  the
yeomanry ;  they  represented  the  counties,  and  in  that
capacity  had  been  the  guardians  of  public  liberty.
Placed  by  station  and  fortune  beyond  vulgar  tempta¬
tion,  they  held  in  check  the  adventurers  who  took
up  politics  as  a  road  to  personal  preferment,  and  by
the  degree  of  genuine  integrity  and  patriotism  which
they  have  carried  into  modern  Parliaments  they
have  alone  made  possible  the  wholesome  working  of
the  Constitution.

In  Ireland  the  form  was  the  same  ;  the  reality  was
essentially  different.  Of  the  resident  noblemen
and  gentlemen  a  minority  retained  their  English
character,  and  acted,  so  far  as  circumstances  would
allow  them,  on  English  principles.  To  them  was  due
such  progress  as  Ireland  had  made.  Their  estates
became  oases  in  the  general  wilderness,  and  they  and
their  families  were  regarded  by  the  peasantry  with  a
feeling  which  went  beyond  allegiance — the  passionate
attachment  with  which  the  Celt  never  fails  to  reward
the  masters  who  treat  him  with  kindness  and  jus¬
tice.  But  men  like  these  kept  clear  of  public  life,  or
if  they  entered  it  can  be  traced  only  by  ineffectual
efforts  to  stem  the  general  tide.  At  best  they  were
but  a  handful  of  salt,  to  keep  the  mass  from  putre¬
fying,  and  were  never  in  sufficient  numbers  to  in¬
fluence  materially  the  fortunes  of  the  country.  A
third,  at  one  time  half,  of  the  Protestant  owners  of

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

193

land  in  Ireland  were  absentees.  Their  connection  chap.
with  their  properties  was  the  mercantile  one  merely.  — i — .
Their  duties  were  to  send  persons  to  collect  their
rents.  Their  lands  were  leased  to  head  tenants,  whom
the  law  compelled  to  call  themselves  Protestants
also;  but  these  persons  were  often  of  the  old  blood,
ashamed  of  the  names  they  bore,  and,  being  without
religion  of  any  kind,  were  without  moral  sense.  The
idea  of  duty  having  disappeared,  the  idea  which  took
its  place  was  the  desirableness  of  being  an  idle  gentle¬
man.  To  live  without  labour,  to  spend  his  time  in
hunting,  shooting,  drinking,  gambling,  and  fighting
duels,  became  the  supreme  object  of  an  Irishman's
ambition.  The  head  tenant  let  to  others  like  himself,
and  they  again  to  others,  till  the  division  fell  at
length  below  the  line  at  which  Catholics  were  ex¬
cluded  from  holding  farms.  The  Catholics  would
offer  any  rent,  and  thus  gradually  ousted  such  Pro¬
testant  cultivators  as  had  remained  from  earlier  times.

Over  large  tracts  of  the  southern  provinces  the  only
Protestants  were  the  agents  of  the  gentry,  or  else
tenants  holding  on  lives  and  long  leases.  The  cul¬
tivation  fell  exclusively  to  the  Catholic  peasantry,
to  wretched  cottiers,  themselves  starving  on  potatoes,
who  in  those  above  them  saw  nothing  but  a  series  of
profligate  extortioners,  a  reproach  alike  to  the  creed
they  professed  and  to  the  system  of  administration
which  they  represented.

The  extremity  of  worthlessness  was  to  be  found
on  the  estates  of  the  absentees.  Of  the  resident  pro¬
prietors,  the  smaller  sorts,  living  most  of  them  beyond
their  means,  and  buried  in  mortgages,  nearly  resembled
the  middleman.  The  more  considerable,  with  a  few

VOL.  II.  o

194

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  remarkable  exceptions,  formed  the  Irish  gentlemen  of
— — -  popular  tradition,  who,  easy  and  goodnatured,  had
accommodated  themselves,  like  the  Norman  barons,  to
the  ways  of  their  country.  They,  too,  raced  and  rode
and  drank.  They  were  out  at  elbows.  They  were
popular  among  their  tenants,  and  on  the  whole,  kind
to  them.  But  it  was  the  more  necessary  for  them
to  find  other  means  of  replenishing  their  empty  purses.
In  a  land  where  industry  was  under  a  blight,  they
took  up  into  themselves  the  genius  of  the  nationality
which  their  fathers  had  been  planted  in  Ireland  to
eradicate.  Light-hearted,  reckless,  and  extravagant,
they  became  like  Irish  chiefs  of  the  sixteenth  century
in  modern  costume,  living  from  hand  to  mouth,  and
recognising  but  one  obligation  which  was  always  and
uniformly  held  sacred  among  them — to  send  or  ac¬
cept  a  challenge,  with  or  without  reason,  at  any  place
and  at  any  time.  These,  for  the  most  part,  were  the
country  magistrates,  to  whom  the  peace  of  Ireland  was
entrusted.  The  duties  were  light,  for  the  crimes
committed  were  of  a  sort  which,  till  landlords  began
themselves  to  be  murdered,  opinion  did  not  severely
condemn  ;  and  those  inclined  to  be  more  severe  found
themselves  compelled  to  conform  to  the  general  tone.
As  a  rule,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  evidence  was  a
sufficient  passive  check.  If  a  too  enterprising  magis¬
trate  went  further,  if  he  insisted  on  punishing  a
ravisher,  or  preventing  a  duel,  or  arresting  smug¬
glers  or  whisky  distillers,  or  interfering  in  short
with  any  general  right  which  custom  sanctioned,  he
was  encountered  by  a  challenge  to  himself  from  one  or
other  of  the  parties  aggrieved,  and  he  had  to  fight,
or  lie  under  the  ban  of  society.

More  unsuited  than  even  the  owners  of  the  land  for

THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

195

the  work  demanded  of  them,  were  the  spiritual  in¬
structors  which  the  Irish  Constitution  provided.
That  the  Irish  Celts  might  be  converted  to  Protes¬
tantism  could  not  be  called  impossible  after  the  ex¬
ample  of  Wales  and  the  Scotch  Highlands.  That
they  should  be  so  converted  was  of  incomparably  more
consequence,  because  it  was  only  when  ceasing  to  be
Catholics  that  it  was  possible  for  them  to  become
loyal  subjects  of  the  British  Crown.  British  Minis¬
ters  dreamt  of  attaching  them  by  standing  between
the  priests  and  the  execution  of  the  penal  laws.  The
priests  affected  gratitude,  which  they  did  not  and
could  not  feel.  The  Irishman,  who  was  at  once  Celt
and  Catholic,  received  a  legacy  of  bitterness  from  the
past  which  he  was  forbidden  to  forget.  The  invaders
were  in  possession  of  the  land  of  his  fathers.  He  had
been  stripped  of  his  inheritance  for  his  fidelity  to  his
creed.  He  saw  himself  trodden  down  into  serfdom
on  the  soil  which  had  been  his  own,  and  England —
England  only — he  knew  to  be  the  cause  of  his  sor¬
rows.  The  edge  of  his  animosity  was  blunted  when
he  adopted  the  reformed  religion.  The  rebellions
which  had  occasioned  the  forfeiture  were  then  no  longer
sacred  to  him,  and  his  point  of.  sympathy  with  the
conquerors  was  stronger  than  his  resentment.  To
gain  him  over  therefore  should  have  been  the  first
object  of  an  English  statesman,  and  the  institutions
of  the  country  should  have  been  studiously  adapted
to  missionary  purposes.  No  organization  could  have
been  invented,  less  adapted  for  such  an  end,  than  the
Established  communion.  It  had  divided  Protes¬
tantism  in  two,  and  had  ostracised  the  most  energetic
section  of  it.  It  drove  the  Presbyterians  into  repub¬
licanism  and  disaffection  ;  and  to  the  Catholic,  who

o  2

CHAP.

I.

T?767

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

boasted  of  his  own  unchanging  and  uniform  faiths
it  presented  the  contrast  of  wrangling  creeds  hating
and  denouncing  each  other  more  cordially  than  either
hated  their  common  antagonist.

The  Irish  Church,  had  it  not  been  for  English  in¬
fluence,  would  probably  have  drifted  into  a  wiser
policy  and  perhaps  a  more  successful  career.  At  the
beginning  of  the  last  century  the  bishops  and  clergy
were  Jacobites  and  High  Churchmen,  and  were  dis¬
abled  for  active  work  of  any  kind  by  worldliness  and
pluralities.  The  pluralities  and  worldliness  continued,
but  the  happy  possessors  of  the  richer  benefices  became
absentees  like  the  landlords.  The  work  was  left  to
curates  of  simpler  habits  and  more  genuine  piety.
The  visit  of  Wesley  to  Ireland  and  the  practical  con¬
flict  with  Romanism  of  a  violent  type,  had  kindled
and  fostered  in  the  parochial  clergy  an  interesting
development  of  evangelical  devotion;  and  had  they
been  left  to  themselves  to  choose  their  own  prelates
and  organize  their  own  services,  they  would  have
found  means  perhaps  of  ending  the  schism  which  was
paralysing  Protestant  efficiency.  Here  too,  however,
as  everywhere  else,  the  Parliamentary  system  made
improvement  impossible.  The  high  offices  in  the
Church,  the  bishoprics  and  deaneries,  were  utilized  as
the  most  effective  instruments  of  political  influence,
and  were  reserved  and  distributed  with  scarcely  an
exception  as  the  reward  or  inducement  of  party  service.
The  celebrated  passage  in  which  Swift  describes  the
nominees  to  the  Irish  sees  as  waylaid  and  murdered
by  highwaymen  on  Hounslow  Heath,  who  stole  their
letters  patent,  came  to  Dublin,  and  were  consecrated  in
their  place,  is  scarcely  an  exaggeration  of  the  material
out  of  which  Ireland  in  the  last  century  was  provided

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

197

with  a  spiritual  hierarchy.  When  men  like  Stone
were  Primates,  and  men  like  Harvey  suffragans,  the
prelates  of  the  Irish  Establishment  were  perhaps  more
singular  specimens  of  successors  of  the  Apostles  than
Christendom  under  its  various  phases  had  ever  wit¬
nessed  or  will  witness  again.

The  English  Government  might  count  itself  inno¬
cent,  and  doubtless  was  content  so  to  regard  its  own
conduct.  If  Irish  landlords  chose  to  neglect  their
obligations  and  their  properties,  if  the  Parliament
was  corrupt  and  could  be  kept  in  working  condition
only  by  the  prostitution  of  the  secular  and  spiritual
patronage  ;  if  all  classes  preferred  their  own  customs
to  the  ordinary  principles  of  order  and  morality,  they
were  themselves  the  cause  of  their  own  miseries.
They  had  the  same  institutions  under  which  England
was  the  envy  of  the  world.  If  they  misused  their
advantages,  on  them  lay  the  responsibility.  The  ex¬
cuse  falls  in  but  too  completely  with  the  modern
theories  of  liberty.  It  is  identical  with  the  defence
presented  long  ago  by  Adam’s  eldest  son,  and,  as  in  that
first  instance,  was  a  cynical  pretext  to  cover  deliberate
wickedness.  If  Ireland  had  fallen  into  sloth,  England
had  first  annihilated  the  most  flourishing  branch  of
her  industry.  She  had  left  her  the  linen  trade,  and
boasted  of  having  given  her  exceptional  advantages
in  the  prosecution  of  it,  but  she  was  repenting  of  her
magnanimity,  invading  the  compact,  and  by  side  mea¬
sures,  stealing  it  from  her  in  favour  of  her  own  people.
She  had  cut  Ireland  off  from  the  sea  by  her  Naviga¬
tion  Laws,  and  had  forced  her  into  a  contraband  trade
which  enlisted  half  her  population  in  organized  resist¬
ance  to  the  law.  Even  her  wretched  agriculture

CHAP.

i.

1776?

198

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  had  been  discouraged,  lest  an  increasing  breadth  of
VI.  .  O'  o

— ^ — ■ *  corn  in  Cork  and  Tipperary  should  lower  the  value  of
English  land.  Her  salt  meat  and  butter  were  laid
under  an  embargo  when  England  went  to  war,  that  the
English  fleets  and  armies  might  be  victualled  cheaply
at  the  expense  of  Irish  farmers.  If  the  high  persons
at  the  head  of  the  great  British  empire  had  deliber¬
ately  considered  by  what  means  they  could  condemn
Ireland  to  remain  the  scandal  of  their  rule,  they  could
have  chosen  no  measures  better  suited  to  their  end
than  those  which  they  had  pursued  unrelentingly
through  three  quarters  of  a  century.  By  definite  acts
of  unjust  legislation  they  were  forcing  the  entire
people  to  abandon  themselves  to  the  potato,  and  to
sit  down  to  brood  over  their  wrongs  in  a  paralysis  of
anger  and  despair.

Things  had  come  to  a  point  when  if  men  had  held
their  peace  the  very  stones  would  have  cried  out.
Legislatures  may  pass  laws  at  their  high  pleasure,  but
if  the  laws  are  not  in  harmony  with  the  order  of  nature,
nature  will  refuse  to  recognise  them.  The  discon¬
tent  of  the  peasantry  might  have  been  kept  down  by
force  ;  the  oratory  of  the  patriots  could  have  been
bought  over;  but  every  sound  and  honourable  mind  in
Ireland  was  now  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  a
change.  The  Americans  were  pointing  the  way  to  re¬
dress,  setting  the  example  of  resistance,  and  creating
an  opportunity.  A  great  occasion  raises  common
men  to  a  level  above  their  own.  Accident,  or  the
circumstances  of  the  country,  had  created  in  Ireland
at  this  time  a  knot  of  gentlemen  whose  abilities  and
whose  character  would  anywhere  have  marked  them
for  distinction.  Indignation  and  hope  had  induced

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

199

them  to  forego  the  temptations  which  under  ordinary
conditions  would  have  carried  them  away  to  England.
They  remained  at  home  to  fight  the  battle  of  their
country,  to  inflict  on  England  a  well-merited  humilia¬
tion,  and  to  try  the  experiment  whether  Ireland  could
or  could  not  be  safely  trusted  with  the  control  of  her
own  destinies.

CHAP.

i.

"l77G7

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  II.

The  fortunes  of  Ireland  at  this  moment  were  con¬
nected  so  intimately  with  the  phases  of  war  in  Ame¬
rica,  that  the  student  of  the  Irish  revolution  must  keep
himself  reminded  of  the  parallel  events  of  the  Trans¬
atlantic  struggle.

After  the  battle  of  Bunker’s  Hill  the  American
lines  were  drawn  closer  round  Boston.  The  opening
of  the  year  1776  found  General  Washington  estab¬
lished  on  Dorchester  Heights,  from  which  his  cannon
commanded  the  anchorage.  Swarms  of  small  pri¬
vateers  from  the  mouths  of  the  New  England  rivers
interrupted  the  provision  ships  coming  in  from  the
sea,  and  in  March  General  Howe  found  it  necessary  to
evacuate  the  city,  and  to  remove  his  troops  to  some
position  where  they  could  act  with  effect  and  be  no
longer  straitened  for  supplies.  Sir  Peter  Parker  was
foiled  in  the  summer  in  an  attack  on  Charleston,  and
encouraged  by  their  signal  successes,  the  representa¬
tives  of  the  united  colonies  ventured  their  Declaration
of  Independence.  These  initial  misfortunes  hardened
the  spirit  and  roused  the  resolution  of  England.  An
attempt  to  enlist  Canada  in  the  revolt  was  a  disas¬
trous  failure.  Colonel  Montgomery,  who  commanded
the  invading  forces,  was  killed  ;  his  army  which  ex¬
pected  to  be  welcomed  with  enthusiasm  was  cut  in
pieces  by  the  colonists  and  the  British  garrison  at
Quebec;  and  an  American  squadron  on  Lake  Champ¬
lain  was  taken  or  destroyed.  Lord  Howe  came  out
with  large  reinforcements  to  the  Bay  of  New  York,

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

201

where  he  was  joined  by  his  brother  Sir  William  and  by  chap.
the  troops  withdrawn  from  Boston.  Lord  Howe  had  > — i — *

Ml  (K

brought  with  him  power  to  negotiate,  and  it  is  pos¬
sible  that  after  the  disappointment  in  Canada,  had
substantial  concessions  been  now  offered,  the  Declara¬
tion  of  Independence  might  have  been  reconsidered.

The  idea  of  separation  was  as  yet  unfamiliar,  and  the
majority  of  the  colonists  were  as  loyal  to  the  empire
generally  as  they  were  tenacious  of  their  liberties,
and  determined  to  assert  them.  Lord  Howe,  how¬
ever,  contented  himself  with  offering  pardon  to  those
who  would  lay  down  their  arms.  General  Wash¬
ington  held  Long  Island  and  the  Island  of  New  York
itself  with  17,000  men.  The  British  generals
intended  if  possible  to  take  New  York  and  use  it
from  thenceforward  as  the  base  of  their  operations.

Sir  William  Howe  landed  on  Long  Island  a  little  to
the  North  of  Sandy  Hook.  He  advanced  along  the
harbour  to  Brooklyn,  opposite  the  city,  and  on  the
29th  of  August,  on  the  ground  where  Brooklyn  Park  August  20.
and  Cemetery  now  stand,  he  encountered  Washington,
defeated  him,  drove  him  across  into  New  York,  and
out  of  New  York  over  the  Hudson,  and  thence  in
the  month  following  forced  him  back  over  the  Dela¬
ware  into  the  forest,  apparently  broken  into  ruin.

Now  still  more  would  have  been  the  time  for  Lord
Howe  to  produce  his  commission  to  treat.  But  care¬
less  through  the  ease  of  their  success  the  English
forgot  Lexington  and  Bunker’s  Hill.  They  regarded
their  work  as  done.  They  broke  into  separate  divisions.

They  were  surprised  in  detail  at  Princeton  and  Tren¬
ton,  and  severely  punished.  Sir  William  Howe  gather¬
ed  his  broken  detachments  together,  retreated  slowly
through  New  Jersey  to  New  YYrk,  manceuvering

202

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  in  vain  to  draw  Washington  into  another  general
— — '  action,  and  the  season  being  over,  settled  down  in  his
winter  quarters  to  lay  his  plans  for  a  decisive  campaign
in  the  coming  spring.  New  England  was  the  heart  of
the  insurrection.  As  soon  as  the  snow  had  gone  and
roads  and  rivers  were  again  open,  General  Burgoyne
was  to  move  south  from  Canada  by  Lake  Champlain,
cross  the  watershed,  and  descend  the  Hudson  to
Albany,  where  Sir  Henry  Clinton  would  meet  him
ascending  the  same  river  from  New  York.  The  New
England  States  would  thus  be  cut  off  from  their
allies,  and  tamed  perhaps  into  a  separate  peace.
Meanwhile  Howe  himself,  whom  the  fleet  enabled  to
select  his  own  point  of  landing,  could  threaten
Pennsylvania,  and  if  he  failed  to  reduce  it  could
at  least  prevent  Washington  from  operating  against
Burgoyne.  Sir  William  Howe  conducted  his  own
share  of  the  campaign  with  perfect  success  ;  he
landed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Chesapeake,  inflicted  a
destructive  defeat  on  the  Americans  on  the  Brandy¬
wine,  broke  them  again  as  fast  as  they  recombined,
finally  drove  the  Congress  out  of  Philadelphia,  de¬
stroyed  the  forts  which  had  been  raised  by  Washing¬
ton  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  the  English  ships  into
the  Delaware,  and  sate  down  in  the  autumn  with  his
fleet  and  army  in  full  possession  of  the  American
capital.

Ear  different  was  the  fate  of  Burgoyne,  whose  task,
to  all  appearance,  was  the  easier  of  the  two.

Leaving  Sir  Guy  Carleton  in  Canada  with  a  force
adequate  for  its  defence,  Burgoyne  set  out  in  the
middle  of  June,  with  ten  thousand  of  the  best  soldiers
with  which  England  could  furnish  him,  a  powerful
train  of  field  artillery,  and  a  flying  swarm  of  Indian

\

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

203

allies,  the  warriors  of  the  Six  Nations  who,  useless  for  chap.
purposes  of  real  fighting,  it  was  hoped  would  terrify  « — —
the  American  imagination,  and  instead  of  terror  pro-
duced  only  resentment  by  their  cruelties,  and  a  cen¬
sure  on  their  employment  from  the  conscience  of
civilised  mankind.  He  advanced  unresisted  as  far  as
the  head  of  Lake  Champlain.  The  Americans  had  a
fort  at  Ticonderoga,  but  they  at  once  evacuated  it  on
his  appearance,  and  still  without  seeing  an  enemy,
Burgoyne  struck  into  the  forest  to  make  his  way  to
Fort  Edward,  on  the  Hudson.  Here  his  difficulties
began.  Roads  there  were  few  or  none.  The  settlers
driven  to  fury  by  the  savages  took  their  rifles
and  hung  upon  his  skirts,  interrupting  his  communi¬
cations  and  cutting  off  his  foraging  parties.  They
closed  in  between  him  and  Lake  Champlain,  and
stopped  his  supplies  from  the  rear.  The  country  was
swept  clean  in  his  front.  He  found  himself  dependent
entirely  on  the  stores  which  he  carried  with  him,  and
was  obliged  to  push  forward  at  the  utmost  speed.  The
utmost  speed  was  very  small.  It  was  enough  for  the
Americans  if  they  could  impede  his  march.  Hunger
would  then  do  their  work  for  them.  On  the  30th  of
June  Burgoyne  had  left  Lake  Champlain.  In  the
middle  of  September  he  was  still  fifty  miles  from
Albany,  hemmed  in,  with  provisions  failing  and  unable
to  move.  On  the  19th  he  was  attacked  by  the  Ameri¬
cans  and  fought  a  severe  battle  without  being  able  to
extricate  himself.  Clinton,  whom  he  contrived  to
inform  of  his  situation,  came  forward  up  the  river  ;
but  instead  of  pushing  on  through  Albany  contented
himself  with  destroying  villages  and  farmhouses  in
the  expectation  that  he  would  draw  the  Americans
off.  They  understood  their  advantage  too  well  to

204

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

/

ROOK

VI.

"l777T

October

12.

lose  it.  They  could  rebuild  their  houses.  They  might
wait  long  before  they  could  catch  in  a  net  another
English  army.  As  October  opened,  Burgoyne  made
one  more  desperate  plunge  and  struggled  a  few  miles
further  to  Saratoga.  There  another  battle  followed,
when  he  lost  more  of  his  guns.  The  Indians  deserted
him.  His  provisions  gave  out.  He  attempted  to
retreat,  but  it  was  too  late.  Half  his  force  was  sick
or  disabled,  and  on  the  12th  of  October,  with  no  al¬
ternative  before  him  but  destruction,  he  was  compelled
to  lay  down  his  arms.

The  impression  produced  by  this  catastrophe  was  of
greater  consequence  by  far  than  the  material  loss.  It
raised  the  Americans  to  the  rank  of  a  belligerent  power,
to  be  admired  and  recognised  by  the  world.  It  de¬
cided  France  to  revenge  herself  for  the  loss  of  her  Trans¬
atlantic  provinces  by  assisting,  since  she  could  not  keep
them  for  herself,  in  tearing  them  from  her  rival.  Frank¬
lin,  to  whom  England  would  not  listen,  repaired  to
Paris,  where  he  was  received  with  open  arms.  Then,
at  last,  when  the  opportunity  was  gone,  Lord  North
began  to  realise  the  magnitude  of  his  task.  Stunned
by  the  surrender  at  Saratoga  and  finding  his  old  enemy
preparing  to  strike  in,  he  recognised  the  necessity  of
a  compromise,  and  a  bill  was  hurried  through  Parlia¬
ment,  which  six  months  previously  the  States  would
have  accepted  with  gratitude.  The  pretension  to
tax  the  colonies  directly  or  indirectly  was  totally  and
for  ever  abandoned,  and  Lord  Carlisle  and  Mr.  Eden
were  sent  out  as  commissioners,  with  power  to  offer
free  trade,  to  offer  seats  in  the  English  House  of
Commons  if  America  wished  to  be  represented  there,
to  offer,  even  in  the  name  of  England,  to  share  the
debt  which  the  colonists  had  incurred  in  maintaining

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

205

their  rights  by  arms.  It  was  too  late.  Anticipating
the  course  which  England  would  pursue,  France,  in
consenting  to  an  alliance  with  the  States,  had  made
it  a  condition  that  they  would  for  ever  renounce  their
connection  with  the  mother  country.  La  Fayette,
who  had  joined  the  American  army  as  a  volunteer,
when  the  news  arrived  that  the  treaty  was  signed,
had  flung  himself  in  tears  into  Washington*  s  arms.
Before  Lord  Carlisle  landed  the  chances  of  reunion
were  gone  unless  it  could  be  achieved  by  force
of  arms.  Congress  replied  to  the  English  emissary
that  if  Great  Britain  desired  to  negotiate  with
America,  she  must  withdraw  her  fleets  and  armies
and  recognise  American  Independence.  V ery  gallantly
England  accepted  the  new  conditions  of  the  conflict.
She  declared  war  against  France.  Spain,  in  the  hope
of  recovering  Gibraltar  and  Jamaica,  flung  herself
into  the  quarrel  and  made  a  third  enemy.  The  little
island,  stripping  herself  in  earnest  now  for  the  large
task  which  lay  before  her,  prepared  to  encounter
single-handed  the  two  strongest  powers  in  Europe,
and  still  keep  her  hold  on  her  revolted  provinces.
It  was  work  for  a  giant,  and  never  before  in  her
history  did  England  bear  herself  with  finer  spirit.
A  French  squadron,  under  Count  d’Estaing,  appeared
at  the  mouth  of  the  Delaware.  Howe  moved  1  from
Philadelphia  and  fell  back  to  New  York.  But  the
English  fleet,  thus  reinforced  from  home,  came  out  and
drove  d’Estaing  into  Boston,  where  he  was  left  helpless.
At  the  outset  the  French  brought  no  help  to  their
allies,  but  only  misfortune.  Together  they  attempted
Rhode  Island,  but  made  nothing  of  it.  A  British

CHAP.

i.

^

1778.

1  July,  1778.

206

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  force  was  landed  in  Georgia,  defeated  the  American

— ,  army  there,  and  recovered  the  state.  The  summer

1770  J

following,  1779,  an  expeditionary  force  from  New
York  laid  waste  Virginia.  Re-embarking  and  going
north  it  attacked  Connecticut,  taking  and  plundering
New  Haven  and  Fairfield.  An  American  fleet  was  de¬
stroyed  in  August  off  Massachusetts.  Savannah  was
taken  in  the  south,  and  a  desperate  attempt  to  recover
it  decisively  failed.

1780.  It  seemed  as  if  England,  hitherto,  had  been  playing
with  her  work,  and  was  only  now  setting  to  it  in
earnest.  The  next  year,  1780,  brought  the  Americans
no  better  fortune.  Sir  Henry  Clinton  made  a  second
attack  on  Charleston  and  this  time  successfully.
Charleston  surrendered,  and  five  thousand  of  the
soldiers  of  independence  whom  Washington  could
ill  spare  became  prisoners  of  war.  General  Gates
hastened  with  the  heroes  of  Saratoga  to  the  defence
of  Carolina.  Lord  Cornwallis  met  him  at  Camden,
and  the  sharpest  battle  hitherto  fought  in  the  war,
ended  in  a  rout  of  the  Americans.  Gates  lost  his
stores  and  his  guns.  Cornwallis,  master  of  the
field,  was  master  of  the  Southern  States,  and  pro¬
ceeded  to  confiscate  estates,  try  and  punish  leading
insurgents,  and  inflict  on  the  Carolinas  the  sharpest
consequences  of  unsuccessful  rebellion.  So  far  as
appearances  could  promise,  England  was  only
threatened  by  another  European  coalition  that  she
might  play  over  again  as  proud  a  part  as  she  had
played  under  Chatham.

Bearing  with  him  this  general  outline  of  the  events
of  the  American  War,  the  reader  will  now  be  prepared
to  understand  what  was  happening  in  Ireland.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

SECTION  III.

Could  Lord  North  have  foreseen  the  problem  which
was  about  to  be  presented  to  him,  he  would  have
chosen  the  ablest  statesman  to  succeed  Lord  Har-
court  whom  he  could  have  persuaded  into  undertaking
a  post  so  detested  as  the  Yiceroyalty  of  Ireland.
Encouraged,  perhaps,  by  the  apparent  docility  of  the
newly  elected  Parliament  he  fixed  on  the  Earl  of
Buckinghamshire,  a  nobleman  whose  qualifications
were  that  he  had  discharged  without  discredit  the
office  of  minister  at  St.  Petersburgh.  Lord  Buck¬
inghamshire  on  entering  on  his  office  was  encountered
at  once  by  a  phenomenon  at  once  novel  and  dis¬
agreeable.  The  embargo  had  given  a  fresh  impulse
to  the  smuggling  trade.  Armed  sloops  and  brigantines
were  again  fitted  out  in  the  creeks  of  Cork  and  Kerry,
which  at  sea  and  in  unquiet  times  were  not  particu¬
larly  scrupulous,  while  by  the  side  of  them  and  in
intimate  correspondence  with  them  there  appeared
on  the  coast  three  fast  sailing  and  heavily  armed
privateers  carrying  American  colours,  come  over
to  spend  the  summer  in  and  about  St.  George’s
Channel,  the  ‘  Lexington’  and  the  ‘Reprisal,’  eighteen-
gun  sloops,  and  the  1  Dolphin,’  a  ten  gun  brig.  Their
crews  were  mixed,  Americans,  French,  with  a  large
admixture  of  Irish.  They  lay  chiefly  between  Holy-
head  and  the  Irish  Coast,  in  the  track  of  the  Liverpool
and  Belfast  traders.  Their  prizes  as  fast  as  they  took
them  they  sent  away  round  the  Land’s  End,  to  some

208

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

T777.

French  port,  where  they  were  sold.  The  prize  crews
it  was  easy  to  recruit  from  the  smugglers  and  fisher¬
men.  Three  ships  of  the  line  were  sent  from  Ports¬
mouth  to  destroy  or  drive  off  these  mischievous
hornets.  The  4  Arethusa,’  a  thirty-two-gun  frigate,
was  ordered  to  find  and  capture  them.  They
laughed  at  the  liners.  They  evaded  the  4  Arethusa.’
A  fourth  brigantine,  the  4  Oliver  Cromwell,’  was  added
to  their  number  in  the  course  of  the  summer,  and  they
plied  their  trade  with  impunity,  the  smugglers  keep¬
ing  them  furnished  with  fresh  provisions,  with  pilots,
and  with  information.  The  naval  supremacy  of  Eng¬
land,  in  reliance  on  which  the  Irish  harbours  were  left
undefended  and  Ireland  was  left  bare  of  troops,  was
defied  at  her  own  doors,  while  the  American  flag  was
seen  daily  fluttering  in  insolence  from  the  Irish  coast
anywhere  between  Londonderry  and  Cork.1

The  Biennial  Session  came  duly  round  in  the
autumn.  The  speech  was  colourless;  the  address
was  unopposed.  The  political  air  was  tranquil,  for
all  parties  were  standing  at  gaze  waiting  for  news
from  America.  It  was  known  that  Howe  had  driven
the  Congress  from  Philadelphia.  Had  it  fared  equally
well  with  Burgoyne,  the  majority  so  carefully  secured
by  Harcourt  would  have  remained  true  to  the  winning
colours.  But  in  December  came  the  account  that
Burgoyne  was  taken,  and  then  that  Franklin  was  in
Paris  and  that  a  treaty  was  signed  between  the  insur¬
gent  states  and  France.  The  next  thing  that  Ireland
heard  was  that  Lord  Carlisle  was  going  over  to  grant
America  more  than  Ireland  had  ever  asked  or  dreamt
of.  This  was  to  be  the  reward  of  rebellion.  America

1  See  the  Irish  State  Papers,  for  the  spring  and  summer  of  1777.

I

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

209

had  taken  arms.  Ireland  had  sat  passive  under  her  chap.

wrongs.  America  was  to  be  free  and  triumphant  ;  * - L—

Ireland  was  to  wear  her  chains  as  the  symbol  of  her  1778*
loyalty.

It  was  more  than  Irish  blood  could  bear.  Grattan,
taking  at  once  his  natural  place,  became  the  voice  of
his  people.  On  the  7th  of  February  he  moved  an  ad¬
dress  to  the  Crown  that  the  condition  of  Ireland
was  no  longer  endurable.  The  military  establish¬
ment  was  more  costly  than  ever,  yet  the  country
was  undefended.  The  Civil  List  had  grown  like  a
rank  weed.  Sinecures  were  heaped  on  sinecures.  The
Pension  List  was  so  heavy  in  1757  that  the  Commons
had  protested  against  it;  since  that  time  it  had
doubled.  The  representatives  of  the  people  must
speak  out.  Mr.  Grattan  did  not  prescribe  the  par¬
ticular  mode  of  redress,  but  he  demanded  a  change  of
system  and  appealed  to  the  King.

The  motion  was  lost  by  a  heavy  majority,1  but
the  debate  was  long  and  well  sustained.  The  sup¬
porters  of  the  Government  expressed  their  hope  to  the
Viceroy  after  the  division  that  the  privileges  which
were  to  be  granted  to  the  rebellious  Americans  would
be  extended  to  a  country  which  had  borne  its  wrongs
without  resistance,  and  that  the  restrictions  on  Irish
trade  would  be  relaxed  or  abolished.2

The  Catholics  had  been  demonstratively  loyal  at
the  outbreak  of  the  rebellion.  They  had  been  re¬
warded  with  gracious  words,  and  they  too  had  come
to  think  that  they  might  receive  something  more
substantial.  In  March,  Mr.  Talbot,  on  behalf  of  the

1  143  to  66.  to  Lord  Weymouth,  February  7.

2  ‘  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  To  Lord  North,  March  20,  1778/

VOL.  II.  P

»

210  THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Catholic  Committee,  presented  the  Viceroy  with  a

v — VL _ ,  list  of  grievances,  the  redress  of  which,  if  it  satisfied

the  Committee’s  expectation,  would  amount  4  to  a
repeal  of  almost  the  whole  of  the  Penal  Laws.’ 1

Concession  was  the  order  of  the  day.  The  King
had  already  resolved  on  doing  something  for  the
Catholics,  and  the  rising  tone  in  the  Protestant  House
of  Commons  made  the  Government  more  anxious  to
strengthen  themselves  with  the  support  of  their  rivals.
Lord  Buckinghamshire  was  directed  to  feel  his  way
among  the  members  of  both  Houses  best  inclined  to
the  Catholics,  and  discover  what  degree  of  relief  could
be  proposed  with  a  chance  of  success.  He  met  with
a  cold  reception.  4  The  unanimous  opinion  ’  was
that  although  a  relaxation  of  the  Penal  Laws  was
desirable,  4  the  time  was  unfavourable,’  and  that  to
bring  it  forward  at  present  4  would  set  the  country
in  a  flame.’  2

The  Catholic  Committee  was  satisfied  to  wait,  but
Mr.  Talbot  left  a  sketch  of  their  views  with  the
Viceroy.  The  preamble  of  it  contained  as  an  ob¬
jection  to  the  continuance  of  the  Penal  Laws  the
singular  remark  4  that  those  laws  had  rather  tended
to  create  an  aversion  from  and  dislike  to  the  Estab¬
lished  Church,  and  thereby  in  a  great  measure  pre¬
vented  a  great  majority  of  the  people  from  embracing
the  Protestant  religion.’  It  paid  a  compliment
equally  noticeable  to  Protestantism  itself,  by  appealing
4  to  the  doctrine  and  principles  of  the  Reformation,
and  to  the  spirit  of  British  laws  against  oppression
or  persecution  on  account  of  religious  belief.’  The
substance  of  the  Catholic  demands  was,  4  that  no
person  who  had  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  in  its

2  Ibid.

1  1  To  Lord  Weymouth,  March  4.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

211

latest  form  should  be  counted  a  Papist  according  to
the  meaning  of  the  Popery  Acts.’1

*  Divide  et  impera  ’  was  still  Lord  North’s  maxim.
He  hoped  by  humouring  the  Catholics  to  escape  a
struggle  on  the  trade  monopolies.  But  the  art  of
governing  by  these  time-honoured  methods  was
ceasing  to  answer  its  end.  War  had  been  declared
against  Prance,  and  the  privateers  of  the  past
summer  might  now  be  supplemented  by  a  fleet  from
Brest.  The  coast  towns  could  no  longer  be  left
without  garrisons.

Parliament  voted  300,00(V  for  the  repairs  of  the
fortresses.  The  country  professed  its  willingness  to
provide  for  its  own  defence  either  by  volunteer  corps
or  by  a  militia.  The  Presbyterians  especially,  who  had
been  hitherto  devotedly  American,  were  forward
in  offering  their  services.2  The  idea  of  volunteers
had  not  yet,  perhaps,  suggested  itself  with  any
sinister  object.  It  was  mentioned  only  as  an  alter¬
native.  The  Militia  Bill  of  the  last  session  which  had
been  rejected  in  England  in  the  interest  of  the
Catholics  was  again  sent  over,  and  the  Viceroy  begged
that  it  might  this  time  be  returned  to  him,  that  if
necessary  the  militia  might  be  embodied.  The  Par¬
liament,  however,  he  said,  preferred  volunteer  corps,
and  for  himself  he  was  strongly  of  the  same  opinion .
The  cost  of  the  militia  would  fall  on  the  Treasury.
If  the  lords  and  gentlemen  of  Ireland  were  willing  to
raise  independent  companies  at  their  expense,  it  would
be  a  pity  to  reject  their  liberality.  The  Treasury  was

1  1  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  but  the  disposition  of  the  Presby-

to  Lord  Weymouth,  March  4,  terians. — The  Earl  of  Buckingham-
1778.’  shire  to  Lord  Weymouth,  March

2  ‘  The  idea  of  the  French  war  29.’
has  not  only  altered  the  language

p  2

CHAP.

I.

~rm.

212

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  empty.  Twenty  thousand  pounds  had  been  borrowed
— .  at  interest  from  La  Touche’s  bank,  but  that  was
17VS*  already  spent.  There  were  pressing  demands  for
money  for  indispensable  purposes,  and  a  second  ap¬
plication  to  Messrs.  La  Touche  had  been  met  by
polite  excuses.1

The  necessity  of  prompt  resolution  was  made  more
apparent  by  news  which  came  in  from  the  north.
In  the  last  year  the  privateers  had  not  appeared
before  June.  They  had  vanished  at  the  equinox,
and  if  they  returned  they  were  not  looked  for  at  an
earlier  part  of  the  season.  The  c  Arethusa  ’  and  her
consort  had  gone  back  to  Portsmouth.  The  4  Drake,’
a  20-gun  brig  or  brigantine,  lay  at  Carrickfergus,  and
is  the  onlv  vessel  mentioned  as  on  the  station.  A
seaman,  meanwhile,  had  entered  the  service  of  Con¬
gress  who  knew  how  to  use  an  opportunity.

Paul  Jones  was  born  at  Kirkcudbright,  in  the  year
1747,  and  was  the  son  of  a  servant  of  Mr.  Craik,  of
Arbigland.  He  was  apprenticed  when  twelve  years
old  to  a  merchant  at  Whitehaven,  and  after  remaining
with  him  fourteen  years  emigrated  to  Virginia.
There  he  found  himself  at  the  breaking  out  of  the
revolutionary  war,  and  taking  the  American  side  he
distinguished  himself  so  brilliantly  in  command  of  a
privateer,  that  in  the  spring  of  1778  he  was  appointed
to  the  4  Hanger,’  a  fast  18 -gun  sloop,  with  a  roving
commission.  Guessing  that  if  he  was  early  in  the
Irish  waters  he  would  find  the  coast  clear,  he  sailed
for  St.  George’s  Channel  at  the  beginning  of  April.
Every  harbour  was  familiar  to  him,  and  the  condition
of  every  harbour  battery.  At  midnight  on  the  20th

1  *  To  Lord  North,  April  30,  1778/

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

213

of  April,  an  unknown  armed  vessel  sailed  into  Garrick-  chap.
fergus  Harbour,  and  brought  up  under  the  4  Drake’s  ’  * — r —
side.  She  had  meant  to  board,  but  she  swung  1778,
astern  too  far  in  the  tide.  The  4  Drake  ’  hailed  her
to  know  what  she  was  and  whence  she  came.  A
voice  answered  hastily  that  she  was  from  St.  Vincent’s.

A  moment  after  she  had  cut  her  cable  and  was
standing  again  out  to  sea.  The  4  Drake  ’  fired  a
shot  and  stood  out  in  pursuit,  but  she  had  lost  time
in  getting  under  weigh,  and  the  mysterious  stranger
had  disappeared  in  the  darkness.  It  was  the  4  Kanger,’
which  had  crossed  the  Atlantic  in  less  than  twenty
days,  and  had  already  in  the  way  up  Channel  taken  a
Waterford  brig,  a  Dublin  ship  called  the  4  Lord
Chatham,’  and  a  sloop  and  schooner  which  she  had
pillaged  and  sunk.  Having  missed  the  4  Drake,’

Jones  stood  across  to  Whitehaven  to  visit  his  old
acquaintances  there.  His  appearance  was  an  absolute
surprise.  Before  the  inhabitants  had  recovered  from
their  astonishment  he  had  landed  a  couple  of  boats’
crews,  spiked  the  guns  in  the  batteries,  fired  the
shipping  in  the  harbour,  and  was  gone  like  a  sky
rocket.

Swiftness  in  such  matters  was  the  condition  of
success.  On  the  morning  of  the  22nd  Paul  Jones  was
in  Kirkcudbright  Bay,  the  scene  of  his  childhood  ;  he
landed  at  St.  Mary’s  Isle  and  plundered  the  house  of
Lord  Selkirk.  Thence  on  the  instant  he  flew  back
to  the  Irish  coast  to  look  for  his  friend  the  4  Drake,’
and  dispose  of  her  while  she  was  still  alone.  The
4  Drake  ’  was  at  her  old  moorings  in  the  Lough.

Jones  entered  again  this  time  in  broad  daylight  at
eight  in  the  morning,  sailed  round  her,  and  went  out
again.  An  English  officer  could  not  refuse  so

214

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1778.

insolent  a  challenge.  The  4  Drake’s  ’  guns  were  four
pounders,  the  4  Ranger’s  ’  were  sixes.  Captain  Burder,
the  4  Drake’s  ’  commander,  nevertheless  instantly
weighed  and  went  in  pursuit.  The  4  Ranger  ’  led
him  a  long  chase.  He  did  not  overtake  her  till  the
evening.  After  an  hour’s  sharp  engagement,  yard
arm  to  yard  arm,  Captain  Burder  and  his  first  officer
were  killed,  half  the  crew  were  dead  or  disabled,  and
the  4  Drake  ’  herself  with  shattered  spars  and  leaking
sides  was  obliged  to  strike.  Another  ship  from  White¬
haven  captured  the  next  morning  completed  the  work
of  a  single  week,  and  the  bold  privateer,  after  landing
his  least  valuable  prisoners  on  the  Antrim  coast,
made  sail  for  Brest  with  his  prizes.1

The  dullest  pedant  in  the  English  Government
could  no  longer  resist  such  a  rude  awakening.
Already  the  English  Parliament  had  begun  to  think
that  Ireland  must  be  attended  to.  A  bill  was  brought
in  and  carried  for  repeal  of  the  Penal  Laws  against  the
Catholics  at  home  of  which  the  Irish  Acts  had  been  a
copy.  It  was  an  example  which  Ireland  might  follow
if  it  pleased.  Lord  Nugent  had  brought  up  the  trade
question,  and  after  a  hard  fight  had  wrung  out  some
few  concessions.  The  embargo  was  taken  off,  and
Ireland,  as  an  extraordinary  favour,  was  allowed  a
free  export  of  all  her  productions  except  woollens.

The  absenteeism  of  her  men  of  genius  was  a  worse
wrong  to  Ireland  than  the  absenteeism  of  her  land¬
lords.  If  Edmund  Burke  had  remained  in  the
country  where  Providence  had  placed  him,  he  might
have  changed  the  current  of  its  history.  When  he
took  up  her  cause  at  last  in  earnest  it  was  with  a

1  ‘  Depositions  taken  before  the  Rev,  R.  Dobbs,  co.  Antrim,  April
27,  1778/  S.  P.  0.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

215

brain  which  the  French  revolution  had  deranged,  and  chap.
his  interference  became  infinitely  mischievous.  In  _

these  preliminary  questions,  however,  he  exerted  1778,
himself  wisely  and  on  the  right  side.  The  table  of
the  House  of  Commons  was  covered  with  petitions
from  the  English  manufacturers  against  further  in¬
dulgence.  Ministers  talked  the  usual  cant  that  taxes
in  Ireland  were  low  and  living  cheap,  and  that  she
must  be  weighted  in  the  race  or  England  would  be
ruined.  Liverpool,  Manchester,  Glasgow,  were  almost
in  insurrection.  Burke  had  the  courage  to  face  the
storm.  He  demanded  for  one  thing  the  re-extension
to  Ireland  of  the  benefit  of  the  Navigation  Laws,  and
though  he  failed  for  the  time  and  quarrelled  to  no
effective  purpose  with  his  Bristol  constituents,  he
forced  English  statesmen  into  a  faint  perception  of  the
enormity  of  their  past  policy,  and  familiarized  them
with  the  necessity  of  a  change.

Not  venturing  to  risk  the  stability  of  the  Cabinet
in  a  commercial  tempest,  yet  aware  that  something
must  be  done  to  bring  Ireland  into  a  better  mind,

Lord  North  fell  again  upon  the  Catholic  question.  He
had  reason  to  fear  in  fact  that  the  Catholics  were  less
loyal  than  they  pretended,  and  that  unless  he  insisted
on  concessions  being  made  to  them,  he  might  have  an
Irish  insurrection  on  his  hands  in  addition  to  his  other
troubles.1  Ireland  must  do  what  England  had  done.

1  ‘  I  have  acquired  a  piece  of  in¬
formation  here,  concerning  a  plot
for  a  revolt  in  the  west  of  Ireland
among  the  Roman  Catholics,  with
a  view  to  overturn  the  present  Go¬
vernment,  by  the  aid  of  the  French
and  Spaniards,  and  to  establish  such
an  one  as  prevails  in  this  country,
I  mean  the  Cantons,  by  granting

toleration  to  the  Protestants.  You
may  depend  on  its  authenticity,  and
that  at  this  moment  many  friars  are
going  secretly  from  France  to  Ire¬
land  to  set  it  going;  though  the
late  Acts  passed  for  the  relief  of
the  Roman  Catholics  will,  it  is  to
be  hoped,  prevent  it  from  succeed¬
ing;  the  motive  to  revolt  having

216

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

Tttsl

The  Viceroy  was  directed  to  urge  the  friends  of
Government  to  swallow  their  scruples,  and  forward
immediately  some  measure  4  of  expedient  relief.’
Something  was  better  than  nothing.  Many  intelli¬
gent  Irishmen  were  aware  that  the  Penal  Laws  had

O

failed  of  their  purpose  and  could  no  longer  be  retained.
Others,  not  inclined  to  relaxation  on  the  side  of  the
Catholics,  remembered  that  the  Presbyterian  disabili¬
ties  had  been  laid  on  in  a  side  clause  of  the  anti-
Popery  Act.  The  relief  of  the  Catholics  might  be
accompanied  appropriately  with  the  relief  of  the
Nonconformists.  The  Bill  was  entrusted  to  Luke
Gardiner,  the  member  for  Dublin,  who  afterwards,
as  Lord  Mountjoy,  was  to  learn  the  real  meaning
of  Catholic  emancipation  when  he  was  piked  and
hacked  to  death  at  New  Ross.  At  present  he  was
known  only  as  a  rising  politician,  one  of  the  very
small  body  in  the  House  of  Commons  whose  principles
were  above  suspicion.  His  proposal  was  to  repeal
the  gavelling  clauses  of  the  Act  of  Anne,  to  allow
the  property  of  Catholics  to  descend  unbroken,  to  take
from  the  eldest  son  the  power  of  making  his  father
tenant  for  life  by  affecting  conversion,  to  enable  Catho¬
lics  to  purchase  freehold  property,  and  to  relieve  them

proceeded  from  the  intolerable  hard¬
ships  they  suffered.  My  intelli¬
gence  comes  from  Rome,  and  I  am
pretty  certain  these  Acts  have  been
brought  in,  from  the  ministry  re¬
ceiving  the  same  intelligence,  which
I  know  they  have  been  in  possession
of  for  some  time  ;  as  the  measures
for  preventing  the  mischiefproposed
by  the  person  who  gives  the  in¬
formation  are  exactly  those  that
have  been  adopted.  Depend  on  its

being  true,  and  that  all  the  Roman
Catholics  in  the  west  of  Ireland
have  been  ripe  for  a  revolt  some
time;  and  that  the  plan  was,  and
may  be  yet,  a  fixed  purpose,  that
has  been  in  agitation,  and  preparing
to  burst  ever  since  France  showed
a  disposition  to  break  with  Eng¬
land.  —  Lord  Amherst  to  Lord
North,  from  Geneva,  June  17,
1778.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

217

from  the  vexatious  limitations  on  their  leases,  which
had  led  so  many  of  the  larger  tenants  to  affect  to  be
Protestants.  These  suggestions  fell  far  short  of  the
committee’s  expectations,  but  short  as  they  were  they
involved  the  final  surrender  of  the  polic}7  which  was
designed  to  throw  the  whole  soil  of  Ireland  into
Protestant  hands.  To  part  entirely  with  so  cherished
an  expectation  was  more  than  the  House  was  pre¬
pared  for.  An  amendment  still  to  withhold  from
Catholics  the  right  of  buying  freeholds,  and  to  enable
them  instead  to  take  leases  for  999  years,  was  carried,
after  a  long  debate,  by  a  majority  of  three.1  A
member  in  favour  of  the  Presbyterians  then  moved
the  repeal  of  the  Test  clause.  There  had  been
a  time  when  English  Ministers  were  alive  to  this
enormous  impolicy  of  alienating  so  powerful  a  section
of  the  Protestant  community,  and  had  endeavoured
in  vain  to  persuade  the  Irish  Parliament  to  adopt  a
■wiser  attitude  towards  Dissent.  Now,  when  the  Irish
Commons  at  least  were  willing,  it  was  England  that
drew  back.  Lord  North  and  the  Viceroy,  sharing
the  miserable  prejudices  of  Churchmen  against  Dis¬
senters,  had  determined  that  the  Dissenters’  disabili¬
ties  should  be  maintained  as  a  punishment  of  the
Presbyterians  for  their  American  tendencies  ;  but
their  hope  was  to  avoid  if  possible  the  responsibility
of  the  rejection,  and  throw  the  odium  of  it  on  the  Irish
Parliament.  Very  many  members  of  the  House  of  Com¬
mons,  by  the  Viceroy’s  confession,  were  in  its  favour.
Lord  Buckinghamshire  might  have  succeeded,  how¬
ever,  in  throwing  out  the  clause  by  Castle  influence,  but
for  the  tactics  of  some  of  the  leaders  of  the  ultra-

CHAP.

i.

1778.

1  111  to  108.

218

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Protestant  party.  Lord  Shannon,  Lord  Ely,  and  other

ITT  A  **

_ i _  noblemen  who  were  opposed  to  granting  relief  to  the

Catholics  supported  it  c  as  a  clog  to  the  rest  of  the
Bill.’  They  were  aware  of  Lord  North’s  resolution.
They  expected  that  if  the  Presbyterian  claims  formed
part  of  the  Bill  as  it  was  sent  to  England,  one  of  two
things  would  happen — either  it  would  be  struck  out
by  the  English  Cabinet,  and  the  party  in  the  House
which  had  supported  Catholic  relief  only  with  a  view
of  emancipating  the  Presbyterians  would  then  reject
it  altogether,  or  the  Bill  would  be  returned  entire,
and  then  it  would  be  thrown  out  by  the  bishops  in  the
House  of  Lords.1  Assisted  by  the  nominees  of  these
great  persons,  the  clause  was  carried  through  the
House  of  Commons.  So  intense,  so  childish,  was
still  the  animosity  of  the  peers  and  prelates  against
the  Nonconformists  that  it  passed  the  Council  on  its
way  to  England,  only  from  an  assurance  that  it
would  be  removed  there.  Lord  North,  as  was
anticipated,  struck  it  out.  The  sacramental  test,
which  had  done  more  harm  in  Ireland  than  all  the
penal  acts  against  the  Papists  ten  times  told,  was  per¬
sistently  retained.  The  Bill  came  back  a  relief  to
Papists  only,  and  in  this  form  nearly  met  the  fate
which  Lord  Shannon  and  its  friends  designed  for  it.
It  was  carried  through  the  Commons  with  extreme  dif¬
ficulty,  but  it  was  carried,  and  the  first  step  was  taken
in  the  series  of  measures  yet  perhaps  unended,  which
are  called  Justice  to  Ireland.  The  Catholic  Irish  could
once  more  acquire  a  hold  on  the  soil  of  their  fathers.
The  distinction  between  a  tenure  of  999  years  or  a

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Weymouth,  June  20,  1778.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

219

lease  for  five  lives  and  a  freehold  was  too  arbitrary  to
be  permanent.  This  feature  in  the  Penal  Laws,  the
harshest  because  the  most  difficult  to  evade,  was
abolished  for  ever,  and  with  it  the  ever  demoralizing,
if  not  at  the  time  when  it  was  enacted  whollv  unne-
cessary,  power  bestowed  on  a  child  who  conformed  to
the  Establishment  to  prevent  his  father  from  disin¬
heriting  him.

With  the  Catholic  Relief  Bill  was  this  time  returned
also  the  Militia  Bill,  as  the  Viceroy  had  desired;  and
50,000/.  borrowed  from  the  Bank  of  England  were
sent  over  for  greater  security  in  a  frigate  to  enable
the  Viceroy  to  protect  the  harbours.1  As  the
summer  wore  on,  privateers  under  French  and
American  colours  thickened  in  the  Irish  Channel,  the
fishermen  and  smugglers  being  still  their  constant
friends.  Two  of  them  lay  usually  off  Bray  Head,
others  off  Waterford  and  Cork,  others  at  the  Dursevs
or  Cape  Clear.  Being  built  for  speed  they  laughed
at  pursuit,  and  made  prizes  of  any  traders  that
passed  them.  Their  occupation  was  so  lively  and
so  lucrative  that  it  found  imitators  in  the  captains  and
owners  of  the  contraband  crafts,  who  went  to  Brest  for
letters  of  marque  and  returned  to  their  haunts  to
plunder,  as  if  engaged  in  honourable  war.  The

1  ( The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire
to  Weymouth,  June  3, 1778. — It  is
painful  to  observe  that  at  a  time
when  Lord  North  appeared  really
alarmed  about  Ireland  Irish  jobs
were  as  rife  as  ever.  Charles  James
Fox  held  a  sinecure  office  of  Clerk
of  the  Pells  in  Ireland,  with  a  sa¬
lary  of  2,300/.  a  year.  In  this  year,
1778,  North  induced  Fox  to  sur¬
render  it  in  return  for  30,000/.  in

hand  and  a  life  pension  of  1,700/.  a
year.  The  Clerkship  of  the  Pells
was  then  given  to  Mr.  Jenkinson,
afterwards  Earl  of  Liverpool.  The
salary  was  raised  from  2,300/.  to
3,500/.,  and  the  Irish  Exchequer
was  thus  burdened  in  this  one  trans¬
action  with  an  additional  1,200/.
on  the  office  which  Fox  had  held,
the  pension  of  1,700/.  a  year  and  the
interest  of  30,000/.’

CHAP.

I.

1778.

220

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND*.

rook  Viceroy’s  50,000Z.  meanwhile  melted  away,  yet  no

. _ ZZ _ '  coast  guard  was  established  and  no  militia.  From

1778.  piracy  at  sea  the  step  would  be  a  short  one  to  pillage
on  shore,  and  the  country  gentlemen  began  in  earnest
to  arm  their  tenants  and  combine  in  corps  for  mutual
protection.  The  state  of  the  Channel  was  creating  in
England  serious  inconvenience,  and  English  attention
already  roused  on  the  Irish  problem  began  to  direct
itself  upon  it  in  earnest.  Lord  Nugent  again  brought
up  the  subject  in  Parliament.  He  was  an  absentee  ;
and  it  did  not  occur  to  him  that  his  own  duty  was  at
once  to  return  to  his  post.  His  patriotic  perceptions
had  been  quickened  by  the  cessation  of  remittances.
For  two  years  he  told  the  House  of  Commons  that  he
had  received  no  rents.  The  war  had  ruined  the  linen
trade.  The  embargo  had  ruined  the  farmers.  Artisan
and  peasant  were  starving.  Land  was  offered  at  four¬
teen  years’  purchase  and  found  no  buyers.  By  every
ground  of  obligation,  by  duty,  by  prudence,  by  com¬
mon  human  feeling  for  the  misery  of  their  fellow
subjects,  the  English  legislature  was  bound  to  inter¬
fere,  and  to  remove  at  least  the  artificial  hindrances
which  were  shackling  Irish  enterprise.  The  North¬
ern  millowners  clamoured  that  the  Irish  were  idle,
and  were  starving  by  their  own  indolence.  These
interested  coteries  began  to  be  listened  to  with  less
patience  as  the  progress  of  the  rebellion  in  America
created  an  evidence  so  palpable  of  the  possible  conse¬
quences  of  misgovernment.  The  King  recommended
that,  in  consequence  of  the  undoubted  distress  in
Ireland,  the  English  Treasury  should  undertake  the
cost  of  the  Irish  regiments  which  were  serving  in
America.  The  message  brought  on  debates  in  which
both  Houses  agreed  to  demand  an  account  of  the  entire

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

221

condition  of  Irish  trade.  Lord  Shelburne  ventured
to  say  that  America  had  revolted  on  far  less  provo¬
cation  than  had  been  habitually  endured  by  Ireland.
Lord  Townshend,  who  knew  Ireland,  and  knew  what
ailed  her  better  than  any  of  his  hearers,  spoke  with
remarkable  feeling  and  eloquence,  and  implored  the
Peers  to  wake  to  a  sense  of  the  insolent  cruelty  with
which  the  poor  island  had  been  so  long  afflicted.  With
keen  antithesis  he,  too,  like  Shelburne,  contrasted
Ireland  and  America,  the  Irish  patient  under  misery,
which  might  have  driven  a  wiser  people  into  madness,
the  Americans  rebellious  in  the  midst  of  plenty  and
prosperity.  Ireland,  he  said,  perishing  in  the  fetters
which  chained  her  industry,  had  petitioned  humbly  for
partial  release,  and  England  had  answered  insolently,
Break  your  chains  if  you  can.  The  Americans  had
leagued  themselves  with  England’s  inveterate  enemy
for  her  total  destruction.  To  them  England  had  said,
You  shall  be  free,  you  shall  pay  no  taxes,  we  will  inter¬
fere  no  more  with  you ;  remain  with  us  on  your  own
terms.  If  these  replies  were  persisted  in,  the  Irish
when  peace  was  made  would  emigrate  to  a  land
where  honest  labour  would  receive  its  due  reward.
While  the  war  continued  they  would  require  to  be
held  down  by  force,  and  at  any  moment  they  might
refuse  after  all  either  to  buy  English  manufactures
or  export  their  own  produce,  and  fleets  and  armies
would  preach  to  them  in  vain.

The  Irish  counties  supported  by  petition  the  argu¬
ments  of  their  English  friends.  The  grand  juries
represented  that  the  fields  and  highways  were  filled
with  crowds  of  wretched  beings  half  naked  and
starving.  Foreign  markets  were  closed  to  them.  The
home  market  was  destroyed  by  internal  distress,  and

1

CHAP.

I.

1778.

1

r

222

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  the  poor  artisans  who  had  supported  themselves

weaving  were  without  work  and  without  food.  They
1779*  had  bought  English  goods  as  long  as  they  had  means
to  buy  them.  Now  in  their  time  of  dire  distress  they
had  hoped  the  English  Parliament  would  have  been
their  friend.  They  learnt  with  pain  and  surprise  that
the  only  boon  which  would  give  them  relief  was  still
withheld.  They  besought  the  King  to  interpose  in
their  favour,  and  procure  them  leave  to  export  and
sell  at  least  the  coarse  frieze  blankets  and  flannels
which  the  peasants’  wives  and  children  produced  in
their  cabins.1  Eloquence  and  entreaty  were  alike  in
vain.  The  English  Parliament,  though  compelled
at  last  to  listen  to  the  truth,  could  not  yet  bend
itself  to  act  upon  it.  The  House  of  Commons  still
refused  to  open  the  woollen  trade,  in  whole  or  in
part;  and  Ireland,  now  desperate  and  determined,  and
treading  ominously  in  the  steps  of  America,  adopted
the  measures  which  Townshend  had  suggested,  which
long  before  had  been  recommended  by  Swift  ;  and
resolved  to  exclude  from  the  Irish  market  every
article  of  British  manufacture  which  could  be  produced
at  home.2

1  *  Humble  petition  of  tbe  Higb
Sheriff  and  Grand  Jury  of  Wick¬
low,  April  6,  1779.’  S.  P.  0.

2  1  Resolution  taken  at  the  Thol-
sel,  in  Dublin,  April  26,  1779 : —
1  a  That  at  this  time  of  universal  ca¬
lamity  and  distress,  when,  through
a  total  stagnation  of  our  trade,
poverty  and  wretchedness  are  now
become  the  portion  of  those  to
whom  hitherto  labour  and  industry
afforded  a  competency;  when  the
emigration  of  thousands  of  our  most
useful  manufacturers  renders  them
acceptable  and  material  acquisitions
to  other  countries,  and  threatens

ruin  to  our  own;  when,  notwith¬
standing  the  most  pathetic  repre¬
sentations  of  our  addresses,  and  our
late  humble  petition  to  the  throne,
our  sister  country  not  only  par¬
tially  and  unj  ustly  still  prevents  us
from  benefiting  by  those  advan¬
tages  which  the  bountiful  hand  of
Providence  has  bestowed  on  us,  but
even  tantalizes  us  with  imaginary
schemes  of  improvement,  and  in¬
sults  us  with  permission  to  cultivate
our  own  soil;  when  the  unjust,
illiberal,  and  impolitic  opposition  of
many  self-interested  people  of  Great
Britain  to  the  proposed  encourage-

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  BETRIBU TION.

223

The  Viceroy,  incapable  of  thought,  and  with  a  chap.
mind  saturated  with  vulgar  English  prejudice,  could
see  nothing  in  this  movement  but  the  secret  action  1779‘
of  French  and  American  emissaries,  and  was  rash
enough  to  dream  of  prosecution.  The  law  officers,
wiser  than  he,  forbade  a  folly  which  might  have
caused  immediate  insurrection.  Weymouth  allowed
the  dangers  of  the  merchants’  resolution,  but  advised
Buckinghamshire  to  be  quiet  and  conciliatory.  He
bade  him  tell  the  popular  leaders  that  his  majesty
was  deeply  concerned  for  his  Irish  subjects,  and  was
occupied  in  devising  means  to  relieve  their  distress.1
Meanwhile  he  desired  the  Viceroy  to  send  him  his
own  thoughts  on  the  cause  of  the  distress,  and  to
collect  the  private  sentiments  of  such  of  the  servants
of  the  Crown  and  other  gentlemen  as  he  could  best
depend  on.

The  Viceroy  complied.  He  collected  the  opinions
of  Lord  Lifford  (the  Chancellor),  of  Mr.  Flood,  of
Sir  Lucius  O’Brien,  Lord  Annaly,  Mr.  Pery  (the
Speaker),  of  Hussey  Burgh,  and  last  and  most  im¬
portant,  of  Hely  Hutchinson ;  and  the  papers  drawn
by  these  gentlemen,  for  the  most  part  calm  and  well-
reasoned,  form  the  best  exposition  which  exists  of
the  poisonous  forces  which  had  so  long  been  working
in  the  country.

ment  of  the  trade  and  commerce  of
this  kingdom  originates  in  avarice
and  ingratitude.  .  .  We  will  not

directly  or  indirectly  import  or  use
any  wares,  the  produce  or  manu¬
facture  of  Great  Britain,  which  can
be  produced  or  manufactured  in
this  kingdom,  until  an  enlightened
policy,  founded  on  principles  of
justice,  shall  appear  to  actuate  the

inhabitants  of  certain  manufactur¬
ing  towns  there,  who  have  taken  an
active  part  in  opposing  the  regula¬
tions  proposed  in  favour  of  the  trade
of  Ireland.” — Enclosed  by  the  Earl
of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Wey¬
mouth.’  S.  P.  O.

1  ■  Lord  Weymouth  to  the  Earl
of  Buckinghamshire,  May  7,  1779.’

224

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  For  himself  Lord  Buckinghamshire  admitted  that
_  his  own  view  could  be  but  superficial.  In  his  opinion

1779.  c^-]^  great  leading  mischief’  had  been  the  rise  of

rents.  The  absentees  were  most  to  blame,  but  the
resident  gentry  were  in  fault  almost  as  much.  They
lived  beyond  their  incomes.  They  had  heavily  en¬
cumbered  their  estates.  Between  absentee  rents,  the
interest  on  mortgages,  the  interest  on  the  now  fast
accumulating  State  debt,  the  profits  of  pensions
and  of  the  many  lucrative  offices  held  as  sinecures
by  Englishmen,  the  aggregate  sum  sent  annually  out
of  the  kingdom  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  re¬
sources.  The  soil  could  not  be  cultivated,  the  mines
and  fisheries  could  not  be  developed  without  capital,
and  the  drain  prevented  capital  from  accumulating.
Here,  so  far  as  the  Viceroy  could  see,  was  the  chief
seat  of  the  disease ;  of  the  manufacturing  grievances
others  were  fitter  judges  than  himself.1

Mr.  Flood  was  hesitating  and  diffident,  as  became
a  patriot  in  bondage,  who  was  unable  to  speak  his
real  convictions.  Sir  Lucius  O’Brien  demanded  free
trade,  pure  and  simple.  Lord  Annaly,2  an  old-expe¬
rienced  lawyer,  selected  three  special  influences  as
working  for  evil  in  Ireland — the  trade  laws,  absen¬
teeism,  and  lastly,  4  the  idleness  and  licentiousness
of  the  lower  class  of  people,  which  had  been  greatly
increased  by  the  Octennial  Bill  ’ — a  remark  as  preg¬
nant  as  it  'was  unexpected.  The  patent  remedy  for
Irish  evils  then  and  since  has  been  the  extension  of
what  is  popularly  called  liberty  and  self-govern¬
ment.  The  Octennial  Bill  was  the  first  move  in

1  ‘  Buckinghamshire  to  Wey-  naly  in  1776,  Chief  Justice  of  the

mouth,  May  28,  1779.’  Court  of  Kang’s  Bench.

2  John  Gore,  created  Baron  An-

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

225

that  direction,  and  had  begun  already  to  bear  its  too
familiar  fruits.

Lord  Lifford  was  an  Englishman,  and  was,  perhaps,
over  partial  to  his  own  country.  Like  the  Viceroy,
he  dwelt  on  the  exhaustion  caused  by  the  remittances
out  of  the  country,  the  burden  on  the  exchequer
from  so  many  useless  nominal  offices,  the  high  rents,
the  enormous  and  unjust  county  cesses,  which  pressed
so  heavily  on  the  peasantry,  and  the  suspension  of
the  linen  trade,  caused  by  the  American  war  ;  the
loss,  4  too,  of  the  great  clandestine  woollen  trade  which
had  been  opened  with  America,’  and  had  been  the
chief  support  of  the  spinners  and  weavers.  The
existence  of  such  a  clandestine  trade,  however,  re¬
quired  to  be  accounted  for,  and  Lifford,  feeling  him¬
self  on  dangerous  ground,  concluded  cautiously  :
4  The  great  cause,  or  some  great  cause,  lies  probably
much  deeper.  The  seeds  of  the  decay  which  have
brought  us  to  our  present  state  may  have  been  sown
long  ago.  I  fear  there  may  be  some  radical  cause,
not  sufficiently  understood.’  4  For  remedy  of  pre¬
sent  evils,  nothing  adequate  can  be  found  till  the
people  of  both  kingdoms  shall  be  brought  to  that
temper  and  liberality  of  mind  that  they  can  think
on  so  great  a  subject  as  citizens  of  the  world,  and
feel  indifferent,  as  one  people,  under  one  king,  one
constitution,  and  with  one  religion,1  whether  the
manufactures  of  the  empire  are  carried  on  in  Down
or  in  York.’

1  This  remarkable  expression  de-  to  restore  Ireland  to  the  condition
serves  to  be  attended  to.  Intellect,  in  which  it  stood  before  the  Crom-
education,  property, political  power,  wellian  conquest,  has  been  the  sole
everything  that  could  make  itself  result,  almost  wholly  accomplished
felt  as  a  constituent  of  national  life,  now,  by  England’s  penitence  for
was  still  Protestant.  To  undo  this,  past  misgovernment.

VOL.  II.  Q

CHAP.

I.

1779^

226

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Pery  wrote  as  a  cultivated  and  moderate  Irish-

VI  "

- — '  man.  His  country,  he  said,  was  either  by  direct
prohibition,  or  as  a  consequence  of  other  restraining
laws,  cut  off  from  trade  either  with  the  British  colo¬
nies  or  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  There  could  be
no  commerce  without  assortments  of  the  various
goods  which  were  in  demand  in  the  country  traded
with,  and  without  free  permission  to  bring  back  the
produce  of  that  country.  Ireland’s  present  produce
was  limited  to  linen  and  provisions.  In  the  linen
trade  she  had  powerful  rivals,  and  she  was  forbidden
at  present  to  send  the  most  profitable  branch  of
that  manufacture  to  America,  where  there  was  the
readiest  market  for  it.  Her  provision  trade  had
been  violently  destroyed  by  the  recent  embargo.
Pery  did  not  question  the  justice  of  the  restrain¬
ing  laws,  but  he  ventured  to  doubt  the  policy  of
them.  It  could  not  be  England’s  interest  to  keep
Ireland  miserable.  England  was  the  centre  of  the
empire.  To  England  the  wealth  gained  in  the  extre¬
mities  must  necessarily  flow.  She  should  be  ashamed
to  confess  that  she  dreaded  Ireland’s  rivalry.  Her
policy  should  be  to  allow  the  Irish  to  exert  them¬
selves  in  whatever  branch  of  industry  best  suited
them,  in  common  with  their  British  fellow-subjects,
and  leave  them  to  gather  the  harvest  of  their  labours.
This  was  all  that  they  asked,  and  they  ought  not  to
be  contented  with  less.  Expedients  might  be  tried,
and  probably  would  be  tried,  but  they  would  fail  of
their  object,  and  would  only  prolong  the  irritation.
Let  the  restrictive  laws  be  removed  ;  the  Irish  and
English  nations  would  then  be  united  in  affection  as
much  as  in  interest,  and  the  power  of  malice  would
be  unable  to  destroy  their  harmony ;  but  the  seeds

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

227

of  discord  had  been  sown,  and  if  allowed  to  spring
up  would  soon  overspread  the  land.

All  parties  were  represented  on  the  Viceroy’s  list.
Hussey  Burgh  was  more  advanced  than  Pery,  though,
perhaps,  no  truer  a  patriot.  He  was  young,  but  just
turned  thirty,  handsome,  and  with  a  large  for¬
tune.  His  expenses  still  exceeded  his  income.  He
drove  six  horses  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  and  he  was
attended  everywhere  by  three  outriders.  He  was
indolent,  but  he  had  shown  abilities  in  Parliament
so  considerable,  that  the  Government  had  made  him
Prime  Sergeant,  rather  to  protect  themselves  against
his  hostility  than  in  the  hope  of  securing  his  sup¬
port.  He  was  called  the  Cicero  of  the  Senate,  and
at  happy  moments  he  exceeded  even  Grattan  in
pregnant  powers  of  expression.

4  It  has  come  to  this,’  Hussey  Burgh  replied  to
the  Viceroy’s  request  for  his  sentiments  on  the  Irish
difficulty.  4  England  must  either  support  this  king¬
dom,  or  allow  her  to  support  herself.  Her  option  is
to  give  in  trade  or  to  give  in  money ;  without  one  or
the  other  the  expenses  cannot  be  supplied.  If  she
gives  in  money,  she  suffers  a  country  of  great  extent
and  fertility  to  become  a  burden  instead  of  a  benefit.
If  she  gives  in  trade,  whatever  wealth  we  may  ac¬
quire  will  flow  back  upon  herself.  Were  I  asked
what  is  for  the  benefit  of  Manchester,  what  is  for
the  benefit  of  Glasgow,  I  should  answer  that  mono¬
polies,  however  destructive  of  the  general  weal,  are
beneficial  to  those  who  possess  them.  Were  I  asked
what  is  the  most  effectual  measure  for  promoting
the  common  wealth  and  strength  of  his  majesty’s
subjects  of  both  kingdoms,  I  answer,  an  equal  and

perfect  freedom  of  trade,  without  which  one  of  those

q  2

CHAP.

i.

1779.

228

BOOK

VI.

"l779?

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

kingdoms  has  neither  strength,  wealth,  nor  com¬
merce,  and  must  become  a  burden  on  the  other/

The  contribution  of  Mr.  Hely  Hutchinson  was
the  first  sketch  of  a  book  which  he  afterwards  pub¬
lished  on  Ireland’s  commercial  disabilities,  and  which
earned  his  pardon  from  Irish  patriotism  for  his  sub¬
serviency  to  the  Court  and  Lord  Townshend.

4  You  ask  my  sentiments  on  the  state  of  my
country,’  he  answered  to  the  Viceroy’s  invitation.  4 1
see  ruin  everywhere;  the  rate  of  interest  rising,  the
revenue  falling,  between  twenty  and  thirty  thousand
merchants  and  artisans  in  Dublin  alone  reduced  to
penury  and  supported  by  alms.  The  public  debt
exceeds  a  million,  and  the  interest  is  remitted  to
England.  Rents  have  risen,  salaries  have  increased.
Pensions,  annuities,  the  American  rebellion,  the  em¬
bargo,  all  in  their  several  ways,  have  contributed  to
our  distress.  But  the  great  and  permanent  cause  of
our  misfortunes  is  the  restraint  of  our  commerce  and
the  discouragement  of  our  manufactures.  The  chief
produce  of  our  soil  is  wool,  which  we  are  forbidden
to  work  ;  our  weavers  starve,  therefore,  for  want  of
employment.  Our  principal  material  is  a  drug,  and
we  import  our  woollen  goods  from  England  at  a  cost
of  360,000/.  a  year.  Your  people  are  jealous  of
us.  You  say  labour  is  cheaper  here  and  taxes  lower,
and  if  you  leave  our  trade  free,  we  shall  undersell
you  in  foreign  markets.  Why  is  our  labour  cheaper?
Our  people  live  on  potatoes  and  milk,  or,  more  often,
water.  Why  ?  Because  they  can  afford  no  better.
Were  trade  free  they  would  earn  higher  wages  and
demand  better  fare.  Underpaid  labour  is  dear  labour
in  the  end.  You  do  your  work  cheaper  in  England
than  we  can  do,  for  you  undersell  us  with  your  wool-

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

229

lens  in  our  own  market.  Open  our  trade,  and  the  chap.
prices  of  all  things  will  then  rise,  labour  included.  > — ^
Our  wool  will  be  manufactured  at  home  with  the
help  of  English  capital.  The  chief  profit  will  pass
to  you,  but  our  people  will  prosper  too.  They  will
learn  industry  and  grow  in  numbers,  and  be  of  ser¬
vice  to  the  State.

4  Y our  exclusion  of  us  from  the  woollen  trade  has
hurt  you  even  more  than  it  has  hurt  us.  One  pack
of  Irish  wool  works  up  two  packs  of  French  wool.

The  French  supply  themselves  with  smuggled  wool
from  Ireland  ;  they  are  thus  able  to  undersell  you
everywhere,  and  your  loss  is  then  double  what  it
would  be  if  we  exported  our  wool  manufactured  by
ourselves.  You  have  forced  us  into  an  illicit  com¬
merce,  and  our  very  existence  now  depends  upon  it.

Ireland  has  paid  to  Great  Britain  for  eleven  years
past  double  the  sum  that  she  collects  from  the  whole
world  in  all  the  trade  which  Great  Britain  allows  her,,
a  fact  not  to  be  paralleled  in  the  history  of  the  world.

Whence  did  the  money  come?  But  one  answer  is
possible.  It  came  from  the  contraband  trade,  and
surely  it  is  madness  to  suffer  an  important  part  of
the  empire  to  continue  in  such  a  condition.  You
defeat  your  own  objects.  You  wished  to  secure  a
monopoly  in  foreign  markets.  You  have  not  secured
it.  You  wished  to  be  the  only  purchasers  of  Irish
wool,  and  the  only  sellers  of  woollen  goods  to  Ireland.

The  quantity  of  wool  exported  from  Ireland  to  Eng¬
land  in  the  last  ten  years  has  been  almost  nothing,
and  we  are  driven  to  consume  our  native  goods  our¬
selves.  As  you  have  ordered  it  we  can  sell  our  wool
and  woollen  goods  only  to  you.  We  can  buy  woollen
goods  from  you  only.  You  impose  a  duty  equal  to

230

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

1779.

a  prohibition  on  our  sale  of  woollen  goods  to  you ;
you  therefore  in  fact  say  to  us  that  we  shall  not  sell  to
you,  and  that  we  shall  buy  from  you  only.  If  such
a  law  related  to  two  private  men  instead  of  two
kingdoms,  and  enjoined  that  in  buying  or  selling  the
same  goods,  one  individual  should  deal  with  one  man
only  in  exclusion  of  others,  it  would  in  effect  ordain
that  both  as  buyer  and  seller  that  man  should  fix  his
own  price  and  profit,  and  would  refer  to  his  discretion
the  loss  and  profit  of  the  other  dealer.  You  pro¬
hibited  us  from  exporting  live  cattle  into  England,
at  the  time  of  the  prohibition  a  grievous  calamity  to
us.  You  thus  forced  us  into  breeding  sheep,  and
by  the  restraint  of  our  woollen  manufactures  drove  us
next  into  the  practice  of  running  wool.  In  vain  you
endeavoured  to  prevent  it  by  penalties  and  seizures.
The  world  has  become  a  great  commercial  society,
and  if  you  exclude  trade  from  one  channel  it  will
make  another  for  itself.

4  Your  jealousies  are  of  recent  date ;  not  till  the  end
of  the  seventeenth  century  was  there  ever  an  en¬
deavour  to  interfere  with  Irish  manufactures.  Edward
the  Third,  Edward  the  Fourth,  Henry  the  Seventh
specially  favoured  Ireland.  Neither  of  the  Cecils
discouraged  us.  Charles  the  First,  the  Protector,
and  Charles  the  Second  desired  especially  to  develope
the  woollen  trade  among  us.  Restrictive  laws  never
answer.  You  maintain  a  corn  law,  and  a  corn  law
is  only  mischievous.  The  farmer  pays  dearly  in  all
that  he  buys  for  the  advanced  prices  which  manu¬
facturers  pay  for  corn.  Enlarge  your  policy,  our
people  will  then  increase  and  will  grow  more  pros¬
perous  along  with  it.  Merchants,  sailors,  farmers,
manufacturers  will  spring  up  in  the  place  of  spiritless,

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

231

starving  drones  who  are  a  burden  and  a  re
the  empire  in  which  they  live.

c  Try  the  experiment  at  all  events.  It  is  to  be  1779
hoped  that  the  enlightened  spirit  which  led  to  this
enquiry  will  direct  its  progress,  and  that  the  repre¬
sentations  of  interested  individuals  will  not  decide
your  resolutions.  Commercial  bodies  are  like  other
corporations  in  desiring  to  be  monopolists.  The  in¬
terest  of  the  dealer  in  any  branch  of  trade  or  manu¬
facture  is  always  different  from  or  opposite  to  that  of
the  public.  To  widen  the  market  and  narrow  the
competition  is  the  interest  of  the  dealer.  To  widen
the  market  may  frequently  be  the  interest  of  the
public,  but  to  narrow  the  competition  must  always
be  against  it.’ 1

1  1  Opinions  of  Lord  Lifford,  Sir  Pery,  and  Mr.  Hely  Hutchinson,  de-
Lucius  O’Brien,  Mr.  Flood,  Lord  livered  to  the  Viceroy  in  June  and
Annaly,  Mr.  Hussey  Burgh,  Mr.  July,  1779.’  S.  P.  0.  Abridged.

proach  to  chap.

i

232

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  IV.

BOOK

VI.

"msT

Meanwhile  Ireland  was  arming,  and  arming  in  a
form  which,  however  convenient  to  an  embarrassed
treasury,  might  prove  embarrassing  should  Lord
North  resolve,  after  all,  on  maintaining  the  restraining
laws.  After  Paul  Jones’s  visit  to  Carrickfergus,
Belfast  applied  to  the  Viceroy  for  troops.  The
Viceroy  sent  down  sixty  dragoons  as  the  most  which  he
was  able  to  spare.  The  Militia  Act  had  been  passed.
On  the  part  of  the  gentlemen  there  was  no  objection
to  the  Viceroy’s  enrolling  as  many  regiments  as  he
pleased.  Sir  Lucius  O’Brien  among  others  most
strongly  urged  him  to  lose  not  a  moment  in  pro¬
viding  the  country  with  its  constitutional  garrison.1
A  governor,  the  most  moderately  qualified  for  his
duties,  should  have  known  that  if  there  was  to  be  a
military  force  in  the  kingdom  he  ought  himself  to  have
the  control  and  disposition  of  it.  Lord  Bucking¬
hamshire  unfortunately  was  embarrassed  for  money.
The  taxes  could  not  be  collected  owing  to  the  dis¬
tress.  The  customs  were  yielding  next  to  nothing
owing  to  the  collapse  of  trade.  To  borrow  was  diffi¬
cult,  if  not  impossible,  and  to  embody  the  militia
would  require  a  large  sum.  As  matters  stood,  Belfast,
Cork,  Waterford,  Limerick,  Galway,  were  wholly  un¬
protected.  There  were  not  soldiers  enough  in  the
country  for  the  commonest  police  duties.  The  militia
nevertheless  could  not  be  had  for  want  of  funds.

1  1  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Weymouth,  June  30, 1779.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

233

The  summer  was  coming  back,  and  with  the  summer  chap.
would  return  the  pirates  and  privateers.  Gentlemen  > — ^ —
who  had  property  to  lose  grew  impatient,  and  insisted  1  1
that  if  Government  could  not  protect  them  they  must
raise  corps  among  themselves,  for  their  own  defence.

Lord  Buckinghamshire  did  not  wholly  like  the  com¬
plexion  of  the  proposal.  A  few  companies  already
raised  had  assumed  a  <^<m-political  complexion,  but
it  was  impossible  to  forbid  men  to  take  care  of  their
own  property.  If  volunteer  corps  were  formed  they
would  be  under  the  command  of  great  peers  and
commoners  who  were  men  of  property  and  were  Pro¬
testants  as  well.  The  Catholic  Belief  made  a  diffi¬
culty  in  refusing  permission.  c  The  Protestants,’  the
Viceroy  said,  c  might  plausibly  have  murmured  if
they  had  been  forbidden  to  arm  in  their  own  defence
when  the  Legislature  was  protecting  men  whom  they
had  so  long  deemed  their  inveterate  enemies.’ 1

The  Cabinet  were  clearer  sighted  than  the  Viceroy.

They  perceived  at  any  rate  that  to  allow  an  indis¬
criminate  arming  of  the  Irish  people,  or  even  of  the
Protestant  Irish,  in  their  present  humour,  was  ex¬
ceedingly  ill-judged.  Weymouth  wrote  in  haste  that
Lord  Buckinghamshire  must  prevent  the  corps  from
assembling,  that  he  must  take  their  arms  from  them,
that  he  must  insist  on  nominating  the  officers  himself.

To  this  there  was  but  one  answer,  it  was  too  late  for
such  steps  ;  perhaps,  in  the  absence  of  a  militia,  they
were  from  the  beginning  impossible.  The  movement
had  spread  as  if  the  whole  country  had  a  purpose  in  it
ready  prepared.  To  interfere  there  must  be  a  British
army,  and  there  were  not  3,000  British  soldiers  in  the

1  ‘The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Weymouth,  May  24,  1779/

S.  P.  0.

234

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  island  ;  while  the  executive  was  so  feeble,  and  the
»  \L  ^  population  so  ill  affected,  that  even  in  the  quietest  times
a  convicted  murderer  could  not  be  carried  to  the  gal¬
lows  without  a  military  guard  to  prevent  a  rescue.1

Every  hour  the  problem  became  more  abstruse.
If  the  Protestants  were  to  arm,  the  Catholics  con¬
sidered  the  example  worth  imitating.  They,  too,
began  to  form  into  companies,  and  had  they  con¬
tinued  there  would  probably  have  been  immediate
bloodshed.  Urgent  representations,  however,  being
made  to  their  leaders  in  private,  they  desisted.  Not
so  the  country  gentlemen.  In  vain  Weymouth  bade
the  Viceroy  pour  water  on  the  fire.  Corps  was  added
to  corps.  The  suspicion  that  the  Government  was
alarmed  increased  the  rate  at  which  they  were  mul¬
tiplied,  and  as  the  volunteers  gathered  confidence
from  their  numbers  they  began  naturally  to  consider
what  effect  their  assembly  might  have  on  the  public
question  about  which  the  country  was  so  anxious.
It  was  said  openly  that  in  the  presence  of  such  a
force  England  could  no  longer  refuse  Ireland  free
trade,  and  carried  as  they  were  off  their  feet  by
enthusiasm  and  excitement  the  chance  for  the  pre¬
sent  was  gone  of  holding  the  Irish  Parliament
in  leading  strings  by  the  old  methods.  4  The  occa¬
sional  favour  of  Government  would  not  induce  men
to  incur  the  odium  of  their  country  at  so  critical  a
time.'  2  The  troubled  Viceroy  could  find  but  one
consolation.  There  were  no  symptoms  of  treason.
The  noble  lords  and  gentlemen  who  were  at  the  head
of  the  movement  were  above  suspicion  of  collusion

1  1  To  Lord  Weymouth,  May  24.’  to  Lord  Weymouth,  June  12/

2  ‘  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  S.  P.  0.

*

THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

235

with  the  enemy.  The  country  was  never  in  better
spirit  to  resist  invasion.

It  was  still  possible  to  call  out  the  militia  as  a  coun¬
terpoise,  and  if  the  country  could  be  considered  safe
from  invasion  the  volunteers  might,  perhaps,  dis¬
solve  to  escape  expense.  Buckinghamshire  applied  to
W eymouth  for  money.  W eymouth  answered  that  there
was  none  to  send.  The  Viceroy  must  call  together
the  Parliament.  The  Viceroy  said  that  if  he  was
ordered  to  call  the  Parliament,  and  to  call  it  three
months  before  the  usual  time,  he  would  obey,  but  he
would  not  be  answerable  for  the  consequences.  Free
trade  would,  in  fact,  have  to  be  conceded  at  all  events.
There  was  no  escape  from  it.1  A  demand  for  money
for  the  militia  might  lead  to  further  pretensions  which
it  would  be  difficult  to  satisfy.

In  arming  thus  rapidly  the  country  owed  its  escape
from  a  dangerous  adventure.  The  volunteer  corps  had
been  formed  not  an  hour  too  soon.  Encouraged  by  his
exploits  in  the  past  summer,  Paul  Jones  had  col¬
lected  a  formidable  squadron  at  L’ Orient,  a  ship  of
the  line,  three  powerful  frigates,  a  sloop,  and  a  heavy
eighteen-gun  cutter.2  His  crews  amounted  to  2,000
men,  and  his  intention  was  to  land  at  Galway,  Derry,
and  wherever  else  there  was  a  prospect  of  plunder.
He  left  L’Orient  on  the  12th  of  August.  At  the
end  of  the  month  he  was  in  Ballinskellig’s  Bay
looking  out  for  prizes,  and  had  Ireland  been  as
unprepared  as  in  the  previous  years,  he  would  have
ventured  undoubtedly  a  desperate  exploit  of  some
kind,  and  perhaps  have  roused  the  Western  Irish

CHAP.

I.

"l7797

wTo  Weymouth,  July  12.’  of  64  guns;  the  frigates,  ‘LeBon
S.  P.  O.  Homme  Richard, ’  of  40,  the  ‘  Al-

2  The  ship  was  ‘  La  Grande  Ville,’  liance,’  36,  and  the  1  Patrie,’  32.

236

/

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  into  revolt.1  His  many  secret  friends  along  the  coast
— — '  must  have  informed  him  that  it  was  no  longer  safe  to
1779.  r*gk  a  landing.  He  bore  away  to  the  North  Sea,
where  he  fell  in  with  the  summer  fleet  from  the
Baltic,  and  after  a  desperate  fight  had  the  honour  of
capturing  two  English  frigates,  the  4  Serapis  ’  and
the  4  Countess  of  Scarborough/  and  carrying  them  as
prizes  into  the  Texel.

It  was  no  slight  thing  to  have  protected  Ireland
from  an  attack  by  a  force  capable  of  such  an  exploit.
The  fresh  proof  at  once  of  the  reality  of  the  danger
and  of  their  own  ability  to  encounter  it,  added  new
impulse  to  the  volunteer  movement  which  the  Viceroy
had  been  forbidden  to  encourage.  He  found  himself
invited  4  by  several  most  respectable  noblemen  ’  who
had  formed  companies  to  issue  muskets  for  them  from
the  Government  stores.  He  asked  advice  from  the
Irish  Council.  The  Irish  Council  told  him  that  he
must  comply,  and  the  muskets  were  given  out.  By
the  end  of  September  over  forty  thousand  men  had
been  enrolled  and  armed,  under  no  authority  except
what  they  might  organise  for  themselves.  Some  had
been  raised  by  associations,  some  by  the  merchants’
companies  in  the  towns,  most  of  them  happily  by  the
peers  and  country  gentlemen.  The  result  being  that
at  a  moment  of  national  discontent  when  men  of  all
creeds  and  parties  were  united  to  demand  from  Eng¬
land  a  repeal  of  her  unjust  legislation,  Ireland  suddenly
found  herself  in  possession  of  an  army  of  her  own
which  there  was  no  force  in  the  country  capable  of
resisting.

Under  these  circumstances  the  Irish  Parliament  was

1  ‘  Depositions  taken  by  Rev.  Doctor  Day,  at  Tralee,  August,  1779.’ —
MSS.  Dublin  Castle.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

237

about  to  meet,  and  the  patriot  leaders  bad  determined  chap.
that  the  occasion  of  their  own  strength  and  England’s  > — i — *

1  77  Q

weakness  should  not  pass  from  them  unused.  Not¬
withstanding  the  agitation  which  had  been  raised  in
England  itself  in  favour  of  measures  of  relief  to  Ireland,
the  Cabinet  were  still  unable  to  resolve  on  frank  and
free  concessions.  The  Viceroy  had  been  told  at  first  that
he  was  to  evade  the  subject  in  the  Speech  from  the
Throne.  He  had  objected  humbly  that  to  be  entirely
silent  4  would  indicate  a  settled  resolution  ’  to  concede
nothing.  It  would  be  difficult,  he  admitted,  to  avoid
creating  expectations  on  one  side  or  embarrassments
on  the  other  ;  he  proposed  4  to  be  wary  in  his  language
and  inform  the  House  merely  that  particulars  would
be  laid  before  them  which  would  enable  the  national
wisdom  ’  to  devise  measures  for  the  relief  of  the  king-
dom;1  but  something  or  other  it  was  necessary  that
he  should  say.  Eetouched,  and  rendered  still  more
vague  by  Weymouth’s  pen,  the  draft  of  a  Speech,
conceived  in  this  spirit,  had  been  returned  from
England.

The  Viceroy’s  secrets  were  ill  kept.  Half  his  coun¬
cil  being  in  league  with  the  patriots,  the  purport  of  the
Speech  was  known  some  days  before  the  opening,  and
on  a  soft  October  afternoon,  Henry  Grattan,  Denis
Daly,  and  Hussey  Burgh  sate  on  the  shingle  beach  at
Bray,  with  the  transparent  water  washing  at  their  feet,
to  arrange  the  approaching  campaign.  Hussey  Burgh
being  a  servant  of  the  Crown  thought  it  indecent  to  take
a  leading  part,  and,  after  a  general  conversation,  left  his
two  friends  to  themselves.  The  address  would  natu¬
rally  be  an  echo  of  the  Speech.  Grattan  and  Daly

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Weymouth,  September  26,

1779.’

238

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  resolved  on  moving  its  rejection  pure  and  simple.

_ _  The  session  was  to  open  on  the  12th.  As  the  day

1779-  approached  the  Viceroy’s  uneasiness  did  not  diminish.
The  Council  were  called  for  a  rehearsal  of  the
Speech.  Hussey  Burgh  and  the  Duke  of  Leinster,
though  they  were  both  in  Dublin,  refused  to  attend.
The  plan  of  the  Castle  was,  that  if  the  address  was
opposed,  John  Foster1  should  move  for  a  committee
to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  nation,  and  that  a
similar  motion  should  be  made  in  the  Upper  House.
The  intention  was  betrayed,  and  at  the  advice  of  Barry
Y elverton,2  Grattan,  when  the  time  came,  moved,  in¬
stead  of  a  rejection,  an  equivalent  amendment,  4  That  it
was  not  by  temporary  expedients,  but  by  a  free  export,
that  the  nation  was  now  to  be  saved  from  impending
ruin.’  Hely  Hutchinson,  though  no  one  in  private
had  more  effectively  pressed  on  the  Government  the
necessity  of  a  radical  change  of  policy,  exerted  himself
to  protect  them  from  a  hostile  vote.  Scott,  the
Attorney-General,  spoke  powerfully  on  the  same  side  ;
but  the  corruption  on  which  they  had  relied  failed  at
the  hour  of  trial,  as  it  deserved  to  fail.  The  purchased
4  servants  of  the  Crown  ’  fell  from  their  allegiance.
Hussey  Burgh  suggested  that  for  Free  Trade,  if  the
Government  disliked  the  word,  might  be  read  4  opening
of  the  ports.’  Flood  seeing  the  patriot  tide  was  rising
again,  returned  to  his  old  allegiance,  snapped  the  cords
which  bound  him  to  the  Castle,  and  with  a  half  apology
for  having  ever  taken  office3  insisted  that  the  amend-

1  Son  of  Anthony  Foster,  Chief
Baron  of  the  Court  of  Exchequer
in  Ireland,  afterwards  Speaker  of
the  House  of  Commons,  and  created
Lord  Oriel.

2  Then  a  distinguished  barrister,

Member  for  Carrickfergus,  after¬
wards  Chief  Baron  and  Lord  Avon-
more.

3  He  allowed  himself  to  sav  that

*

‘the  Vice-Treasurership  had  been
the  unsolicited  gift  of  his  sovereign.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  KETRIBUTION.

239

ment  should  go  to  Free  Trade.  1  Ireland  asked  no  chap.
more  and  would  not  be  satisfied  with  less.’  In  vain  Sir  — i —
Robert  Heron,  the  Secretary,  pleaded  that  such  amend-  1779'
ments  could  only  produce  ill  consequences ;  the  friends
of  Government,  purchased  so  expensively  at  the  elec¬
tions,  could  not  be  expected  to  be  more  submissive  than
a  Prime  Sergeant  and  a  Vice-Treasurer.  The  Castle
did  not  venture  a  division,  and  the  amendment  to
the  address  was  carried  unanimously.  The  next  day,
the  13  th,  the  usual  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Viceroy
was  proposed.  Against  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,
an  innocent  automaton,  there  was  no  quarrel,  and  it
was  allowed  to  pass.  But  Tom  Conolly  in  the  Com¬
mons,  and  the  l)uke  of  Leinster  in  the  Lords,  moved
along  with  it  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  Volunteers  of
Ireland,  and  this  was  carried  with  enthusiasm.  On
the  14th,  the  Volunteer  Corps  of  Dublin,  with  the
Duke  of  Leinster  at  their  head,  lined  the  streets
between  College  Green  and  the  Castle,  when  the
Speaker  and  the  entire  Lower  House  marched  in
procession  to  present  the  amended  address.  The
Viceroy  had  appealed  to  Pery  to  prevent  what  could
be  intended  only  as  a  display  of  force.  Pery  said
it  was  impossible,  and  advised  the  Viceroy  to  appear
to  sympathise. 1

4  In  the  present  disposition  of  the  House  of  Com¬
mons,’  Lord  Buckinghamshire  wrote  five  days  later,

4  it  will  be  difficult  to  resist  the  motions  now  in  con¬
templation.  Unless  his  majesty  in  his  answer  holds
out  strong  hopes  on  the  subject  of  commerce,  motions
will  be  strongly  pressed  to  reduce  the  Establishment.

The  Money  Bill  will  be  limited  to  six  months.  The

1  1  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Weymouth,  October  13  and
14,  1779.’  S.  P.  O.

240

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Duke  of  Leinster,  Mr.  Conolly,  and  the  Prime

_ _ — *  Sergeant  are  decidedly  hostile  to  us. 7  There  was

177 9‘  but  one  hope.  Even  in  the  midst  of  the  efferve¬
scence,  base  motives  were  still  at  work  with  the
more  experienced  politicians.  4  If  some  popular
orator  could  be  brought  over ’  the  apostate  members
might  yet  be  recovered.  4  The  Duke,’  he  said,  4  has
been  with  me  this  morning  and  presents  his  compli¬
ments  ;  his  brother,  the  seaman,  being  promoted,  is  a
point  insisted  on.’ 1

Unhappily,  time  pressed.  The  Duke’s  brother,
the  seaman,  could  not  be  made  an  admiral  in  a
moment.  Unless  trade  was  opened  Parliament  would
vote  no  more  war  taxes.  It  might  even  appropriate
the  existing  duties  to  the  payment  of  debt.  Nay,
having  now  a  force  of  its  own,  it  might  abolish  the
military  establishments.  4  You  must  give  way,’
Heron  wrote  on  the  25th  to  Sir  Stanien  Porter,  4  so
far,  at  least,  as  to  open  to  Ireland  the  Colonial  trade  ;
their  woollens  being  legally  exported  cannot,  to  say
the  least  of  it,  be  more  prejudicial  to  Great  Britain
than  the  smuggling  them.’

A  frank  answer  from  England  would  not,  perhaps,
have  checked  the  torrent  which  had  now  broken  loose,
but  at  least  it  might  have  made  the  stream  flow  in  good
humour.  An  answer  came  on  the  1st  of  November,
but  enigmatic  as  an  oracle  from  the  Delphic  priestess.
The  King  was  said  to  be  sorry  for  the  distresses  of  Ire¬
land,  to  be  attentive  to  her  interests,  and  to  be  always
ready  to  concur  in  measures  which,  on  mature  con¬
sideration,  should  be  thought  conducive  4  to  the  gene¬
ral  welfare  of  all  his  subjects.’  4  All  his  subjects  ’

1  ‘  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Weymouth,  October  18.  Most  secret.’
S.  P.  0.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

241

comprehended  the  monopolists  of  Liverpool :  Irish  sus¬
picion  flamed  into  a  blaze;  and  on  King  William’s
birthday,  four  days  later,  the  volunteers,  with  the  Duke
of  Leinster  again  at  their  head,  paraded  in  front  of  the
statue  outside  the  Parliament  house.  Flags  were  dis¬
played  with  impassioned  blazonries  —  4  Relief  to
Ireland,’  ‘The  Volunteers  of  Ireland,’  ‘A  Short
Money  Bill,’  ‘Fifty  thousand  of  us  ready  to  die  for
our  country.’  More  significantly  still,  two  cannon
were  trailed  round  the  pedestal,  with  an  emblem,

‘  Free  Trade  or  this:  ’  and  amidst  the  roar  of  artillery,
musketry  volleys,  and  the  shouts  of  ten  thousand
voices,  Dublin  intimated  that  it  must  have  its  way,
or  England  must  be  prepared  for  the  consequences.

For  once  Ireland  had  a  definitely  just  cause,  and
was  strong  in  virtue  of  it.

‘  If  the  expectations  of  this  kingdom  are  not
received  with  lenity,’  wrote  the  fluttered  imbecile  who
represented  the  majesty  of  the  Crown,  ‘  every  species
of  disorder  may  be  apprehended.  Rational  men  are
seriously  alarmed.  Those  who  were  principal  pro¬
moters  of  the  volunteer  companies  feelingly  lament
their  own  achievements.  You  will  pity  the  situation
of  a  man  who  has  laboured  uniformly  to  do  his  duty
divested  of  every  other  consideration.  What  a  re¬
flection  !  that  in  the  present  critical  situation  of  the
British  empire,  the  kingdom  under  my  care  should
contribute  such  an  addition  to  the  already  almost
insurmountable  difficulties  of  English  government.
Oppressed  with  the  reflection  consequential  to  this
idea,  it  is  too  much  in  addition  to  be  fretted  hourly
with  inadmissible  solicitations,  and  to  be  obliged  to  fre¬
quently  combat  suspicions  of  a  duplicity  to  the  which
my  heart  has  ever  been  a  stranger.  Torn  by  a

CHAP.

I.

November.

VOL.  II.

R

242

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  thousand  conflicting  passions,  it  is  a  necessary  duty
__ — -  to  assume  a  face  of  calmness,  and  I  must  not  risk,
1779.  flowever  provoked  by  manifesting  well  justified
resentment,  to  lose  any  chance  of  support  to  his
majesty’s  service.’ 1

The  House  of  Commons  had  shown  spirit,  but  its
fervour  was  not  equal  to  the  temperature  out  of
doors,  and  required  to  be  stimulated.  The  Attorney-
General,  Scott,2  speaking  of  the  demonstration  on  the
4th,  had  asked  whether  Parliament  existed  to  register
the  pleasure  of  the  volunteers.  He  had  been  heard
with  more  favour  than  the  populace  approved ;  and
on  the  15th,  early  in  the  morning,  a  drum  beat  in  the
liberties  behind  St.  Patrick’s  Cathedral.  A  vast  body
of  artizans,  armed  with  bludgeons,  cutlasses,  and
pistols,  gathered  at  the  call,  and  made  their  way
to  Scott’s  house,  in  Harcourt-place.  Finding  that
he  had  gone  to  the  Four  Courts,  part  of  them  re¬
mained  to  break  his  windows  ;  part  followed  to  the
courts  swearing  they  would  have  him  out.  He  had
been  warned  in  time  and  had  taken  refuge  in  the
Castle.  The  mob,  not  caring  to  encounter  the  can¬
non  there,  surged  off  to  College  Green,  beset  the  doors
of  the  House  of  Commons,  and,  as  the  members  came
up,  made  them  alight  from  their  carriages  and  swear
to  vote  for  Free  Trade  and  a  Short  Money  Bill.
The  Mayor  was  sent  for  to  the  Speaker’s  chamber.
In  the  afternoon  a  squadron  of  dragoons  was  brought
down  to  the  barracks,  and  at  the  Speaker’s  requisition
the  Mayor  went  to  the  doors  to  give  them  orders  to
act.  The  rioters  had  gathered  within  the  railings  out
of  reach  of  the  horses.  The  unfortunate  man  no

1  *  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  2  Afterwards  Lord  Clonmell  and
to  Lord  Hillsborough,  November  8,  Chief  Justice.

1779.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

243

sooner  appeared  than  cutlasses  were  flourished  over
his  head ;  and  he  was  told  that  the  first  word  that  he
uttered  to  the  soldiers  was  to  be  the  last  that  he  should
speak  in  this  world.  More  discreet  than  valiant  he
shrank  back  into  the  passage.  The  dragoons,  finding
that  they  were  to  receive  no  orders,  rode  away  as  they
came,  the  House  adjourned,  and  the  people  were  left
masters  of  the  field. 1  The  volunteers,  who  had  charged
themselves  with  the  peace  of  the  country,  might  have
gained  credit  by  interposing ;  but  they  preferred  to  re¬
main  passive,  and  for  an  entire  day  Dublin  was  in  pos¬
session  of  a  band  of  rufiians.  Yelverton,  when  the
House  reassembled  the  next  morning  with  plumes
somewhat  ruffled,  spoke  in  the  people's  favour.  Scott,
who  had  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life,  called  Yel¬
verton  a  ‘  seneschal  of  sedition.'  Yelverton  replied
with  calling  Scott  ‘the  uniform  drudge  of  every
English  administration.’  Grattan  interposed  between
the  angry  combatants.  The  House  asserted  its  dignity
by  a  resolution  condemning  the  assemblies  of  mobs
to  coerce  the  debates.  The  Mayor  and  Sheriff  were
called  to  the  bar  to  be  reprimanded  for  their  cowardice.
The  Mayor  said  that  if  he  had  told  the  dragoons  to
act  they  would  have  used  their  sabres,  and  would
have  hurt  some  of  the  poor  people.  The  House
submitted  to  the  explanation,  the  Speaker  gravely
saying  that  c  the  Mayor’s  unwillingness  to  endanger
the  lives  of  his  fellow  citizens  might  deserve  com¬
mendation,  but  that  if  such  violence  was  repeated
lenity  to  the  guilty  might  prove  fatal  to  the
innocent.'  2

1  ‘The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  mouth,  November  16.’ — Comynons ’
to  Lord  Weymouth,  November  15.’  Journals ,  Ireland ,  November  17.

2  i  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Wey-

b  2

CHAP.

I.

1779.

244

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

TttoT

The  tone  assumed  in  the  Parliament  in  England
did  not  tend  to  smooth  the  Viceroy’s  course.  Lord
Hillsborough,  an  Irishman  who  preferred  making  his
political  career  in  the  more  important  country,  had
ventured  to  say,  and  say  with  apparent  authority
there,  that  Irish  distress  was  a  child  of  the  imagination,
or  if  real  was  due  only  to  laziness.  The  war  and
the  bankrupt  state  of  the  Irish  treasury  had  made  it
necessary  for  the  secretary  to  ask  for  additional
taxation.  Grattan  moved  at  once  that  in  the  presence
of  so  much  general  poverty  it  was  inexpedient  to
grant  new  taxes,  and  carried  his  resolution  by  170
votes  to  47.  The  secretary  then  asked  for  the
ordinary  supplies  to  be  granted  as  usual  for  two  years.
The  House,  by  this  time  thoroughly  infected  with  the
spirit  of  the  country,  accepted  the  amendment  which
the  Viceroy  had  dreaded,  and  passed  a  Six  Months’
Money  Bill,  by  138  to  100.1  It  was  in  these  debates
that  Hussey  Burgh  made  his  reputation  as  an  orator
by  the  famous  sentence  so  often  quoted.  Some  one
had  said  Ireland  was  at  peace.  4  Talk  not  to  me  of
peace,’  said  Hussey  Burgh;  4  Ireland  is  not  at  peace;  it
is  smothered  war.  England  has  sown  her  laws  as
dragon’s  teeth,  and  they  have  sprung  up  as  armed
men.’2  Never  yet  had  Grattan  so  moved  the  Irish
House  of  Commons  as  it  was  moved  at  these  words.
From  the  floor  the  applause  rose  to  the  gallery.  From
the  gallery  it  was  thundered  to  the  crowd  at  the  door.
From  the  door  it  rung  through  the  city.  As  the

1 A  very  full  house  for  Ire¬
land.  The  whole  number  of  mem¬
bers  was  300 ;  but  some  had  seats
in  the  English  Parliament;  some
were  in  the  army;  some  always
were  purposely  absent,  intimating

that  they  were  open  to  negotiation.

2  These  words  are  sometimes
quoted  as  referring  to  the  Penal
Laws.  They  had  nothing  to  do  with
the  Penal  Laws,  and  related  entirely
to  the  restrictions  on  trade.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

tumult  calmed  down  Hussey  Burgh  rose  again,  and,
amidst  a  renewed  burst  of  cheers,  declared  that  he
resigned  the  office  which  he  held  under  the  Crown.
4  The  gates  of  promotion  are  shut,’  exclaimed  Grattan,
4  and  the  gates  of  glory  are  opened/

246

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  Y.

i

book  Lord  North’s  Cabinet  bad  to  the  last  persuaded  them-
v—  -IZ — '  selves  that  the  storm  would  pass  over.  The  King  had
1779,  recommended  Ireland  to  the  consideration  of  the  Eng¬
lish  Parliament  at  the  opening  of  the  session  in  Novem¬
ber.  The  Ministers,  however,  had  fought  in  both
Houses  for  delay,  till  the  news  of  the  short  Money  Bill
opened  their  eyes  at  last.  They  had  not  now  to
reckon  with  miserable  Celts,  who  could  be  tram¬
pled  on  with  comparative  impunity.  The  iniquitous
legislation  of  past  generations  had  roused  all  ranks,
both  races  and  both  creeds,  to  a  common  indignation.
The  resource  of  playing  party  against  party  would
serve  no  longer.  The  first  exasperation  was  vented
upon  the  Viceroy.  ‘  You  send  us  the  opinions  of
others,’  Lord  Hillsborough  angrily  wrote  to  him.

‘  Why  don’t  you  send  us  your  own  ?  The  King
desires  that  you  will  let  us  know  your  sentiments
immediately.’ 1

It  was  unjust  to  blame  Lord  Buckinghamshire ;  he
had  already  told  Lord  Weymouth,  and  he  now  again
repeated  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  that  if  Ireland  was
to  be  restored  to  tranquillity,  the  trade  restrictions
must  be  given  up,  and  that  the  repeal  must  be  imme¬
diate  and  complete.2  The  intelligent  part  of  England
had  arrived  at  the  same  conclusion.  On  the  1st  of
December  Lord  Shelburne  spoke  at  length  in  the

1  1  Lord  Hillsborough  to  the  Earl  2  {  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Hillsbo-

of  Buckinghamshire,  December  1.’  rough,  December  9.’

Substance  of  a  long  brusque  letter.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

247

Upper  House  of  the  abominable  system  by  which  the  chap.
affairs  of  Ireland  had  long  been  carried  on.  The  Irish,  > — i —
he  said,  were  now  determined  to  have  their  trade  1779'

restored  to  them,  and  he  moved  a  vote  of  censure

'  •

on  the  Cabinet  for  having  delayed  concession  so
long.  Lord  Camden  followed  him,  insisting  on  the
impolicy  of  alienating  the  Irish  people  at  a  moment
so  critical  in  the  fortunes  of  the  empire.  In  the
Commons,  Mr.  Burke,  with  even  greater  effectiveness,
contrasted  the  terms  offered  to  America  with  the  ob¬
stinate  perseverance  in  wrong  towards  his  own  long-
suffering  countrymen.  The  Irish,  he  said,  had  learnt
at  last  that  justice  was  to  be  had  from  England  only
when  demanded  at  the  sword’s  point.  They  were
now  in  arms  with  a  good  cause,  and  they  would
either  have  redress  or  they  would  end  the  connec¬
tion  between  the  two  islands.

Opinion  was  pronouncing  itself  so  decisively  that
the  Ministers  escaped  censure  only  by  pleading  that
the  laws  complained  of  were  none  of  theirs.  They
were  inherited  from  the  past  century.  They  had  been
wrought  into  the  constitution,  and  Parliament  had
always  refused  to  reconsider  them.  Acquitted,  how¬
ever,  of  responsibility  for  the  past,  the  Cabinet  could
only  earn  their  full  pardon  by  consenting  to  instant  re¬
paration.  The  repeal  of  the  Restriction  Acts  was  pro¬
posed  on  the  spot,  and  swept  through  both  Houses
with  extraordinary  spirit.  A  copy  was  sent  to  Ire¬
land  before  the  forms  were  completed,  to  allay  the
tempest,  ere  it  could  swell  into  fresh  acts  of  violence.

‘  I  congratulate  your  excellency,’  wrote  Lord
Hillsborough,  as  if  the  credit  of  what  had  been
done  belonged  to  the  Cabinet,  4  on  this  important
event.  On  its  being  proposed  to  his  majesty  that  a

248

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

”177^

commission  should  be  prepared  to  pass  this  Act,  his
majesty  declared  that  he  would  go  to  the  House  in
person  to  give  his  assent  to  a  measure  conferring  so
considerable  an  advantage  on  his  faithful  subjects
of  Ireland.’1

The  Irish  Parliament  meantime,  while  waiting  for
the  resolution  of  England,  had  been  usefully  occu¬
pied.  The  leaders  of  the  Opposition,  if  the  Viceroy
was  to  he  believed,  were  as  much  as  ever  influenced
by  personal  motives,  and  in  a  moment  of  success
so  sudden  and  unlooked  for,  were  each  aspiring  to
make  capital  out  of  it  for  his  own  advancement.

‘  When,’  Lord  Buckinghamshire  said,  4  the  bravery
and  determined  spirit  which  personally  distinguishes
this  nation  is  considered,  the  little  feminine  jea¬
lousy  and  suspicion  which  they  manifest  in  political
business  is  scarcely  credible.  I  have  hardly  ever  met
with  the  man  who  will  believe  that  the  whole  truth  is
fairly  told  him.  Every  moment  of  attention  which  you
show  to  an  individual  is  measured,  and  a  whisper  is  a
mortal  offence.’2  Perhaps  experience  of  the  whispers
of  viceroyalty  might  in  some  degree  justify  alarm.
Only  a  few  weeks  before,  Lord  Buckinghamshire  had
been  looking  for  a  road  out  of  his  difficulties  by
4  bringing  over  ’  a  popular  orator.  Whether  honestly
or  dishonestly,  however,  the  Opposition  were  now
addressing  themselves  to  the  removal  of  genuine
mischiefs.  On  the  1st  of  December  the  Speaker
presented  the  heads  of  a  bill  aimed  specially  at  the
object  which  had  been  attempted  unsuccessfully  in
the  Catholic  Belief  Bill— the  repeal  of  the  Test  clause

1  ‘  Lord  Hillsborough  to  the  Earl  3  ‘  To  Lord  Hillsborough,  Decem-

of  Buckinghamshire,  December  23,  ber  15.’

1779/

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

249

in  tlie  Act  of  Anne.  It  had  been  anticipated  that  a
second  effort  would  be  made  in  the  Presbyterian  in¬
terest  during  the  session ;  and  the  Cabinet  had  ordered
the  Viceroy  to  throw  every  obstruction  in  the  way.
But  the  House  of  Commons  was  no  longer  amenable
to  the  usual  influences.  The  Bill  of  Repeal  was  sent
before  the  Irish  Council  for  transmission  by  a  unani¬
mous  vote.  If  it  went  to  England  it  was  unlikely  that
under  existing  circumstances  the  Cabinet  would  risk  a
fresh  quarrel  on  a  secondary  subject.  If  the  measure
was  to  be  stopped  at  all  it  must  be  stopped  in  Ire¬
land,  and  the  bishops  in  the  Council,  consistent  to
the  last,  desired  to  strain  a  power  which  it  was
doubtful  if  the  Council  constitutionally  possessed,
and  suppress  the  bill  on  their  own  responsibility.
The  Chancellor,  the  Attorney- General,  and  Mr.  Foster
warned  them  against  so  dangerous  an  experiment.
The  bill  went  over,  and  this  time  was  returned,  and
the  Presbyterians — the  right-arm  of  Irish  Protest¬
antism,  though  never  admitted  to  the  privileges  of
the  Establishment,  and  ensuring  by  their  exclusion
its  eventual  fall — were  no  longer  insulted  by  being
declared  unfit  to  hold  office,  civil  or  military,  above
the  rank  of  a  parish  constable.1

Another  attempt  was  less  successful.  Nothing  in
the  Irish  administration  was  more  scandalous  than
the  tenure  of  judges  during  pleasure  only.  It  de¬
graded  an  office  which  ought  to  have  been  guarded
most  scrupulously  from  contact  with  parliamentary
corruption  into  an  instrument  for  controlling  or
influencing  the  Irish  bar.  It  stood  already  con¬
demned  in  a  speech  from  the  throne.  Yet  it  not  only

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  December
31.’  Secret.

CHAP.

"r779/

December.

250

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

look  survived,  but  Lord  Harcourt  had  pointedly  objected

> _ iil _ .  to  a  change,  and  every  effort  made  by  Parliament

178°*  had  failed.  Hoping  that  they  might  now  find  Eng¬
land  more  pliant,  the  Commons  again  sent  on  the  heads
of  a  bill  to  assimilate  the  Irish  to  the  English  tenure.
Once  more  this  bill  was  rejected,  the  Viceroy  tacitly
admitting  the  character  of  the  objection  to  it  in  a
passing  allusion.

‘As  the  having  the  commissions  of  the  Irish  judges
the  same  as  in  England  has  been  a  favourite  wish  in
this  country,  it  was  never,  as  I  understand,  thought
expedient  to  oppose  the  heads  in  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  ;  the  reasons  upon  which  those  heads  have  been
disapproved  by  his  majesty’s  British  servants  not
being  of  a  nature  to  be  agitated  here  even  in  quiet
times.’1

Ill  pleased  that  the  responsibility  of  rejection  should
be  thrown  on  them,  the  Cabinet  had  blamed  the  Vice¬
roy  for  not  having  stopped  the  bill  in  the  House  of
Commons.  Weighed,  perhaps,  in  accurate  balances,
this  measure  was  as  important  as  free  trade  itself ;
but  it  was  a  subject  on  which  the  Irish  public  had
scarcely  troubled  themselves  to  think;  and  whether  it
was  allowed  or  rejected  was  comparatively  of  trifling
moment  beside  the  all-important,  all-absorbing  ques¬
tion,  Would  or  would  not  England  abandon  her  com¬
mercial  monopoly?  The  reports  of  the  debates  at
Westminster  had  been  read  with  passionate  avidity,
and  had  prepared  men’s  minds  to  hear  that  England
had  yielded.  Nevertheless,  when  the  certainty  ar¬
rived,  when  the  copy  of  the  Act  of  repeal  was  deli¬
vered  and  laid  by  the  Viceroy  before  the  two  Houses,

1  1  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  January  26,  1780.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

251

the  news  seemed  almost  too  good  to  be  true.  To  chap.

these  mischievous  and  wicked  restrictive  Acts  the  - ^ —

Irish  had  justly  referred  the  wretchedness  that
weighed  on  them.  In  their  impetuosity  and  eager¬
ness  they  forgot  that  when  an  evil  had  been  of  long
growth,  time  would  be  needed  for  recovery.  They
conceived  that  the  repeal  would  be  as  the  removal  of
a  spell,  that  Ireland  would  at  once  blossom  into
abundance,  and  every  bare  back  be  clothed  and  every
stomach  be  filled.  In  gratitude  for  the  so  intensely
desired  boon,  the  wrongs  of  a  century  were  forgotten
or  forgiven.  Dublin  was  illuminated.  Addresses  of
gratitude  were  sent  over  from  the  two  Houses.  The
happy  Viceroy  reported  that  his  woes  were  over,  and
that  4  no  peevish  question  was  allowed  to  cloud  the
sunshine  of  the  brightest  day  the  kingdom  ever
knew.’ 1  The  dispositions  of  nations  unfortunately
do  not  change  so  easily.

1  1  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  December  28.’

252

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  VI.

book  The  worst  effect  of  unjust  legislation  is  the  difficulty
,  of  retiring  from  it  without  causing  worse  evils  than
1780'  those  which  are  removed.  Concessions  necessary,
because  right  in  themselves,  when  yielded  to  menace,
shake  the  principle  of  authority.  The  momentary
gratitude  is  succeeded  by  the  recollection  that  the
wrong  would  have  been  continued  had  there  been
strength  to  continue  it.  The  powers  of  State  have
been  transferred  for  the  time  from  the  rulers  to  the
ruled  ;  and  the  subject  takes  his  own  measure  of  the
changed  situation.  He  conceives  that  he  has  estab¬
lished  his  claim  to  be  a  better  judge  of  what  is  good
for  him  than  those  who  had  confessedly  abused  their
superiority,  and  he  proceeds  at  once  to  make  fresh
demands  where  justice  is  less  clearly  on  his  side.
Hostile  feelings  and  hostile  lines  of  action  begin  again
to  manifest  themselves.  The  superior  power  having
sacrificed  its  pride  and  interest  considers  itself  entitled
to  reap  an  immediate  reward  in  a  return  of  good  feel¬
ing,  and  resents  the  persistence  in  an  attitude  for
which  it  conceives  that  there  is  no  longer  a  reason.
Thus  measures  which  promise  best  for  reconciliation
are  found  only  to  have  made  the  breach  still  wider.

A  peculiarly  unlucky  complication  at  this  moment
spoilt  the  effects  of  the  repeal  of  the  restrictive
Acts,  and  made  England  repent  of  having  given  way.
The  embargo  had  led  to  a  clandestine  trade  in  salt
meat  with  France  and  Spain.  The  Irish  farmer
considered  that  he  had  a  natural  right  to  defend

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETKIBUTION.

253

himself  against  robbery,  and  had  found  both  pleasure  chap.
and  profit  in  opening  a  market  with  the  enemies  of  J —
his  oppressors.  The  embargo  had  been  taken  off,  178°*
but  the  connections  which  had  been  opened  could
not  be  immediately  broken.  At  the  beginning  of
January  it  was  ascertained  that  a  Cork  contractor
was  loading  provision  cargoes  in  the  harbour,  which
were  intended  for  the  French  fleet.  Coming  so  im¬
mediately  on  what  the  English  Cabinet  regarded  as
an  act  of  sublime  generosity,  they  sent  orders  to
the  Viceroy  to  seize  the  contractor’s  vessels.  The
Viceroy  was  obliged  to  answer  that  if  he  attempted
any  such  measure  there  would  be  immediate  vio¬
lence.  It  was  a  practical  illustration  of  the  mean¬
ing  of  trusting  the  military  power  in  Ireland  out  of
the  hands  of  the  constituted  Government.  It  was
not  enough  that  when  England  was  fighting  single-
handed  against  her  revolted  colonies  and  a  European
coalition,  Irish  politicians  should  take  advantage  of  her
difficulties.  They  were  choosing  the  moment  when
their  requests  had  been  granted  to  give  active  help  to
her  enemies.

‘  It  appears,’  Lord  Hillsborough  wrote  sarcastically
to  the  unlucky  Viceroy,  ‘  to  be  little  short  of  a  de¬
claration  that  Government  in  Ireland  is  dissolved.
Dependent  as  we  are  for  information  upon  your  ex¬
cellency,  we  know  not  what  to  recommend,  and  in
this  dilemma  we  are  left  to  lament  the  unhappy
situation  of  affairs.  It  is  impossible  to  reflect  with¬
out  concern  and  astonishment  that,  while  his  majesty
is  taking  every  step  in  his  power  to  give  satisfaction
to  his  Irish  subjects,  there  is  apprehension  of  dan¬
gerous  violence  if  measures  are  taken  to  prevent  his
enemies  from  receiving  supplies  from  them,  without

254

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  which  they  would  find  it  difficult  to  carry  on  the
— —  war.  We  cannot  bid  you  lay  on  an  embargo  in  the
ir^‘  face  of  possible  consequences,  or  send  a  message  to
Parliament  which  might  compromise  the  prerogative.
But  is  there  no  member  who  would  have  public  spirit
enough  to  stand  up  in  the  House  of  Commons,  and
move  an  address  to  your  excellency  to  prevent  the
enemies’  fleet  from  being  victualled  from  Ireland  ?
I  recommend  your  excellency  to  exert  yourself  on
this  occasion.  Stopping  these  provisions  is  equal  to
the  gain  of  a  battle  at  sea,  and  may  go  further
towards  giving  his  majesty  superiority  over  his
enemies.’1

Lord  Hillsborough  should  have  known  his  country¬
men  better  than  to  make  extravagant  suggestions.
The  Viceroy  laid  his  letter  before  the  Privy  Council.
The  Privy  Council  told  him  that  ‘for  a  private
member  to  move  an  address  of  such  a  kind  would
increase  the  general  ill-feeling.  There  was  but  one
course  to  be  pursued.  The  Government  must  pur¬
chase  the  contractor’s  stores  for  the  Crown.’  The
Viceroy  was  helpless.  The  House  of  Commons  was
under  the  dictation  of  the  mob.  4  The  situation  of
England  was  well  understood,  and  they  meant  to
take  advantage  of  it.’  He  did  not  mean,  he  said,  that
4  the  indulgences  lately  granted  would  fail  ultimately
of  being  of  useful  consequences  to  the  empire.’  4  Bar¬
ring  insurrection  or  something  nearly  resembling  it,
he  hoped  to  get  through  the  remainder  of  the  session
without  fresh  collision.’  But  he  could  succeed  only
4  by  closet  interviews  with  independent  members.’

1  1  Lord  Hillsborough  to  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  February  6.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

255

4 1  tell  these  gentlemen/  he  wrote,  4  that  however  chap.
distressing  a  quarrel  between  the  two  kingdoms  > — i —
might  be  to  England,  it  would  necessarily  be  sub-
versive  of  the  Protestant  interest  here,  and  ruinous
to  Ireland.  As  they  are  pleased  to  allow  me  more
merit  than  belongs  to  me,  I  tell  them  this  considera¬
tion  should  have  some  little  weight  with  them  in
pressing  measures  which  must  render  the  remainder
of  my  life  miserable.  I  state  myself  as  pledged  to
his  majesty  for  the  gratitude  and  full  satisfaction
of  Ireland.  I  have  not,  indeed,  in  my  despatches
risked  such  an  assertion,  but  I  thought  in  so  par¬
ticular  an  instance  a  slight  deviation  from  fact
meritorious.’ 1

The  Cork  contract  did  not  stand  alone.  The  suc¬
cesses  of  Paul  Jones  had  fired  the  emulation  of  the
Irish  smugglers  who  had  set  up  business  on  their  own
account.  The  visits  of  the  American  privateers  were
confined  to  the  late  spring  and  summer.  The  Irish
were  on  the  spot  and  could  choose  their  own  season.

At  the  beginning  of  March  two  large  cutters,  the
4 Black  Prince’  and  the  ‘Black  Princess,’  showed  them¬
selves  under  F  rench  colours  in  the  Irish  Channel.  They
were  Irish  built  and  manned  by  Irish  sailors.  They
had  taken  out  commissions  at  Dunkirk,  and,  armed
to  the  teeth,  occupied  themselves  in  stopping  the  mail
packets  between  Holyhead  and  Dublin,  plundering  the
passengers,  sinking  the  bags,  and  holding  the  vessels
to  ransom.  The  4  Princess  ’  was  the  largest  cutter  ever
seen  on  the  coast,2  long,  black-sided,  swift  as  a  race¬
horse,  and  carrying  eighteen  nine -pounders.  For  four

1 1  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Hillsbo-  2  She  was  commanded  by  a  man
rough,  February  17/  named  MacCarty,  of  Newry.

256

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  months  these  rovers  remained  masters  of  the  Channel.

— *  Other  minor  craft  started  into  similar  activity.  The
March’  Waterford  and  Milford  packet  was  taken,  ‘  our  bishop’s
daughter  on  board,’  and  ransomed  for  160  guineas.
Waterford  Harbour  was  practically  blockaded:  the
merchants  enquired  ironically  whether  England  had
given  them  back  their  trade  only  to  let  it  be  de¬
stroyed  by  negligence  :  if  this  was  the  meaning  of
English  sovereignty  of  the  seas,  the  sooner  it  came  to
an  end  the  better.1

The  Viceroy  described  his  situation  as  ‘beyond
measure  disagreeable.’  While  affairs  were  going  on
thus  fatuously  out  of  doors,  the  Parliament  was
equally  busy  in  adding  to  his  sorrows.  On  the  1st
of  March  the  Irish  Lords  and  Commons  were  invited
to  express  by  formal  resolution  their  gratitude  for
the  repeal  of  the  trade  laws.  Mr.  Grattan,  supported
by  Yelverton,  intimated  that  if  much  had  been  done
more  remained  to  be  done.  The  spirit  of  Molyneux
was  awake  again.  Ireland  was  still  in  bondage,  so  long
as  she  was  bound  by  laws  to  which  she  had  not  her¬
self  consented.  Poynings’  Act  must  be  modified.  The
Act  passed  in  England  in  the  sixth  year  of  George
the  First 2  must  be  repealed,  and  Ireland’s  birthright
as  a  free  nation  must  be  at  once  restored  to  her.

The  leap  from  regulations  of  trade  to  political

1  Miscellaneous  MSS.  S.  P.  0.,
March,  April,  May,  and  June,  1780.

2  This  Act,  round  which  so  se¬
vere  a  battle  was  now  to  be  fought,
had  originated  in  the  Irish  House  of
Peers  having  presumed  to  act  as  a
Court  of  Ultimate  Appeal.  The
Act  declared  ‘  that  the  King  and
Parliament  of  Great  Britain  had
authority  to  bind  the  kingdom  and

people  of  Ireland ;  ’  and  that  the
House  of  Lords  in  Ireland  had  no
jurisdiction  ‘  to  affirm  or  reverse  ’
any  judgment  given  in  the  King’s
Courts  of  law  there.  ‘All  pro¬
ceedings  before  the  said  House  of
Lords  upon  any  such  judgment
were  thereby  declared  to  be  null
and  void/

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

257

independence  was  across  a  chasm  too  wide  as  yet  for
the  nerves  of  the  majority  of  the  members.  They
could  remember  that  England  had  just  done  what
was  right  and  liberal.  They  could  see  that  consti¬
tutional  questions  ought  not  to  be  forced  at  the  point
of  the  bayonet.  Even  the  Duke  of  Leinster  thought
the  time  improper  for  political  agitation.  Grattan
had  argued  that  Ireland  was  still  at  England’s  mercy,
that  what  England  had  done  England  could  undo,
and  as  to  the  unsuitableness  of  the  time  England’s
difficulty  was  Ireland’s  opportunity.  The  House
could  not  at  the  moment  rise  to  the  level  of  these  high
reasonings.  The  address  of  thanks  was  passed  without
an  amendment.  But  the  vision  which  Grattan  had
opened  had  set  the  Irish  pulses  tumultuously  beating.
He  had  led  the  country  to  its  late  victory.  He
perhaps  understood  the  condition  under  which  the
millennium  would  be  realised,  though  as  yet  it  delayed
to  appear.  He  had  Lord  Charlemont  and  Lord  Carys-
fort  with  him  in  the  House  of  Peers.  He  had  the
Dublin  mob  with  him  outside  the  Parliament  walls.
His  words  were  like  the  seeds  sown  by  the  Indian
jugglers,  which  germinate  in  a  night  and  are  grown
to  fulness  of  stature  on  the  morrow.  Supported,  as
he  believed,  by  the  greater  number  of  gentlemen  of
property,  the  Viceroy  had  perhaps  not  very  judi¬
ciously  confirmed  Grattan’s  language  by  hinting  that
if  Ireland  was  so  inveterately  troublesome  the  late  con¬
cessions  might  be  rescinded.1  The  Irish  in  vapouring

1  ‘The  epidemic  madness  so  as-  to  reason  more  temperately.  Very
siduously  circulated  by  Lord  Charle-  limited  indeed  is  the  number  of  men
mont,  Mr.  Grattan  and  Lord  Carys-  of  property  who  are  not  anxious  to
fort,  does  not  prevail  everywhere.  stifle  ill-humour;  but  the  temper
Even  Mr.  Stuart,  of  Down  (the  of  the  inferior  orders  is  in  unplea-
first  Lord  Londonderry),  is  inclined  sant  fermentation.  The  tenour  of

VOL.  II.  S

CHAP.

I.

~178o7

March.

258

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

March.

*

about  liberty  were  less  unpractical  than  they  seemed.
They  were  not  only  determined  to  protect  themselves
against  a  reversal  of  the  late  legislation,  but  they  aspired
to  independence,  that  they  might  hasten  the  revival  of
their  manufactures  by  retaliating  on  England  with
protective  duties.  The  orders  of  the  Cabinet  were
to  oppose  constitutional  changes  with  all  the  power  of
the  Crown,  and  to  prevent  any  proposition  tending  in
that  direction  from  being  transmitted.  The  patriots
had  chosen  their  ground  for  the  next  attack.  Grattan
gave  notice  that  on  the  19th  of  April  he  would  move
‘a  declaration  of  Rights. ’  Mr.  Bushe  moved  on  the
18th  for  leave  at  a  later  period  to  bring  in  a  Mutiny
Bill.  Grattan’s  motion  was  to  try  the  principle.
Bu she’s  motion  applied  it  in  a  signal  instance.  In  1692
a  Mutiny  Bill  had  been  offered  by  Lord  Sidney  to
the  first  Parliament  which  met  after  the  Revolution.
It  had  been  thrown  out  in  a  fit  of  ill-temper,  and  the
Irish  army  had  since  been  provided  for  under  the
Annual  Act  of  Great  Britain.  Mr.  Bushe’s  object
was  to  reclaim  for  the  Irish  Parliament  its  suspended
privileges.

The  Attorney-General  opposed  Bushe  at  the  first
stage.  He  protested  against  the  imprudence  of
mooting  so  dangerous  a  question.  He  moved  the
adjournment  of  the  House  to  get  rid  of  it,  and  failed.
Leave  was  given,  and  the  Viceroy  had  to  report  that
when  the  measure  came  on,  the  friends  of  Govern¬
ment  meant  to  support  it.

The  day  following  Grattan  opened  his  campaign  in

my  language  is  that  England  begins
to  feel  an  honest  indignation  at  the
absurd  ingratitude  of  this  kingdom  ;
and  that  the  seditious  ideas  propa¬
gated  here  must,  instead  of  obtain¬

ing  unreasonable  and  ruinous  con¬
cessions,  tend  ultimately  to  the
rescinding  of  the  favours  conferred.
— Lord  Buckinghamshire  to  Lord
Hillsborough,  March  8.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION*

259

form,  for  the  liberation  of  his  country,  and  moved  the
two  resolutions  which  became  famous  in  Irish  history.

1 .  The  King,  with  the  consent  of  the  Parliament

of  Ireland,  was  alone  competent  to  enact
laws  to  bind  Ireland.

2.  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  were  indissolubly

united,  hut  only  under  the  tie  of  a  common
sovereign.

He  spoke  for  two  hours,  and  4  with  the  greatest
warmth  and  enthusiasm.’  He  denounced  the  6th  of
George  I.  as  a  general  attack  on  the  rights  and  liber¬
ties  of  Ireland.  He  appealed  to  the  terms  which  had
been  offered  to  America,  to  show  how  much  might
be  extorted  from  England’s  fears  if  only  demanded
resolutely.

The  Attorney -General  rose  to  reply  at  a  disadvan¬
tage  in  a  House  which  Grattan  had  made  drunk  with
enthusiasm.  He  pointed  out  that  the  titles  of  half  the
estates  in  Ireland  depended  on  British  Acts  of  Par¬
liament,  and  must  become  invalid  if  those  Acts  were
declared  unlawful.  It  was  unnecessary,  he  said,  it  was
inexpedient,  ungrateful,  even  dangerous  and  injuri¬
ous  in  a  high  degree,  to  agitate  such  questions.  He
moved  the  adjournment  of  the  consideration  of
Grattan’s  resolution  till  September,  equivalent  to  the
English  six  months.  The  Attorney-General  was
supported  by  young  Fitzgibbon,1  who  was  now  be¬
ginning  to  take  part  in  the  business  of  the  House.
So  long  as  there  were  real  grievances  to  be  redressed,
Fitzgibbon,  careless  of  his  professional  prospects,  had
gone  with  the  popular  party.  But  none  knew  better
than  he,  bred  as  he  was  from  the  very  heart  of  the

1  Afterwards  Lord  Clare,  and  Chancellor.

s  2

L

CHAP.

1780."

April  19.

260

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

April  19.

Irish  people,  the  meaning  of  the  revival  of  an  Irish
nationality.  It  meant  a  nationality  not  of  the  Irish
Protestants,  but  of  the  Irish  Catholic  Celts.  It
meant,  if  successful,  the  undoing  of  the  work  of
Elizabeth  and  James  and  Cromwell.  It  meant  the
overthrow  of  the  Irish  Church,  and  in  some  shape
or  other  a  struggle  for  the  recovery  of  the  lands.

Fitzgibbon’s  arguments  sounded  like  foolishness.
The  House  was  in  the  humour  of  its  predecessors  in
1641,  when  analogous  aspirations  after  liberty  had
been  encouraged  by  England’s  embarrassment,  but
had  issued  in  the  massacre  and  the  civil  war.  Very
ominously  a  resolution  of  that  Parliament  was  read
out  in  the  course  of  the  debate,  and  was  listened  to
with  general  applause.1  Beyond  the  Attorney-Gene-
ral  and  Fitzgibbon  not  a  member  was  found  to  defend
the  legislative  authority  of  England.  Flood  and
Hely  Hutchinson  only  prevented  the  resolution  from
being  carried  by  appealing  to  Irish  generosity  not  to
bear  too  heavily  on  England  in  her  distress.  The
House  adjourned  without  a  division,  and  agreed  that
the  proceedings  should  be  passed  over  without  being
entered  in  the  Journals.

It  was  •  with  the  utmost  concern  ’  that  the  Vice¬
roy  sent  over  an  account  of  the  debate.2  There  could
no  longer  be  a  doubt  that  the  Mutiny  Bill  would
be  carried.  The  English  Act  was  indeed  already
treated  as  of  no  authority.  Deserters  from  the  army
committed  to  prison  under  it  were  released  by  the
magistrates.  The  Privy  Council  told  the  Viceroy

1  ‘It  is  voted  upon  question,
nullo  contradicente ,  that  the  sub¬
jects  of  this  his  majesty’s  kingdom
are  a  free  people,  and  to  be  governed
only  according  to  the  common  law
of  England,  and  statutes  made  and

established  in  this  kingdom  of  Ire¬
land,  and  according  to  the  lawful
customs  used  in  the  same.’ — Com¬
mons  Journals,  July  26,  1641.

2  1  The  Viceroy  to  Lord  Hills¬
borough,  April  20,  1780.’

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

261

that  after  the  discussion  of  the  19th  neither  magis¬
trates  nor  juries  would  enforce  in  Ireland  a  law
passed  by  the  British  Parliament.  The  6  Freeman’s
Journal  ’  announced  that  the  inclusion  of  Ireland  in
the  British  Mutiny  Act  was  a  step  towards  establish¬
ing  a  tyranny.  The  soldiers  were  invited  to  leave
their  colours,  and  the  gentry  were  warned  against
arresting  them  at  their  own  peril.

Mr.  Bushe’s  motion  was  fixed  for  the  8th  of  May.
On  the  7th  the  Viceroy  summoned  the  Council;  he
informed  them  that  his  orders  from  England  were  to
resist,  and  asked  their  opinions.  The  attendance  was
larger  than  usual,  and  the  answer  was  all  but  una¬
nimous.  Agar,  the  Archbishop  of  Cashel,  was  for
standing  out.  All  the  rest,  English-born  as  well  as
Irish-born,  the  Chancellor,  and  the  Duke  of  Leinster,
Foster,  Pery,  Hutchinson,  agreed  that  the  Bri¬
tish  Mutiny  Act  could  not  be  enforced  in  Ireland,
and  that  the  army  would  fall  to  pieces  unless  the
Government  consented  to  let  Mr.  Bushe’s  motion
pass.  Opposition  could  have  no  effect  but  to  show
the  weakness  of  the  English  party.

This  was  not  all.  Private  Members  of  Parliament
wrote  to  protest  against  opposing  it  on  the  ground
of  the  consequences  to  themselves  from  the  support
which  they  had  given  to  the  Government  already.
British  authority  rested  on  the  army.  The  army
without  an  Irish  Mutiny  Bill  must  disintegrate,  and
they  would  be  sacrificed  to  the  fury  of  the  people.1

Finding  himself  deserted  on  so  vital  a  measure,
the  Viceroy  could  only  ask  for  time  to  learn  the

x  (  “We  have  resisted  popular
questions,  and  exposed  ourselves  to
the  indignation  of  the  people  at
large  by  supporting  Government;
but  who  is  to  defend  us  against  their

resentment,  if  the  army,  from  the
doubts  now  circulated,  should  be
dissolved  P  ” — Extract  of  letter  en¬
closed  by  the  Viceroy  to  Lord
Hillsborough,  May  8, 1780.’

CHAP.

I.

1780.

May.

202

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  Cabinet’s  pleasure.  When  the  motion  came  on,  the
— r— '  Attorney- General  applied  to  have  it  postponed  for  a
fortnight,  and  with  difficulty  obtained  the  House’s  con¬
sent,  almost  every  one  telling  him  that  he  would  vote
for  it  when  finally  brought  in.  Some  members
even  in  their  places  declared  they  would  not,  either
as  jurors  or  magistrates,  ‘  suffer  the  British  Mutiny
law  to  be  acted  upon.’

4  The  whole  tenour  of  the  debate,’  Lord  Buck¬
inghamshire  said,  ‘  leaves  no  room  for  doubt  that  few
inferior  magistrates  will  dare — if  they  were  so  dis¬
posed,  as  they  are  not — to  act  under  that  Mutiny
law.  Whether  their  opinion  is  right  or  wrong,  the
effect  is  the  same,  our  best  friends  being  of  opinion
that  opposition  will  but  rekindle  the  flame.  We  can
offer  in  the  House  of  Commons  but  a  vain  and  em¬
barrassing  resistance.  It  will  pass  the  Council  also,
and  if  rejected  here  it  can  only  be  by  my  refusing
to  certify.’ 1

Past  experience  had  led  the  Cabinet  to  believe  that
the  Irish  meant  ffiss  than  they  said.  They  set  down
much  of  what  the  Viceroy  reported  to  them  as  mere
braggadocio.  Their  orders  remained  as  before.  If
Mr.  Bushe’s  motion  was  so  framed  as  to  imply  that
the  British  Act  was  not  in  force  in  Ireland,  Lord
Buckinghamshire  was  to  oppose  it  at  every  stage.
Being  made  of  weak  materials,  however,  and  evidently
unwilling  to  interpose  his  sole  authority,  he  was  in¬
formed  that  if,  in  spite  of  his  efforts,  the  Bill  passed
the  Privy  Council,  4  his  majesty  would  spare  him  an
unusual  step,’  and  that  he  might  transmit  it  to
England.2

1  1  To  Lord  Hillsborough,  May  8.’

2  ‘  Lord  Hillsborough  to  the  Viceroy,  May  14.’

TIIE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

2G3

The  fortnight  passed  away.  On  the  21st  of  May  the
Council  was  again  assembled.  The  Viceroy  laid  be¬
fore  them  the  Cabinet’s  directions.  He  told  them  that
if  the  heads  of  Mr.  Bushe’s  Bill  were  carried,  he  ap¬
prehended  they  would  be  laid  before  the  Parliament
in  England.  He  did  not  expect  the  servants  of  the
Crown  to  vote  against  the  motion.  He  did  expect
them  not  to  vote  against  the  Government.

Finding  the  Cabinet  more  resolute  than  they  ex¬
pected,  the  Patriots  modified  their  purpose.  Having
talked  so  loudly,  they  were  forced  to  proceed;  but
when  Mr.  Bushe  produced  his  Bill,  it  was  found  to
have  been  so  drawn  as  to  avoid  a  distinct  affirmation,
that  the  British  Act  did  not  apply  to  Ireland.  The
language  could  be  construed  into  an  expression  of
anxiety,  that  the  law  existing  already  should  be  more
efficiently  executed.  Even  thus  modified,  the  Attorney-
General  said  he  must  oppose  the  introduction  of  any
Bill  whatsoever  upon  the  subject.  A  division  was
forced,  and  he  was  heavily  defeated.  The  heads  were
passed  rapidly  through  the  two  Houses.  The  pro¬
gress  through  the  Council  was  obstructed,  but  was
accomplished  at  last,  and  the  Bill  was  transmitted  to
England  at  the  beginning  of  July.

Again  there  was  a  pause,  as  there  had  been  at
the  beginning  of  the  session  when  the  ultimatum  was
sent  over  on  Free-trade.  The  excitement,  however,
was  now  far  greater,  the  hopes  entertained  more
ambitious,  the  general  feeling  more  irritated.  The
army  was  a  peculiarly  sore  subject.  The  towns  on
the  coast,  in  fear  real  or  pretended  of  the  privateers,
beset  the  Castle  with  demands  for  protection.  Angry
motions  were  made  in  the  House  of  Lords.  If
Ireland  was  a  part  of  the  British  Empire,  Ireland  it

CHAP.

I.

“lTha

May.

264

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

"Tt8(L

July.

was  said  had  a  right  to  he  defended;  while  the  handful
of  Government  troops  remaining  in  the  country
were  demoralised  by  the  invitations  to  the  soldiers
to  desert  and  the  impunity  allowed  to  desertion.

To  assist  England  in  coming  to  a  resolution,  and  to
let  the  Cabinet  understand  what  it  was  with  which  they
would  really  have  to  reckon,  the  Volunteers  became
confessed  politicians.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  took
the  chair  while  the  Dublin  corps  passed  resolutions
that  Ireland  should  be  free.  Ireland  would  make  her
own  laws  in  her  own  Parliament,  and  obey  no  others.
The  Volunteers  as  Ireland’s  champion  army  intended
to  have  it  so.  As  if  to  assert  in  the  most  distinct
manner  that  they  owed  no  obedience  to  the  Castle,
and  would  accept  no  orders  from  it,  they  elected  their
own  commander-in-chief ;  and  Lord  Charlemont,  the
most  amiable,  the  most  enthusiastic,  the  most  feeble
of  revolutionary  heroes,  allowed  himself  to  wear  the.
title  of  General  of  the  Patriot  Army  of  Ireland.

Their  efforts  at  display  were  visibly  connected  with
the  plan  too  successfully  pursued  to  weaken  and
demoralise  the  British  regiments.  As  if  to  contrast
their  own  brilliant  condition  with  the  shrivelled
numbers  and  shattered  discipline  of  the  regular
troops,  they  proceeded,  while  the  Mutiny  Act  was
under  consideration  in  England,  to  hold  reviews
in  the  North.  Lord  Charlemont  went  down  accom¬
panied  by  Grattan,  who  was  now  on  every  man’s  lip
as  the  liberator  of  his  country.  The  half  Americanised
artisans  of  Belfast  and  Newry,  officered  by  attorneys
and  shopkeepers,  glittered  glorious  in  their  new  uni¬
forms.  Ireland  was  free  ;  Ireland  was  a  nation.
The  strings  long  silent  of  the  Irish  harp  were  sounding
in  the  breeze ;  the  green  flag  was  blowing  out  with

265.

V

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

the  emblem  blazoned  on  its  folds,  4  Hibernia  tandem
libera/  Ireland  at  length  free:  free  with  the  help  of
the  arms  which  had  been  begged  at  the  gate  of
Dublin  Castle  ;  free  from  the  fell  authority  which,  not¬
withstanding  its  stupid  tyranny  and  still  more  stupid
negligence,  had  given  Ireland  its  laws  and  its  lan¬
guage,  had  prevented  its  inhabitants  from  destroying
each  other  like  howling  and  hungry  wolves,  and  at
least  enabled  them  to  exist  ; — free  from  this,  but
not  free  from  sloth  and  ignorance,  from  wild  ima¬
ginations,  from  political  dishonesty  which  had  satu¬
rated  the  tissue  of  her  being,  and  required  stronger
medicine  to  purge  it  than  the  shouting  of  50,000
volunteers.

No  doubt,  however,  the  spectacle  was  imposing.
The  English  Whigs  sent  their  deputies  to  applaud
and  admire.  Lord  Camden,  whose  son  was  to  learn
by  and  by  the  real  meaning  of  these  fine  doings,
came  over  as  Lord  Charlemont’s  guest,  to  make
speeches  about  America,  to  bid  the  Volunteers  re¬
member  that  England  would  never  forgive  them,  to
tell  them  that  they  must  stand  to  their  arms  or  they
were  lost.  All  was  rapture — bearded  men  falling
into  one  another’s  arms  as  brothers,  in  radiant  tears,
swearing  that  they  would  be  free  or  die ;  bowing
before  Grattan  as  before  a  saviour  newly  sent  from
heaven  ;  and  hearing  from  Grattan’s  lips  the  delight¬
ful  assurance  that  theirs  was  the  spirit  which  made
liberty  secure.

But  the  last  battle  of  the  session  had  still  to  be
fought,  and  the  Liberator  had  to  descend  once  more
into  the  arena.  August  came,  bringing  with  it  the
heads  of  Bills  which  had  been  sent  to  England.  The
Mutiny  Bill  was  among  them.  Some  concession  even

CHAP.

i.

T78oT

July.

266

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VL

1780.

August.

on  this  point  the  Cabinet  had  been  driven  to  make,  but
it  was  returning  in  a  form  deemed  as  insulting  as  it
was  injurious.  The  right  of  the  Irish  Parliament  had
been  allowed,  but  allowed  for  once  only.  In  England
the  Mutiny  Bill  was  annual.  The  heads  of  Mr.
Bushe’s  Bill  made  it  biennial.  The  limitation  of
time  had  been  struck  out,  and  the  duration  assigned
to  it  in  the  Bill  as  corrected  by  the  Cabinet  was
perpetual.

Bumour  had  been  already  busy  with  the  report  of
the  intended  atrocity.  Grattan,  fresh  from  the  tented
field  and  the  adulations  of  the  Volunteers,  gave  notice
that  if  the  change  had  been  made  he  would  oppose  the
passing  of  the  Bill  in  any  shape ;  the  King  should  have
no  army  in  Ireland.  When  the  House  seemed  to  hesi¬
tate  he  threatened  that  if  he  was  not  supported  he
would  secede  from  Parliament  and  appeal  to  the  people.
The  fact  proving  true,  he  moved  to  restore  the  ex¬
punged  clause — a  motion  equivalent  to  rejection,  as
the  Bill  must  have  been  lost  for  the  year.  He
was  beaten  by  a  large  majority.1  The  Perpetual
Mutiny  Bill  became  law,  and  he  did  not  secede.
Irishmen  sometimes  say  more  on  such  matters  than
they  mean.  But  in  fact  his  assistance  was  required  on
another  subject  scarcely  less  important.  The  Supply
Bill  had  returned  also,  and  also,  like  its  companion,
altered.  No  sooner  had  the  Irish  trade  been  opened
than  the  forcing  system  was  at  once  to  be  applied  to
it.  Ireland  had  suffered  for  a  century  under  English
monopolies.  It  was  now  Ireland’s  turn.  She  was
allowed,  under  the  new  regulations,  to  import  raw
sugar  from  the  West  Indies  on  the  same  terms  as

1  114  to  62.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  KETRIBUTION.

2G7

Great  Britain.  But  free  trade  was  to  no  purpose  if  chap.
England  was  allowed  to  conspire  in  another  form  - — r —
against  Ireland’s  prosperity  by  underselling  the  Irish  A  ^
sugar  manufacturers  in  their  own  market.  They  had
included  in  the  Supply  Bill  a  protection  duty  against
British  loaf-sugar,  and  this  duty  the  English  Council
had  refused  to  sanction.

Had  the  Irish  people  been  capable  of  reflection,
they  would  have  perceived  that  England  was  really
protecting  the  Irish  consumer  from  his  own  country¬
men.  In  ordinary  times  even  the  cry  of  English
treachery  would  not  have  betrayed  them  into  an
illusion  so  absurd  as  that  under  which  they  fell:  but
in  the  delirium  of  imagined  liberty  they  had  parted
with  their  senses.  They  could  see  only  that  England,
unable  to  encounter  them  by  force,  was  insidiously
stealing  back  from  them  their  victory.

Dissatisfied  with  the  vote  on  the  Mutiny  Bill,  dis¬
trusting  Parliament  therefore,  and  responding,  as  it
were,  to  Grattan’s  appeal,  the  Volunteers  of  Dublin
assembled  as  supreme  arbiters  of  Irish  policy,  and
announced  their  pleasure  and  their  sentiments.  In  a
series  of  resolutions  they  declared  that  the  alteration
of  the  Sugar  Bill  and  the  passing  of  the  Mutiny  Bill
rendered  the  expectation  of  free  trade  delusive,  and
contradicted  the  sentiments  which  they  had  believed
would  actuate  the  representatives  of  the  people  to
emancipate  the  kingdom  from  the  insult  of  a  foreign
judicature.  The  army  was  to  be  made  the  instru¬
ment  of  despotism  to  violate  the  liberties  of  Ireland.

The  Irish  House  of  Commons  had  adopted  the  sen¬
timents  of  the  British  Privy  Council  in  contradiction
to  their  own  sentiments.  Such  complaisance  was
unconstitutional;  and  therefore  they,  the  Volunteers

268

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI

T78o7

August.

of  Dublin,  announced  that  they  would  not  support
the  interest  or  protect  the  property  of  any  member
who  had  voted  with  the  ministry  on  the  late  division;
and  that  they  would  concur  with  the  Volunteers  of  the
rest  of  the  kingdom  in  every  effort  which  might  tend
to  avert  the  dangers  with  which  they  were  threatened.

A  committee  was  appointed  to  correspond  with  the
different  corps  on  the  measures  which  it  might  be
necessary  to  take,  and  delegates  were  invited  to
meet,  4  to  animate  the  kingdom  to  rise  in  support  of
the  violated  rights  of  Ireland,  and  the.  privileges
which  their  treacherous  representatives  had  basely
sold  to  the  infamous  administration  of  Great  Britain.’

This  singular  commentary  on  the  political  capacity
of  Ireland’s  new  masters,  and  on  the  effects  of  conces¬
sions  however  just  in  themselves  to  Irish  agitation,
was  printed  in  the  4  Hibernian  Journal,’  and  as  a
practical  consequence  a  spirit  showed  itself  of  the  most
ferocious  hostility  to  the  British  regiments  who  were
quartered  in  the  large  towns.  Patriot  ruffians  whose
hands  were  practised  in  cattle  houghing  used  their
knives  in  slitting  the  tendons  of  English  soldiers
who  might  be  walking  carelessly  in  the  streets ;  and
the  local  juries  adopted  as  their  own  these  detestable
atrocities  by  acquitting  the  perpetrators  when  taken
in  the  act.1  The  soldiers,  finding  justice  refused
them  in  the  courts,  took  the  remedy  into  their  own
hands.  In  Dublin  and  Galway-  there  were  angry
spurts  of  fighting.  In  Cashel  one  of  these  villains
was  killed  on  the  spot  by  the  comrade  of  a  man  whom
he  had  maimed.

On  the  members  of  Parliament,  so  rapid  a  deve-

1  MSS.  Ireland,  1780.  S.P.O.  So  Act  of  Parliament  was  passed  in
far  tliis  practice  was  carried  that  an  the  following  session  to  repress  it.

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

269

lopment  of  patriotism,  coupled  with  the  insults  of  chap.
the  Volunteers  to  themselves,  produced  for  a  time  > — ^ — -
a  sobering  effect.  Already  alarmed  by  the  rate  at  Septemb'er<
which  Grattan  was  advancing,  they  were  not  re¬
assured  by  the  visible  breaking  loose  of  Irish  devilry.

The  Supply  Bill  was  passed  notwithstanding  the
outcry  on  the  Sugar  duties.  Mr.  Peter  La  Touche,
who  had  taken  the  chair  at  one  of  the  Volunteer
meetings,  was  called  before  the  Privy  Council  and  apo¬
logised.  The  publications  in  the  4  Hibernian  Journal  ’
were  brought  before  the  House  of  Commons,  and  the
Volunteers’  resolutions  were  condemned  as  false,
scandalous,  and  libellous,  and  tending  to  raise
sedition.

Thus  were  the  chequered  days  of  the  closing  session
gilded  with  a  show  of  loyalty.  Lord  Hillsborough
described  the  doings  of  the  Volunteers  as  4  the  con¬
vulsions  of  expiring  faction ;  ’  the  Government  was
soothed  into  a  belief  that  the  worst  was  over;  and
business  being  now  completed,  the  harassed  Viceroy
had  arrived  in  port,  with  the  one  duty  left  to  the
House  and  to  himself,  to  part  with  mutual  con¬
gratulations.

4  The  satisfaction  of  Ireland  at  the  prospect  opening
before  it  might  equal,’  Lord  Buckinghamshire  said,

4  though  it  could  not  exceed,  the  glow  of  his  private
feelings.  The  commerce  of  the  kingdom  was  now
established  on  an  extended  and  lasting  basis,  and
future  generations  would  look  back  to  the  present
Parliament  and  the  diffusive  indulgence  of  his
majesty  with  grateful  veneration.  The  Lords  and
Commons,  when  they  returned  to  their  counties,
would  impress  on  all  ranks  of  men  the  blessings  of
the  situation,  and  would  invite  them  to  an  industry

270

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

November.

without  which  the  bounties  of  nature  were  lavished
in  vain.’  1

Platitude  could  scarcely  have  been  carried  further.
The  insincere  illusion  disappeared  before  the  closing
speech  of  the  Viceroy  was  in  the  columns  of  the
weekly  journals.  Finding  Parliament  so  unpatriotic
as  to  sacrifice  the  Sugar  duties,  the  freemen  of  Dublin
met,  with  the  High  Sheriff  in  the  chair,  and  resolved
as  before  that  4  non-importation ’  was  more  bene¬
ficial  to  them  than  a  nominal  free  trade.  They  would,
therefore,  neither  themselves  import  nor  consume,
nor  would  deal  with  any  tradesman  who  ventured
to  import,  manufactured  goods  from  Great  Britain.

King  William’s  statue  was  the  scene  of  a  new  de¬
monstration  on  the  4th  of  November,  not  as  in  the  year
preceding,  with  cannon  wheeled  about  its  base  and
Volunteers  parading,  but  now  decorated  with  saddened
emblems  —  Hibernia  weeping  over  the  words  Liberty
and  Commerce,  and  a  scroll  expressing  a  hope  4  that
the  virtuous  resistance  of  America  might  prove  a
lesson  to  the  British  Ministry.’

To  Lord  Buckinghamshire  the  autumn  brought
indisputable  satisfaction.  His  own  inglorious  reign
was  brought  to  an  end.  Before  his  departure  he  had
to  wind  up  the  accounts  of  his  administration.

It  was  not  by  appeals  to  manly  or  honourable
motives  that  he  had  secured  the  majorities  which
saved  his  administration  from  disgrace  and  the  Bri¬
tish  army  from  dissolution.  The  sublime  impulses
which  had  governed  the  opening  months  of  the  ses¬
sion  had  grown  feeble  at  its  close,  and  the  usual
detestable  list  of  aspirants  for  rank  or  pension  was
forwarded  for  the  Cabinet’s  consideration.

1  Commons’  Journals ,  September  2;  1780,

THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  RETRIBUTION.

271

‘  No  man/  the  Viceroy  said,  in  apology  for  the  chap.
numbers  whom  he  was  reluctantly  obliged  to  recom-  ...  L_
mend,  4  can  see  the  inconveniences  of  increasing  the  _ 178(?-

1  #  °  November.

number  of  peers  more  forcibly  than  myself ;  but  the
recommendation  of  many  of  the  persons  submitted
to  his  majesty  for  that  honour  arose  from  engage¬
ments  taken  up  at  the  press  of  the  moment,  to  secure
questions  on  which. the  English  Government  was
very  particularly  anxious.  I  feel  the  same  about
Privy  Council  and  pensions,  and  I  had  not  contracted
any  absolute  agreement  of  recommendations  either  to
peerage  or  pension  till  difficulties  arose  that  occa¬
sioned  so  much  anxiety  in  his  majesty’s  Cabinet,
that  I  must  have  been  culpable  in  neglecting  any
possible  means  of  securing  a  majority  in  the  House
of  Commons.’1

The  applicants  for  favours  2  were  so  abundant  that
some  of  them  after  all  were  disappointed.  The  fond¬
ness  of  the  Irish  for  titles  was  like  the  fondness  of
women  and  savages  for  feathers  and  fine  clothes,  and
the  refusal  was  the  more  bitter  because  Irish  opinion
was  lenient  with  the  apostate  patriot  who  secured  a
handsome  price  for  his  delinquency,  but  had  no
pardon  for  the  dupe  who  allowed  himself  to  be
cheated  of  his  reward.

Viceroys  unable  to  redeem  their  engagements  were
thus  liable,  in  their  own  persons  or  their  secretaries’,
to  be  called  to  account  by  these  exasperated  politi¬
cians.  A  promise  given  to  secure  a  vote  could  not
be  formally  pleaded,  and  was  thus  treated  as  a  debt

1  *  The  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire
to  Lord  Hillsborough,  November
19,  1780/

2  The  names  of  some  of  them

will  be  found  in  a  letter  from  Lord
Buckinghamshire  to  Lord  North.
Printed  in  Grattan’s  Life  of  Grat¬
tan,  vol.  ii.  p.  166,  &c.

272

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

November,

of  honour.  Lord  Buckinghamshire  had  been  tempted,
in  a  moment  of  embarrassment,  into  a  negotiation
with  Sir  Henry  Cavendish,  a  noted  free-lance  in  the
House  of  Commons.  Sir  Henry  had  applied  for  a
place  on  the  Privy  Council.  Lord  Buckinghamshire
had  answered  that  4  the  Privy  Council  was  but  a
feather ;  ’  1  he  would  do  better  than  that  for  him ;  ’
and  when  reminded  of  his  words,  again  promised  to
provide  for  his  importunate  suitor  4  before  he  left
the  kingdom.’  On  the  faith  of  these  assurances  Sir
Henry  had  voted  steadily  with  the  Government.
Time  passed  on;  the  day  of  Lord  Buckinghamshire’s
departure  was  approaching,  and  nothing  had  been
done.  Sir  Henry  wrote  to  say  he  would  not  in¬
sult  his  excellency  by  the  suggestion  that  he  meant
to  evade  his  engagement.  He  appealed  to  the  Vice¬
roy’s  honour.  He  reminded  him  of  his  exact  expres¬
sions.  4  Had  any  common  prostitute  in  office  made
such  declarations  to  him,’  he  said,  4  his  experience
would  have  been  an  antidote  to  deception,  but  the
word  of  the  Earl  of  Buckinghamshire  he  regarded  as
truth  itself.’

To  this  letter  the  Viceroy  sent  no  reply.  Sir
Henry  waited  till  he  was  on  the  point  of  sailing,
and  then  addressed  him  again  in  the  following
words  : —

4  My  Lord, — On  the  22nd  of  last  September  I  did
myself  the  honour  to  write  to  your  excellency,  but
have  not  had  the  honour  of  an  answer.  I  am  not
conscious  of  having  merited  that  silent  contempt.
Your  excellency,  on  perusing  my  letter,  must  have
perceived  that  you  have  deceived  and  injured  me.
I  earnestly  entreat  a  satisfactory  answer  whilst  your
excellency  shall  continue  in  Ireland,  that  I  may  not

THE  BEGINNINGS  OE  RETRIBUTION.

273

be  under  the  necessity  of  demanding  one  on  the
other  side  of  the  water.

4 1  am,

4  Your  Excellency’s  most  obedient  and
humble  servant,

‘  To  his  Excellency  4  H.  CAVENDISH,

the  Lord-Lieutenant.’

Lord  Weymouth,  to  whom  Lord  Buckinghamshire
forwarded  this  characteristic  communication,  sub¬
mitted  it  to  Wallace,  the  English  Attorney-General,
with  a  view  to  prosecution.  The  Attorney- General
replied  that  Sir  Henry  at  worst  had  been  guilty  only
of  a  misdemeanour  in  Ireland,  for  which  he  could
not  be  prosecuted  in  England.  In  Ireland  the
scandal  of  exposure  would  be  certain — a  conviction
would  be  extremely  uncertain.  The  matter  dropped,
and  Sir  Henry  was  left  in  possession  of  the  held,
with  the  satisfaction  of  having  at  least  insulted  the
Lord-Lieutenant,  though  he  lost  his  promised  pro¬
motion.

CHAP.

i.

1780.

VOL.  II.

T

274

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

CHAPTER  II

THE  CONSTITUTION  OE  1782.

SECTION  I.

BOOK

VI.

Tm

The  embarrassments  of  England  presented  an  op¬
portunity  to  the  maritime  nations  of  Europe  too
tempting  to  be  resisted.  She  had  affected  the  so¬
vereignty  of  the  seas.  She  had  asserted  a  supremacy
which  galled  their  pride  and  irritated  their  jealousy.
Her  enemies  and  her  rivals  chose  the  moment  of  the
revolt  of  the  American  provinces  to  humiliate  her.
It  seemed  as  if  the  whole  world  was  about  to  com¬
bine  to  disgrace  and  ruin  the  single  island  which  on
the  map  of  the  globe  appears  but  a  small  appendage
of  the  continent,  divided  from  it  by  a  thread  of  water.
Spain  was  snatching  at  Gibraltar,  and  France  at  re¬
venge  for  her  own  expulsion  from  Canada  and  India.
The  fame  of  England’s  difficulties  had  reached  her
Eastern  empire,  and  she  was  threatened  with  a  re¬
bellion  in  Hindostan.  At  this  crisis  it  pleased
Catherine  of  Russia  to  strike  into  the  quarrel,  and
to  invite  the  sea  powers  which  were  not  yet  at  war
to  form  a  league  for  the  protection  of  the  rights  of
neutrals  —  the  right,  among  others,  of  supplying
England’s  enemies  with  munitions  of  war.

Into  this  league  Holland  now  entered.  Russia
confined  herself  to  intrigue.  Holland  made  her

THE  CONSTITUTION  OE  1782.

275

possessions  in  the  West  Indies  a  depot  of  supplies
for  the  French  and  Spaniards  and  Americans.  She
became  as  actively  mischievous  as  if  she  had  directly
taken  part  in  the  conflict;  and  England,  finding  re¬
monstrances  unheeded,  and  preferring  an  open  foe
to  a  treacherous  neutral,  declared  war  against  the
Dutch.  Thus,  without  an  ally  left  to  her  but  Por¬
tugal,  she  found  herself  matched  against  the  three
most  considerable  naval  powers  of  the  world  next  to
herself,  who  each,  at  one  time  or  another,  had  en¬
countered  her  single-handed,  and  whose  combination
was  rendered  doubly  dangerous  by  the  support  of  the
American  privateers.

That  the  Protestant  colony  in  Ireland  should
select  this  particular  moment  to  threaten  a  rebellion
was  not  generous  on  their  part,  nor  particularly
glorious  ;  but  it  was  not  unnatural,  and  ought  not
to  have  been  unexpected.  The  commercial  monopo¬
lies  were  unjust;  they  had  existed  so  long  that  their
inherent  iniquity  was  no  longer  perceived.  In  sur¬
rendering  them  the  English  had  made  a  sacrifice  of
pride  and  interest  which,  they  conceived,  entitled
them  to  gratitude ;  but  concessions  extorted  by  agita¬
tion  have  never  been  followed  by  gratitude  since  the
world  began,  and  do  not  in  fact  deserve  it.  Under
English  rule  Ireland  had  been  demoralised  and  made
miserable.  The  colonists  might  naturally  suppose
that  if  left  to  manage  their  own  affairs  they  would
manage  them  better.  To  manage  them  worse  might
fairly  be  thought  impossible.

And  yet  there  were  circumstances  in  their  past
history  which,  if  they  had  reflected,  might  have
taught  them  caution.  They  were  aliens,  planted  by
conquest  among  a  people  who,  though  in  chains  and

T  2

CHAP.

II.

1m

276

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  outwardly  submissive,  bad  neither  forgotten  nor

_ ✓  forgiven  their  subjection.  Three  times  already  their

i78°*  ancestors  or  their  predecessors,  tempted  by  analo¬
gous  wrongs,  had  turned  against  the  mother  country,
and  had  united  with  the  Irish  nation  in  a  demand  for
self-government.  On  each  of  these  occasions  their
aspirations  had  recoiled  upon  themselves,  and  the
result  had  been  a  fresh  conquest,  with  worse  miseries
attending  it  than  those  which  they  had  hoped  to
escape.  The  Norman  families  combined  with  the
Celts  to  resist  the  Reformation.  Of  the  descend¬
ants  of  the  Normans  more  than  half  perished  in
the  wars  of  Elizabeth,  while  the  Celts,  in  the  hor¬
rors  of  famine,  were  driven  to  feed  on  one  another.
The  Scotch  and  English  Protestants  planted  by
James  the  First  were  provoked  by  Strafford  and  the
bishops  into  joining  with  the  Irish  when  England’s
hands  were  tied  by  the  quarrel  between  the  King
and  the  Parliament.  The  result  was  a  furious  at¬
tempt  at  their  own  extermination  at  the  hands  of
their  Irish  allies,  and  they  recovered  their  estates
and  their  homes  only  when  Cromwell  and  an  English
army  reconquered  the  island  for  them.  A  third  time,
in  another  form,  the  phenomenon  repeated  itself.  In
the  reaction  from  Puritan  ascendancy  the  Anglo-
Irish  nobles  and  gentry  became  violent  Jacobites
and  High  Churchmen.  They  preferred  the  Catholic
Celts  to  the  Presbyterian  Scots,  and  by  playing  into
the  Catholics’  hands  enabled  Tyrconnell  to  establish
a  Catholic  Government.  When  the  Celts  were  once
more  in  the  saddle  they  found  themselves  involved
in  the  common  proscription  which  refused  to  make
distinctions  among  Protestants.  A  third  time  Enof-
land  was  reluctantly  driven  to  interfere  in  their

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

behalf,  and  replace  the  supremacy  in  their  hands.  She
beat  the  Celts  upon  their  knees,  and  flung  them  into
chains  ;  but  disgusted  with  the  ungrateful  service,
she  threw  Celt  and  colonist  alike  under  disabilities
which  would  prevent  them  from  giving  further
trouble,  and  left  the  country  to  its  fate.  This,  too,
was  not  to  answer  to  England.  Strong  nations  trusted
with  empire  over  their  weaker  neighbours  are  not
allowed  to  leave  their  duties  undone.  Anarchy  and
wretchedness  had  again  produced  mutiny  and  dis¬
content,  and  the  Protestant  colonists  were  once
more  dreaming  of  separation  and  a  revival  of  Irish
nationality.

The  question  what  that  nationality  was  to  be  in
their  present  heat  they  scarcely  cared  to  consider  :
but  that  it  was  a  very  serious  question  was  obvi¬
ous  to  all  but  themselves.  Were  some  half  million
Protestants — for  the  Established  Church  contained
no  more,  and  Churchmen  so  far  monopolized  power
and  privilege — were  half  a  million  Protestants  to
remain  a  Spartan  aristocracy,  surrounded  by  a  popu¬
lation  of  helots  six  times  outnumbering  them,  whose
lands  they  had  occupied?

Lord  Charlemont  and  many  another  enthusiastic
patriot  saw  no  difficulty  in  this.  He  would  perhaps
have  levelled  the  distinction  between  Churchman  and
Nonconformist  Protestant.  The  Catholics — though
he  was  in  favour  of  extending  their  civil  rights  to
the  utmost — Charlemont  never  dreamt  of  admitting
to  political  power,  and  believed  it  would  be  possible
to  keep  them  excluded.

Grattan,  farther  sighted  than  Charlemont,  saw
early  that  an  Irish  nationality,  from  which  the  Irish
themselves  were  shut  out,  was  a  paradox  and  an

278

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

absurdity.  Experience  of  the  ductile  character  of  the
existing  Parliament  showed  him  that,  while  its  com¬
position  was  unchanged,  self-government  would  be  no
more  than  a  name.  He  persuaded  himself  that  dis¬
tinction  of  religion  was  worn  out,  that  animosities
of  race  could  he  extinguished  in  a  common  enthu¬
siasm,  that  Celt  and  Saxon  might  stand  side  by
side  in  the  ranks,  and  present  a  common  front  to
the  British  oppressor.  Like  other  eager  statesmen,
lie  regarded  the  lessons  of  the  past  as  no  longer
applicable.  If  it  was  hinted  that  when  the  Celt
had  his  foot  within  the  Constitution,  when  he  saw
the  usurpers  of  his  estates  and  the  oppressors  of
his  creed  at  the  mercy  of  his  superior  numbers,  he
might  revive  the  aspirations  of  1690,  Grattan
replied  only  with  disdain  or  with  misleading  meta¬
phors.  The  Celts,  as  he  saw  them,  were  spiritless
and  broken,  the  peasantry  cringing  before  the  Pro¬
testant  squires,  or,  when  they  were  kindly  dealt  with,
loyal  and  affectionate.  He  saw  the  Catholic  clergy
in  appearance  humbly  grateful  for  the  suspension
of  laws  which  if  executed  would  have  forbidden
them  to  exist.  That  in  such  a  people  as  this,  there
would  be  danger  to  the  Protestant  gentry,  who,
besides  other  advantages,  had  now  their  own  army
of  volunteers,  was  an  idea  too  preposterous  to  be
entertained.  c  Are  we,’  he  asked,  ‘to  be  a  Protes¬
tant  settlement  or  an  Irish  nation  ?  ’  and  in  his
answer  to  his  question  he  exposed  the  measure  of
his  foresight.

c  The  Penal  Code,’  he  said,  1  is  the  shell  in  which
the  Protestant  power  has  been  hatched.  It  has  be¬
come  a  bird.  It  must  burst  the  shell  or  perish  in  it.
Indulgence  to  Catholics  cannot  injure  the  Protestant

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

religion.  That  religion  is  the  religion  of  the  State,
and  will  become  the  religion  of  Catholics  if  severity
does  not  prevent  them.’

Piece  by  piece  the  shell  has  been  broken  off.  Has
the  Protestant  bird  developed  power  of  wing  in
consequence  ?  Do  the  Catholics  seem  any  more  to
admire  it  ?  Let  us  look  for  answer  in  the  Dises¬
tablished  Church,  in  the  obliteration  of  the  Protes¬
tants  in  Ireland  as  a  political  power  in  the  country,
in  the  reduction  of  the  Viceroy  into  a  registrar  of
the  decrees  of  the  Vatican,  and  the  boast  of  a  cardinal
that  Irish  nationality  is  the  Catholic  religion.

Mr.  Grattan  was  dazzled  by  his  own  brilliancy.  He
believed,  or  he  affected  to  believe,  that  liberty,  like
the  spell  of  an  enchanter,  could  form  a  Legislature
of  pure  and  high-minded  statesmen  out  of  the  Peers
and  Commons,  with  whose  motives  of  action  he
was  by  this  time  familiar  ;  and  that  out  of  the  dis¬
cordant  and  motley  elements  which  formed  the
population  of  Ireland  he  could  create  a  united,
noble,  and  self-reliant  people.  If,  besides  these
high  flights  of  imagination,  any  more  earthly
and  practical  thoughts  presented  themselves,  he  may
have  believed  that  the  day  of  England’s  greatness
was  over,  that  her  star  was  setting,  and  for  ever,  and
that  his  free  Ireland  might  find  an  ally  less  dangerous
to  her  liberties  and  equally  convenient  for  her  protec¬
tion  either  in  F ranee  or  in  her  sister  colony  across  the
Atlantic.

280

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  II.

BOOK

VI.

1780.

So  far  as  the  realization  of  the  hopes  of  the  Irish  pa¬
triots  depended  on  the  progress  of  the  war,  the  events  of
the  year  1780  were  on  the  whole  unfavourable  to  them.
Though  the  Irish  Channel  was  the  hunting-ground
of  privateers,  and  bishops’  daughters  were  captured
and  held  to  ransom  between  Waterford  and  Milford,
England  still  presented  an  unbroken  front  to  her
many  enemies.  The  Spaniards  had  blockaded  Gi¬
braltar  in  the  belief  that  they  could  starve  out  the
garrison.  Sir  George  Rodney,  with  a  relieving  fleet,
seized  a  convoy  of  Spanish  provision-ships  in  the
spring,  and  fed  General  Elliot  and  his  troops  out  of
the  stores  of  the  enemy.  In  J uly  he  encountered  the
Spanish  Admiral  Don  Juan  de  Langara  at  Cape  St.
Vincent,  destroyed  seven  out  of  eleven  of  his  ships,
and  carried  Don  Juan  himself  a  prisoner  into  the
blockaded  fortress.

Nor  had  the  alliance  with  France  brought  that
immediate  triumph  to  the  American  provinces  which
sanguine  patriots  anticipated.  M.  de  Ternay  arrived
at  Rhode  Island  in  July  with  fifteen  ships  of  the
line,  bringing  with  him  the  Count  de  Rochambeau
and  six  thousand  men  as  the  vanguard  of  a  larger
force  which  was  to  follow.  France  was  preparing
to  put  out  her  utmost  strength,  yet  M.  de  Ternay  let
Admiral  Arbuthnot  blockade  him  with  an  inferior
fleet,  and  the  French  contingent  lay  locked-up  and
useless.

The  capture  of  Charleston  had  been  followed  by

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

281

the  complete  submission  of  the  Carolinas.  Sir  Henry
Clinton  held  New  York  in  strength,  against  which
Washington  could  do  nothing;  and  the  unexpected
protraction  of  the  war,  which  had  seemed  as  good  as
ended,  brought  despondency  and  mutiny  into  the
American  camp.  General  Arnold,  who  had  headed
the  expedition  into  Canada,  the  most  distinguished
after  Washington  of  the  patriot  commanders,  believed
the  cause  to  be  lost.  He  opened  a  correspondence
with  Clinton,  proposed  to  betray  West  Point  to  him,
and  with  West  Point  the  controul  of  the  Hudson.
The  plot  was  discovered.  Arnold  escaped  into  the
English  lines.  Major  Andre,  Clinton’s  aide-de-camp,
through  whom  the  negociation  was  carried  on,  was
taken  and  hanged.  But  the  disappointment  did
not  materially  alter  the  prospects  of  the  contend¬
ing  parties.  Arnold  published  a  defence  of  his  de¬
sertion,  in  which  he  pretended  that  England  by  her
concessions  had  removed  the  occasion  of  the  quarrel,
and  that  under  no  circumstances  would  he  be  a
party  to  the  French  alliance  or  assist  in  betray¬
ing  the  mother  country  to  her  hereditary  enemy.
Having  returned  to  his  allegiance,  he  took  active  ser¬
vice  under  Clinton,  and  led  an  expeditionary  force  into
Virginia,  which  at  first  carried  all  before  it.  In
January,  1781,  the  American  army  almost  dissolved
for  want  of  pay,  and  but  for  the  timely  arrival  of  a
subsidy  from  France,  would  have  been  unable  to
offer  opposition  in  the  field  in  any  part  of  the  Con¬
tinent  to  the  British  divisions.  The  supply  of
money  gave  new  spirit  to  the  cause.  Washington  re¬
equipped  his  troops.  La  Fayette  went  down  to
Virginia  with  part  of  the  French  army  tc  oppose
Arnold.  De  Ternay  broke  the  blockade,  and  made

CHAP.

ii.

1780.

1781.

282

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

"l78L

his  way  to  the  Chesapeake  with  the  rest,  intending  to
co-operate.  Still  the  balance  wavered.  Arbuthnot
pursued  him  and  fought  an  action  which,  though
indecisive,  disabled  him  from  proceeding.  The  French
fleet  returned  to  Rhode  Island,  General  Phillips
carried  reinforcements  to  Arnold,  and  in  March,
1781,  Washington’s  own  State,  notwithstanding  La
Fayette,  remained  in  possession  of  the  British.

The  Dutch,  too,  were  paying  dear  for  having  thrust
themselves  into  a  quarrel  which  was  none  of  theirs.
No  sooner  was  war  declared  against  them  than  Rodney
seized  St.  Eustatius,  the  most  important  of  their  West
India  islands,  where  they  had  accumulated  enormous
stores  for  shipment  to  America.  Ships,  factories,
warehouses,  all  were  taken.  Three  millions’  worth  of
property  was  captured  or  destroyed.

From  India,  too,  came  cheering  news.  Sir  Eyre
Coote  twice  defeated  Hyder  Ali.  Warren  Hastings
was  triumphing  in  spite  of  France  and  Mysore,  and
passionate  philanthropists  at  home.

The  French,  finding  the  work  less  easy  than  they
expected,  began  to  hint  at  peace ;  and  it  was  felt  pain¬
fully  by  all  parties  that  unless  some  combined  and
vigorous  effort  could  be  made,  and  made  at  once,
Saratoga  would  be  a  barren  triumph,  and  Bunker’s
Hill  and  Lexington  would  have  been  fought  in  vain.
England,  too,  was  strained  to  the  utmost  of  her  power.
Lord  George  Germaine,  her  Minister  at  War,  was
incompetent  beyond  the  average  of  Parliamentary
administrators.  The  waste  had  been  enormous.  The
national  debt  was  piling  up  into  a  mountain,  and  the
simultaneous  requirements  of  India,  Gibraltar,  and
the  Navy,  rendered  it  a  hard  task  to  keep  Clinton
properly  reinforced.  One  more  attempt  should  be

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

283

made,  at  any  rate.  In  the  summer  of  1780  the  chap.
united  French  and  Spanish  fleets — thirty- six  sail  of  «. — ^ —
the  line  in  all — had  sailed  for  the  West  Indies,  with  a  1 1  ,s  1
view  of  taking  Jamaica,  and  then  of  attacking  Clinton
at  New  York.  Heat  and  overcrowding  had  brought
disease.  They  returned,  having  done  nothing.  In
1781  the  two  fleets  sailed  again  under  Count  de
Grasse.  Jamaica,  as  before,  was  to  be  their  first
object ;  but,  whether  successful  at  Jamaica  or  not,  de
Grasse  was  to  assist  Washington  and  De  Rochambeau
in  a  grand  attack  by  sea  and  land  upon  New  York.

If  the  attack  was  successful,  it  would  conclude  the
war.  If  it  failed,  France  would  probably  decline  to
pursue  the  adventure  further,  and  fortune  this  time
was  more  favourable  than  the  most  sanguine  hopes
could  have  anticipated.

Lord  Cornwallis,  who  had  served  in  America  from
the  beginning  of  the  war,  still  commanded  in  the
Carolinas,  which  he  was  endeavouring  to  bring  to
formal  submission.  The  Americans,  unable  since  the
defeat  at  Camden  to  meet  the  British  in  the  field,
were  able  to  harass  their  marches,  surprise  isolated
detachments,  and  maintain  a  spirited  if  irregular  re¬
sistance.  Cornwallis  found  himself  unable,  with  all
his  exertions,  to  restore  a  regular  government,  or  unite
the  loyal  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  those  states.  The
defeat  of  General  Tarleton  at>  Cow  Pens  was  none
the  less  a  serious  blow  that  it  was  due  to  carelessness
and  over- confidence.  The  small  number  of  troops
engaged  on  both  sides  were  lost  in  the  enormous
territory  for  which  they  were  contending,  and  the
soldiers  wasted  away  in  profitless  marches  and
malaria.  Finding  it  necessary  to  attempt  something
more  effective,  the  English  General  determined,

284

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

though  with  no  very  definite  object,  on  a  bold  ad¬
venture.  He  proposed  to  establish  a  communication
with  Arnold  in  Virginia,  and  place  a  line  of  military
posts  between  Charleston  and  Petersburg]!.  He
took  the  field  at  the  beginning  of  March,  1781,  with
some  misgiving,  but  on  the  whole  sanguine.  He
inflicted  a  severe  defeat  on  General  Greene  on  the
15th  at  Guildford,  and  leaving  Lord  Rawdon1  to  keep
order  in  South  Carolina,  he  moved  on  himself  to
Wilmington.  American  armies  recovered  quickly
from  their  losses.  Greene  doubled  back  in  his  rear,
and  though  again  defeated  on  the  19th  of  April,
forced  Rawdon  afterwards  into  Charleston,  and
picked  up  the  detachments  which  Cornwallis  had  left
to  keep  open  his  communications.  As  Burgoyne  had
been  cut  off  from  Lake  Champlain,  so  Cornwallis  was
now  separated  from  his  base  of  supplies  in  South  Ca¬
rolina,  and  was  forced  to  push  forward  with  his  best
speed  into  Virginia.  He  reached  Petersburgh  on  the
20 tli  of  May,  where  he  found  Arnold.  Clinton  had
sent  him  1,500  men  from  New  York,  which  raised
his  entire  numbers  to  7,000.  He  was  more  than  a
match  in  the  field  for  any  power  which  La  Fayette
could  then  bring  against  him  ;  and  as  long  as  the  sea
was  open  and  the  English  were  masters  of  it,  he  was
in  no  danger  of  a  want  of  supplies.  But  he  confessed
himself  ‘  totally  in  the  dark  ’  as  to  what  he  was  gene¬
rally  to  do  ;  he  was  4  weary  of  marching  about  the
country  in  quest  of  adventure/  2  and  was  anxious  for
orders  from  New  York.  4  Orders  ’  were  what  Clinton
was  just  then  unable  to  give;  he  had  just  heard  that
de  Grasse  had  sailed,  and  that  he  was  himself  in  dan-

1  Earl  of  Moira  afterwards.  Clinton,  April  10,  1780.’ — Com-

2  Lord  Cornwallis  to  Sir  Henry  wallis  Despatches ,  vol.  i.  p.  87.

LOOK

VI.

1781.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

285

ger  of  being  attacked  by  sea  and  land.  He  bad  not  chap.
another  man  to  spare  ;  he  therefore  recommended  - — ^ —
Cornwallis  to  occupy  some  strong  position  on  the  178 1#

coast,  where  he  would  be  within  reach,  and  hold  him¬
self  ready  to  embark  for  New  York.  Such  vague
directions  were  not  of  happy  omen.  Cornwallis,  how¬
ever,  obeyed,  and  entrenched  himself  at  Y  orktown,  in
Virginia,  where  the  York  river  runs  into  the  Chesa¬
peake,  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  a  promised  English
squadron.

No  English  General  can  believe  himself  in  danger
when  he  is  touching  the  sea.  Eor  once,  through  a
combination  of  accidents,  England  was  found  wanting
in  her  own  peculiar  domain.  The  English  squadron
never  reached  the  Chesapeake,  but  de  Grasse  and  the
French  and  Spaniards  came  instead  of  it.  Rodney
had  gone  to  England  with  the  spoils  of  St.  Eusta-
tius,  and  had  not  returned  to  his  station.  De
Grasse,  when  he  arrived  with  the  combined  lleet  of
France  and  Spain,,  found  himself  stronger  than  any
force  which  England  could  at  that  moment  bring
into  line  on  the  American  coast.  Admiral  Graves
came  down  with  the  ships  lying  at  New  York,  and
with  a  far  inferior  force  ventured  an  engagement.

He  was  not  defeated,  but  he  suffered  heavily,  and  was
obliged  to  draw  off,  while  de  Grasse  closed  the  mouth
of  the  net  in  which  Cornwallis  was  by  this  time
enclosed.1

Washington,  joined  by  the  French  at  Rhode
Island,  instead  of  attacking  New  York,  had  pushed
down  by  forced  marches  into  Virginia.  Escape  by
sea  was  impossible.  There  were  a  few  days  in  which,

1  August  20.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

before  the  lines  of  investment  were  drawn  close  about
him,  Cornwallis  might  have  at  least  attempted  to
escape  the  fate  impending  on  him.  Before  Wash¬
ington  arrived  on  the  scene  he  was  still  superior  to
La  Fayette.  By  an  instant  and  rapid  movement  he
might  have  broken  through,  perhaps  have  effected  a
retreat  to  Carolina,  or  even  with  exceptional  daring
have  cut  his  way  by  land  through  Pennsylvania.  But
Cornwallis,  though  a  brave  and  solid  general,  was
without  the  qualities  of  genius  which  are  needed  for
sudden  emergencies.  Half  his  men  had  sickened
from  the  unhealthy  vapours  of  the  York  river,  and
if  he  moved  he  must  have  left  his  sick  behind  him.
Clinton  misled  him  by  cheering  messages  that  help
might  be  looked  for,  and  he  continued  to  wait  for  its
coming  till  Washington  had  drawn  his  lines  across
the  neck  of  the  Peninsula  on  which  the  British  were
lying,  and  with  10,000  Americans  and  7,000  French
completed  the  hopeless  blockade.  Under  these  con¬
ditions  Lord  Cornwallis  did  what  might  have  been
expected  from  an  honourable  man  of  sense  and  in¬
tegrity.  He  held  his  ground  till  the  enemies’  trenches
had  been  pushed  close,  and  their  cannon  searched
every  corner  of  the  British  encampment.  When
further  resistance  was  impossible,  and  the  result  of
prolonging  the  struggle  could  have  been  only  a
useless  sacrifice  of  brave  men’s  lives,  the  American
war  was  brought  on  the  19th  of  October  to  its  virtual
close,  by  the  second  surrender  of  an  English  General
and  an  English  army.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

287

SECTION  III.

The  Earl  of  Carlisle  and  Mr.  Eden,1  the  unsuc¬
cessful  commissioners  to  America,  were  selected  to
succeed  Lord  Buckinghamshire  and  Sir  R.  Heron,  as
Viceroy  and  Secretary  at  Dublin  Castle.  Four  years
of  such  ungrateful  service  tried  the  patience  of  the
most  enduring  public  servants,  each  Viceroy  finding
the  post  more  difficult,  and  the  shifts  more  detestable,
by  which  alone  the  Government  could  be  carried  on.
After  Lord  Buckinghamshire’s  departure  the  Volun¬
teers,  who  now  looked  on  themselves  as  the  real
rulers  of  the  country,  elected  a  second  Legislature  of
their  own.  They  passed  resolutions  condemning  the
House  of  Commons.  They  clamoured  against  the
removal  of  the  sugar  duties.  They  saw  in  the  Per¬
petual  Mutiny  Bill  a  base  surrender  of  the  liberties  of
Ireland.  The  language  in  which  they  expressed
their  views  was  of  the  choicest  Hibernian  type,  and
the  patriotic  newspapers  which  reported  their  pro¬
ceedings  were  filling  their  columns  with  outpourings
of  mere  treason.  Prosecutions  wer£  talked  of ;  but
the  Leinster  corps  interspersing  their  politics  with
reviews  and  displays  of  force,  prudence  was  stronger
than  valour.

The  aristocracy,  many  of  whom  had  taken  a  lead
at  the  beginning  of  the  movement,  were  frightened  at
the  power  which  they  had  created.  ‘  Wild  notions  of
Republicanism’  were  abroad — borrowed  from  America ;
vague  ideas  of  rights  of  man,  not  yet  thrown  into

CHAP.

II.

1781.

1  Afterwards  Lord  Auckland.

288

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  shape  by  Tom  Paine,  but  seething  and  fermenting  in

. _ the  Presbyterian  blood  in  the  north.  Lord  Carlisle,

1/81,  after  a  month’s  experience,  reported  a  conviction
growing  4  among  a  variety  of  men  of  the  greatest
weight  in  the  kingdom,’  4  that  for  their  own  security
they  must  support  the  English  Government,’  that
i  the  power  must  be  regained  from  the  people  which,
if  it  remained  in  their  hands,  would  be  the  ruin  of  the
state.’ 1  Concession  which  was  to  have  made  Ireland
eternally  loyal,  had  resulted  in  4  the  obliteration  of
respect  essential  to  Government  from  the  minds  of
the  people.’  Free  trade  was  to  have  been  4  a  horn  of
plenty.’  It  occurred  to  no  one  that  trade  could  not
grow,  like  a  mushroom,  in  a  night.  The  expected
plenty  was  still  absent,  and  the  people  4  were  taught
to  believe  ’  that  it  was  still  British  legislation  which
forbade  the  fountain  to  flow.2  4  The  men  of  the  greatest
weight,’  too,  though  they  feared  what  was  coming
and  wished  Government  to  exert  itself,  did  not  care
to  compromise  themselves  by  public  action.  In  re¬
volutions  the  centre  of  gravity  changes.  The  privi¬
leged  orders  feel  dimly  that  their  consequence  is
passing  from  them.  They  are  in  the  presence  of
forces  which  they  do  not  understand  and  fear  to  en¬
counter.  Lord  Carlisle  complained  that  c  the  higher
classes  stood  aloof  from  him  ;  ’  while  discontent  grew
louder,  and  the  Volunteers,  more  and  more  disdaining
disguise,  spoke  of  themselves  as  the  defenders  of  the
country  4  against  foreign  and  domestic  enemies  ’ — the
domestic  enemy  4  being  the  Parliament  of  Great
Britain  and  the  supporters  of  the  Government  in
Ireland.’  3

1  ‘The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  2  ‘To  Lord  Hillsborough,  March
Hillsborough,  January  29,  1781.’  29,  1782.’  A  retrospective  letter.

S.  P.  0.  3  Ibid.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

289

If  this  state  of  things  was  scarcely  tolerable  in  the  chap.
recess,  it  would  necessarily  be  infinitely  worse  when  > —
the  period  arrived  for  the'  Irish  Legislature  to  re-  1781,
assemble,  which  the  usual  leading-strings  were  now
obviously  unable  to  guide.  Eepeal  of  Poynings’  Act,
repeal  of  the  6th  of  George  the  First,  a  bill  of  rights,
and  none  could  say  how  many  more  such  bills,  were
preparing  in  Grattan’s  laboratory,  and  would  have  to
be  met  in  the  midst  of  a  universal  hubbub,  under  the
muskets  of  the  Volunteers,  now  said  to  number  a
hundred  thousand.  Hillsborough,  when  the  Viceroy
consulted  him,  advised  a  free  use  of  4  secret  service
money.’  But  where  in  Ireland  did  a  subterranean
Pactolus  flow?  Lord  Carlisle,  or  Mr.  Eden  for  himr
replied  in  sorrow,  4  that  he  could  take  no  money
from  the  Irish  treasury  without  accounting  for  it.’’
Ireland  having  no  foreign  relations  4  he  had  no  con¬
stitutional  pretext  of  foreign  service;  ’  4  and  the  mis¬
chief,’  he  pathetically  said,  4  which  had  long  resulted
from  this  was  not  to  be  described.’  4  In  the  present
state  of  the  country  the  wise  application  of  3,000/.  a
year  might  be  of  a  degree  of  importance  to  his  ma¬
jesty’s  affairs  beyond  what  words  could  estimate.’

There  was  in  fact  but  one  resource.  He  must  be
supplied  from  England.  4  Lord  Carlisle  must  be  per¬
mitted  to  draw  on  Mr.  Bobinson  for  sums  to  be-
applied  to  his  majesty’s  service  and  the  effective  con¬
duct  of  Government:  Lord  North,  in  return,  might
expect  an  ample  compensation  to  his  majesty  by
grant  or  pension  from  Ireland  at  a  proper  time  to
such  persons  as  his  majesty  would  otherwise  provide
for  from  his  English  revenue.’ 1

1  ‘In  short,  my  dear  lord/  this  matter  is  of  extreme  moment;  but  if
singular  letter  concluded,  ‘  this  Lord  North,  whose  dispositions  to-

VOL.  II.  U

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

As  tlie  summer  advanced  the  aspect  of  things  grew
^  steadily  darker.  Every  ship  that  England,  could
spare  from  her  home  defences  was  in  the  West  Indies
or  at  New  York,  or  relieving  Gibraltar,  or  watching
the  Dutch.  Ireland,  so  anxious  to  relieve  England  of
her  internal  garrison,  provided  no  volunteers  upon
the  water.  The  mouth  of  Waterford  Harbour  was
held  by  a  fleet  of  privateers,  who  lay*  undisturbed
there,  preying  upon  the  passing  vessels.  When  it
was  rumoured  that  the  French  meant  to  send  an
expedition  against  Cork,  a  few  volunteers  offered  their
services.  The  offer,  it  will  be  seen,  came  to  nothing,
though  the  Government  received  it  as  well  meant,
and  as  indicating  feelings  not  utterly  disloyal.

By  September  the  patriots  had  laid  out  the  plan  of
their  campaign.  An  attack  was  to  be  made  on
Poynings’  Act ;  the  biennial  clause  was  to  be  re¬
stored  to  the  Mutiny  Bill ;  and  to  counterbalance  the
declaratory  Act  of  the  6th  of  George  the  First,  Mr.
Grattan  meant  to  move  a  Declaration  of  Parliamentary
Independence.  On  Poynings’  Act  and  the  Mutiny  Bill
Lord  Carlisle  felt  comparatively  easy.  The  temper
of  the  House  had  been  tried  on  both  subjects  in  the
last  session,  with  satisfactory  results.  The  Declaration
of  Independence  had  a  charm  for  the  ears  of  Irishmen
which  made  the  Constitution  on  this  side  far  more
vulnerable ;  and  he  saw  that  his  utmost  efforts  would
be  necessary  if  it  was  to  be  successfully  resisted.
Whether  Eden  received  the  powers  which  he  desired
of  drawing  on  the  English  exchequer  is  uncertain.
Other  points,  however,  were  looked  for  on  which

wards  us,  both  officially  and  per-  others,  and  go  on  as  we  can.’ — ‘Mr.
sonally,  are  not  unkind,  does  not  Eden  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  July
fully  feel  its  importance,  we  have  15,  1781.  Most  secret.’
only  to  meet  this  difficulty  with

THE  CONSTITUTION  OE  1782.

291

popular  prejudices  might  be  humoured.  The  sugar  chap.
duty  question  would  certainly  be  revived.  If  the  »  IL
Irish  consumer  wished  to  pay  an  extra  price  for  his  1781*
sugar  to  benefit  his  country’s  trade,  Lord  Carlisle
thought  he  might  be  indulged.  A  vote  of  thanks  might
be  given  graciously  to  the  Volunteers  ;  and  his  hands
would  be  strengthened,  he  said,  if  he  might  consent
at  last  to  the  change  in  the  judges’  tenure.  There
was  no  modern  instance  of  a  judge’s  dismissal,  and  it
was  hard  to  assign  a  producible  reason  for  placing
the  Irish  bench  in  a  different  position  from  that  of
their  brethren  in  England.1

To  these  suggestions  the  Cabinet  had  but  one
answer.  With  enemies  on  all  sides  of  them,  they  stood
to  their  old  policy  of  uncompromising  resistance.  It
was  a  matter  of  course  that  the  Viceroy  should  be
instructed  to  oppose  constitutional  changes,  to  resist
a  Declaration  of  Independence,  to  resist  attacks  on  the
securities  for  the  good  behaviour  of  the  Irish  Par¬
liament.  But  the  small  acts  of  grace  which  Lord  Car¬
lisle  recommended  to  soothe  and  satisfy  the  minds  of
moderate  men  were,  it  seemed,  equally  distasteful.

The  Volunteers  might  be  thanked  if  it  were  insisted
on,  but  there  were  to  be  no  taxes  on  manufactured
sugar  ;  and  4  as  to  giving  the  Irish  judges  the  same
position  which  the  judges  had  in  England,’  ‘the
King’s  servants  had  to  observe  that  nothing  could  be
more  dangerous  and  improper  than  such  an  act,  with¬
out  the  clauses  which  were  inserted  by  the  Privy
Council  in  the  former  bill,  on  which  it  was  thrown
out  by  the  House  of  Commons  in  Ireland.’2

The  Viceroy  was  thus  thrown  on  his  own  resources

1  1  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  2  1  Lord  Hillsborough  to  the  Earl
Weymouth,  September  15.  Most  of  Carlisle,  September  1781.’
secret.  ~

292

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  to  meet  tlie  storm,  of  which  the  sounds  of  the  ap-
— — '  proach  were  every  moment  becoming  more  audible.
1'81*  The  Volunteers  had  continued  their  reviews  through
the  summer  into  the  autumn,  to  the  infinite  satis¬
faction  of  admiring  Ireland.  The  Ulster  corps,  with
Lord  Charleraont  at  their  head,  paraded  at  Belfast  in
the  presence  of  6,000  spectators.  The  officers  pre¬
sented  an  address  to  the  commander-in-chief,  and
Charlemont  replied  with  corresponding  flattery.

4 1  behold/  he  said,  4  a  powerful  army,  self-raised,
self-clothed,  self-paid  ;  disciplined  by  its  own  efforts,
so  that  the  most  experienced  veteran  must  admire.
I  behold  my  country,  fearless  of  invasion,  formidable
to  her  enemies,  respected  by  her  sister  kingdom,  an
object  of  veneration  to*  all  Europe;  constitutional
freedom  emerging  from  the  dark  abyss  into  which
she  had  been  plunged  by  folly  and  corruption,  law¬
less  and  absurd  oppression.’

Whether  Ireland  was  really  at  that  moment  the
object  of  veneration  which  she  supposed,  it  would  be
discourteous  to  enquire  too  curiously.  That  the
veneration,  if  it  existed,  would  not  have  survived  a
trial  of  the  Volunteers  in  the  field,  may  be  asserted
with  more  certainty.  When  the  Government  accepted
their  offer  to  defend  Cork,  three  hundred  men  were
all  that  came  forward.  They  had  courage  in  plenty,
and,  no  doubt,  goodwill ;  but  4  scarcely  a  corps  had
any  camp  equipage/  or  could  be  moved  for  more  than
two  days  out  of  reach  of  their  homes.  They  were
totally  unprovided  with  everything  necessary  to
soldiers  beyond  a  uniform  and  a  musket.  Not  one
of  their  officers  4  would  accept  a  commission  from
the  Crown  or  subject  himself  to  the  Articles  of  War/
and  when  their  strength  was  at  its  highest  the  Duke

/

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

293

of  Portland  gave  it  as  his  deliberate  opinion  that,
unless  they  were  assisted  by  an  English  division,
4  five  thousand  regular  troops,  who  could  effect  a
landing,  would  remain  masters  of  whatever  port  they
might  choose  to  occupy,’  for  all  the  resistance  they
would  meet  with  from  the  Volunteers.1

Nevertheless,  if  not  dangerous  to  the  enemy,  they
were  a  formidable  element  of  possible  internal  mis¬
chief,  and  Lord  Carlisle  was  justified  in  regarding
the  prospect  before  him  with  serious  apprehension.

The  opening  of  the  session  which  was  big  with  the
fate  of  Ireland  at  length  arrived.  It  was  the  9th  of
October,  ten  days  before  the  catastrophe  at  York
Town.  In  default  of  money,  or  any  substantial  act  of
grace  which  might  have  served  instead  of  it,  Mr.
Eden  had  been  lavish  of  promises  to  be  fulfilled
after  good  behaviour,  when  the  campaign  was  over.
He  stood  in  need,  as  he  well  knew,  of  all  the  friend¬
ship  that  he  could  make.  The  Irish  debt,  for  one
thing,  was  now  nearly  three  millions,  the  annual
deficit  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  million,  and  trade
still  refusing  to  rise,  of  course  through  the  invidious
machinations  of  ever-guilty  England.

The  speech  was  studiously  humble,  Lord  Carlisle
seeming  as  if  he  was  awed  bv  the  crowd  which  filled
every  corner  of  the  galleries.  His  majesty  was  said  to
be  filled  with  the  warmest  wishes  for  Ireland’s  happi¬
ness,  and  in  consideration  for  her  sufferings  would,
notwithstanding  the  war,  make  no  extraordinary  de¬
mands  upon  her.  T owards  the  V olunteers  the  Viceroy
forced  himself  into  expressions  of  gratitude  and  an

CHAP.

H.

1781.

1  ‘  The  Duke  of  Portland  to  Thomas  Townshend,  July  18,  1782/

S.  P.  0.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

admiration  neither  of  which  it  was  possible  for  him
to  feel.

The  address  was  moved  by  Mr.  O’Neil,  who  coupled
with  it  the  expected  proposal  for  the  thanks  of  the
House  to  the  Volunteers.  After  the  Viceroy’s  ful¬
some  language,  opposition  on  this  account  was
expected  from  no  one.  It  appeared,  however,  that
among  the  members  present  there  was  one  at  least
who  would  neither  speak  any  untrue  word  himself,
nor  would  listen  in  silence  to  the  insincerity  of  others.
Thirteen  months  only  had  passed  since  in  that  House
the  resolutions  of  these  same  Volunteers  had  been
condemned  as  false,  scandalous,  and  libellous  ;  since
the  editor  of  the  Hibernian  Journal  had  been  rebuked
for  publishing  them,  and  La  Touche,  the  chairman  of
the  Volunteer  meeting,  had  been  obliged  to  apologize.

Mr.  Fitzgibbon,  member  now  for  the  University  of
Dublin,  being  without  the  admiration  professed  by
others  for  the  singular  body  who  had  taken  on  them¬
selves  to  dictate  to  Parliament,  moved  that,  before
the  thanks  were  voted  to  the  V olunteers,  the  censures
should  be  read  which  the  House  had  passed  on  them
at  the  close  of  the  last  session.

Had  a  spectre  appeared  on  the  floor,  the  members
could  not  have  been  more  startled.  On  all  sides
they  sprung  to  their  feet  to  clamour  down  so  incon¬
venient  a  proposal.  Tom  Conolly,  who  had  been  the
mover  of  the  censure,  deprecated  the  revival  of  it.
The  Attorney -Genera],  for  the  Government,  professed
his  high  respect  4  for  a  virtuous  armed  people.’  The
scandal  was  hushed  up  in  the  enthusiasm  while  the
vote  was  passed,  and  men  tried  to  forget  that  it  had
happened.  None  the  less  Fitzgibbon,  in  that  daring
action,  had  shown  friend  and  foe  the  metal  of  which

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

he  was  made.  He,  for  himself,  had  declared  war
against  insolent  anarchy  and  factious  imposture,  and
had  struck  his  first  blow.

Pandora’s  box  was  now  opened.  Bradstreet,  the
Recorder  of  Dublin,  came  first  with  a  Habeas  Corpus
Act,  and  a  motion  for  a  committee  to  enquire  into
the  state  of  the  kingdom.  Yelverton  followed  with  a
notice  that  he  would  bring  in  a  bill  to  take  from  the
Council,  English  and  Irish,  the  powers  which  they
exercised  under  Poynings’  Act  to  alter  bills  of  the
Irish  Parliament.  Then  Grattan  came  to  fulfil  his
threat  of  the  preceding  year,  and  gave  notice  that  he
would  move  to  repeal  the  Mutiny  Bill.

The  debates  had  become  interesting  to  the  public.
The  galleries  were  crammed  with  eager  listeners,
who  occasionally  joined  in  the  debates.  On  the  1st
of  November  there  was  an  exchange  of  courtesies
between  the  audience  and  the  members.  This  was
on  Bradstreet’s  Habeas  Corpus  Act.  The  audience
were  dissatisfied  at  the  tone  of  the  speeches.  The
members  shouted  c  Order  ’  from  the  floor,  and  called
the  strangers  in  the  galleries  ruffians.

Floor  and  galleries  were  amusing  themselves  be¬
fore  the  chief  performers  appeared  on  the  stage.
Another  actor  besides  Fitzgibbon  was  to  play  an
important  part  there.  Mr.  Grattan  had  assumed  the
place  which  his  achievements  in  the  past  year  seemed
to  have  won  for  him  as  leader  of  the  Opposition.  He
found,  when  he  began  to  bring  in  his  measures,  that
another  claimant  for  public  favour  was  disputing
pre-eminence  with  him.  Ten  years  before,  Mr.  Flood
had  been  what  Grattan  then  was — the  proud  anta¬
gonist  of  English  influence,  the  all-adored  declaimer
on  the  rights  and  the  oppressions  of  Ireland.  His

296

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

1781.

November.

eloquence^and  his  influence  had  purchased  for  him
the  ordinary  rewards  of  successful  agitation.  He  had
obtained  the  most  lucrative  office  at  the  disposition
of  the  Castle,  with  the  immensely- cove  ted  seat  in
the  Privy  Council ;  and  having  achieved  the  highest
objects  of  an  Irish  politician’s  ambition,  his  career  as
a  patriot  was  assumed  to  be  over.  His  services
thenceforward,  except  in  extraordinary  cases,  had
been  secured  to  the  Crown.

The  agitation  with  which  he  had  played  had  unex¬
pectedly  changed  its  character.  From  being  a  mere
avenue  to  public  employment  it  had  become  a  na¬
tional  power,  threatening  to  change  the  face  of  the  Con¬
stitution  ;  and  unable  to  endure  to  see  the  place  once
so  brilliantly  occupied  by  himself  snatched  from  him
by  a  younger  rival,  impatient  to  hear  another’s  name
shouted  by  the  million  voices  which  had  once  rung
with  his  own,  while  his  mind  was  still  in  its  maturity,
and  his  power  unimpaired,  Mr.  Flood  believed  that
he  could  recover  his  lost  position,  and  a  second  time
become  the  champion  of  Irish  liberty.  In  the
debates  of  1780  he  had  shown  signs  that  he  was  rest¬
less  in  his  chains.  The  growth  of  the  movement  in
the  interval  had  determined  him  to  break  them.  On
the  first  occasion  which  offered,  when  Grattan  brought
up  the  Mutiny  Bill,  he  rushed  to  the  front,  and  in
the  old  style  poured  out  a  stream  of  declamation  on
the  profligacy  of  the  Castle  expenditure,  by  which  he
had  himself  condescended  to  profit.

The  returned  prodigal  was  not  very  warmly  re¬
ceived.  George  Ponsonby  congratulated  him  on  the
recovery  of  his  voice,  after  seven  years  of  silence,
and  hinting  sarcastically  at  the  probable  conse¬
quences,  applauded  the  public  spirit  which  made  him

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

297

risk  the  loss  of  the  best  appointment  which  the  Go¬
vernment  had  to  bestow.  His  friends  exclaimed  at
the  enormity  of  the  supposition  that  he  should  lose
his  office  for  obeying  his  conscience.  If  he  shared
their  feelings  and  believed  that  the  Government
would  not  dare  to  punish  him,  he  calculated  too
much  upon  the  King’s  cowardice.  He  had  tried  the
patience  of  the  Cabinet  already,  when  he  boasted
that  the  Vice-Treasurership  had  been  the  unsolicited
gift  of  his  sovereign.  His  sovereign  remembered
too  accurately  the  history  of  that  transaction  ;  he
showed  his  sense  of  Mr.  Flood’s  conduct  by  striking
his  name  with  his  own  hand  from  the  list  of  Privy
Councillors;  and  Mr.  Flood  only  escaped  deprivation
of  the  office,  for  which  he  had  sued  so  ardently,  by  im¬
mediate  voluntary  resignation.  The  coolness  of  his

J  O

reception  by  the  patriots,  and  the  prompt  action  of
the  Crown,  stimulated  him  to  more  violent  efforts.

When  Grattan’s  motion  on  the  Mutiny  Bill  came
to  a  division  on  the  13th  of  November,  it  was  lost  by
a  large  majority,  Mr.  Flood  desired  to  show  that  an
experienced  general  could  succeed  where  his  younger
rival  had  failed,  and  revived  it  under  another  form.
The  opportunity  selected  for  these  attacks  on  the  Bri¬
tish  army  was  ungracious  and  unfortunate.  At  the
moment  when  the  Irish  popular  leaders  were  cla¬
mouring  for  measures  which  destroyed  the  discipline
and  threatened  the  existence  of  the  scanty  regiments
which  formed,  nevertheless,  the  sole  effective  defence
of  Ireland  against  invasion ;  when  the  cattle  houghers,
encouraged  by  parliamentary  rhetoric,  were  ham¬
stringing  British  soldiers  who  were  straying  care¬
lessly  in  the  provincial  towns,  the  poor  army  of  which
they  formed  a  part,  in  another  quarter  of  the  world,

CHAP.

H.

1781.

November.

298

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1781.

November.

was  crowning  itself  with  immortal  glory.  For  a  year
past  a  never  intermitting  storm  of  shot  and  shell
had  rained  into  Gibraltar.  The  houses  in  the  town
were  all  destroyed.  The  inhabitants,  gentle  and
simple,  were  crowded  in  the  casemates.  Enormous
works  had  been  thrown  up  at  the  neck  of  the  Penin¬
sula  by  the  most  accomplished  engineers  which  the
allied  nations  could  produce;  and  from  behind  those
works  and  under  a  fire  before  which  no  living
thing  could  show  itself  and  escape  destruction,  the
choicest  troops  of  France  and  Spain  were  to  advance
and  drive  the  English  into  the  sea.  All  was  ready
for  the  attack.  Ten  thousand  tons  of  powder  had
been  distributed  anions;  the  magazines.  On  one  of
those  very  same  November  nights  when  Grattan
was  wreathing  his  brow  with  an  aureole  and  Flood
was  lighting  for  the  recovery  of  his  patriotic  laurels,
General  Ross  stole  out1  in  the  darkness  with  two
thousand  men,  stormed  into  the  Spanish  lines,  swept
the  trenches,  overthrew  the  palisades,  and  laying
trains  into  the  magazines,  sent  the  results  of  twelve
months’  toil  and  the  passionate  hopes  of  England’s
enemies,  with  one  wild  roar  into  the  air.

It  was  not  the  Irish  Volunteers  just  then  which
Europe  was  admiring,  as  Lord  Charlemont  supposed,
but  the  British  defence  of  the  barren  rock  which
stands  sentinel  at  the  gates  of  the  Mediterranean.
Mr.  Flood’s  spirited  endeavours,  at  that  instant  at
least,  were  not  allowed  to  succeed.  To  his  extreme
mortification,  he  failed  more  decisively  than  Grattan
had  failed.  The  patriot  phalanx  declined  to  follow
his  call.  He  was  defeated  by  146  to  66.

1  November  27.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OE  1782.

299

The  Attorney- General  improved  the  occasion.  He  chap.
observed  with  delicate  irony  that  Mr.  Flood’s  situa-  < — ^ —
tion  reminded  him  of  a  parish  clerk  whom  he  had  NovInber
known  when  he  was  at  the  Temple,  going  by  the
name  of  Harry  Plantagenet.1  Harry  had  acquired
his  soubriquet  as  a  king  of  sportsmen.  When  the
hounds  were  at  fault,  no  whip  was  so  skilful  as  Harry
in  bringing  them  back  to  the  trail.  They  followed
no  voice  so  readily  as  Harry’s.  The  huntsman,  seeing
his  influence  over  the  dogs,  took  him  into  employment
and  dressed  him  in  the  royal  uniform.  In  this  sitm
ation  his  zeal  languished,  he  became  lazy  and  self-
indulgent.  Younger  men  outrode  him  and  took  his
place  in  the  favour  both  of  dogs  and  field.  He  became
jealous  ;  he  quarrelled  with  his  masters.  He  went
back  to  hunt  in  opposition,  but  he  found  now  that  the
spell  was  broken,  that  not  a  hound  would  obey  him,
not  a  rider  would  follow  him,  and  he  returned  to  the
Temple  Church  to  sing  psalms  and  care  for  his  soul.

The  story  was  told  with  a  dramatic  humour  which
sparkled  the  more  brilliantly  as  the  House  showed
itself  the  more  intensely  delighted.  The  arrow  hung
by  the  barb  in  Flood’s  side.  In  vain  he  tried  to
shake  it  from  him,  and  capered  like  the  bull  in  the
arena  when  the  chulos  plant  the  banderilla  in  his
shoulders.

The  Irish  gentry,  for  a  time  at  least,  were  showing
a  nobler  spirit  than  their  chosen  champions.

Yelverton  had  given  notice  that  on  the  5th  of
December  he  would  move  for  the  consideration  of
Poynings’  Act.  Before  the  day  came  the  news
arrived  of  Lord  Cornwallis’s  surrender.  Struck  at

1  Flood’s  name  was  IIenr}\

300

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

N— - 1  '

1781.

November.

once  with  the  unfitness  of  pressing  a  hostile  motion
at  such  a  crisis,  he  proposed  in  place  of  it  an  address
to  the  Crown  of  simple  and  unaffected  good  feeling.
He  said,  4  it  would  ill  become  the  loyalty  of  Ireland
to  remain  in  apathy,  when  Britain,  surrounded  with
enemies,  was  struggling  against  a  warring  world,  with
the  admiration  of  every  generous  mind.’  He  was  not
expressing  the  sentiments  either  of  the  mob  out  of
doors,  or  of  Grattan,  the  representative  of  the  mob
in  Parliament.  The  Irish,  generally,  could  not  be
expected  to  feel  regret  at  the  disasters  of  their  op¬
pressors.  Grattan  stormed  at  Yelverton’s  weakness,
and  declared  that  Ireland  would  be  mad  if  she  ex¬
erted  herself  to  save  England  from  misfortune.  The
House  was  of  a  different  opinion.  The  address  of
sympathy  was  carried  by  a  very  large  majority. 1

The  division  showed  Grattan  that  the  Castle  was
stronger  than  he  had  hoped.  So  far  he  had  made  no
progress  in  a  campaign  where  he  had  looked  for  im¬
mediate  victory.  He  assumed  that  his  defeat  was
owing  (as  perhaps  in  part  it  was)  to  the  usual
debasing  influences.  He  repeated  the  language  of
the  Volunteers,  and  openly  accused  the  Viceroy  of
spending  the  Irish  revenue  in  corrupting  the  con¬
science  of  Parliament.2  Flood,  snatching  at  any  in¬
strument  which  would  give  him  back  his  place  in  the
people’s  hearts,  took  up  the  subject  which  Yelverton
had  not  dropped,  but  had  laid  aside  out  of  good  feeling
for  a  fortnight  only.  Yelverton’s  motion  was  to

1  167  to  37.

2  ‘  As  to  the  appropriation  of  the
money,  I  am  ashamed  to  state  it.
Let  the  minister  defend  it.  Let
him  defend  the  scandal  of  giving-
pensions,  directly  or  indirectly,  to

the  first  of  the  nobility.  Let  him
defend  the  minute  corruption  which,
in  small  bribes  and  annuities,  leaves
honourable  gentlemen  poor  while
it  makes  them  dependent.’ — Irish
Delates,  December  7,  1781.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

come  on  again  on  the  18tli.  Flood  dragged  it  forward
in  an  altered  shape  on  the  11th,  and  moved  for  a  com¬
mittee  to  consider  the  conditions  under  which  heads
of  bills  were  certified  with  England.  His  cause  was
good.  It  has  been  seen  in  many  instances  how  mis¬
chievously  the  Privy  Council  both  in  England  and
Ireland  abused  their  powers  to  defeat  good  measures
or  forward  bad  ones.  Mr.  Flood  explained  with
correctness  that  the  modern  practice  was  never  con¬
templated  when  the  Act  on  which  it  was  based  be¬
came  law.  Sir  Edward  Poynings’  Act  had  been  passed
when  the  communication  between  the  two  countries
was  slow  and  difficult,  and  the  object  of  it  had  been  to
prevent  the  Viceroys  of  Ireland  from  giving  the  Royal
assent  on  their  own  responsibility  to  measures  of  which
England  disapproved.  By  the  ingenuity  of  James
the  First  the  Irish  Council  had  been  shaped  after  the
pattern  of  the  Scotch  Lords  of  Articles ;  and  following
that  example  they  had  been  allowed  to  remodel,  and
even  originate,  heads  of  bills  which  were  the  property
of  Parliament.  He  spoke  eloquently,  as  he  always
did.  The  House  was,  in  principle,  on  his  side,  for
there  was  scarcely  a  single  member — not  even  Fitz-
gibbon — who  did  not  desire  to  see  the  powers  of  the
Council  modified  ; 1  but  they  resented  Flood’s  taking
the  question  out  of  Yelverton’s  hands,  and  he  was
beaten  almost  as  severely  as  before.

Flood  being  pushed  aside,  not  without  loud  com¬
plaints,  Yelverton  resumed  charge  of  his  own  bill,
the  effect  of  which,  if  carried,  would  be  to  place

1  Hely  Hutchinson  was  an  ex-  too  little  remembered  lines : —
ception.  He  had  no  "belief  in  an  1  For  modes  of  Government  let
independent  regenerated  Irish  Par-  fools  contest ;

liament.  He  looked  for  reform  in  Whate’er  is  best  administered
another  direction,  and  quoted  Pope’s  is  best.’

302

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1781. "

December.

the  Irish  Parliament  in  the  same  position  as  the
English.  The  Irish  Parliament  was  to  frame  its
own  measures  as  pleased  itself.  The  Crown  was
to  be  left  with  a  veto  as  the  constitutional  symbol  of
sovereignty.  The  6th  of  George  the  First  had  been
mentioned  repeatedly  in  the  debate.  The  sentiment
of  the  House  was  distinct  that  the  English  Parlia¬
ment  had  nothing  to  do  with  Ireland,  and  could  pass
no  laws  affecting  it.  At  a  calmer  time  many  ques¬
tions  would  have  suggested  themselves  on  the  rela¬
tions  in  which  the  two  countries  would  stand  towards
one  another,  and  in  which  Ireland  would  stand  to¬
wards  the  Executive  Government,  if  the  tie  between
them  was  reduced  to  the  person  of  the  sovereign.
What  was  to  happen  if  on  points  of  public  policy  or
general  commerce  the  two  Legislatures  should  be  in
collision  ? — if  the  Crown  should  withhold  its  consent
from  a  measure  desired  in  Ireland,  but  disapproved
in  England  ?  Ireland’s  ambition  was,  in  fact,  to  defy
the  laws  of  gravity  ;  bring  the  inferior  country  to  be
regarded  and  treated  as  an  equal,  and  her  slightest
trade  being  dependent  on  the  protection  of  the  English
navy,  to  be  allowed  to  regulate  the  details  of  it  after
her  own  pleasure.  Another  more  vital  difficulty
there  was  too,  such  as  had  already  occurred  after  the
Revolution,  when  there  was  a  King  de  facto  on  the
throne,  and  a  Pretender  aspiring  to  it!  Was  the
English  Parliament  to  decide  who  was  to  be  Ireland’s
sovereign  ;  and  if  they  differed  in  opinion,  who  was  to
judge  between  them?

These  objections  could  scarcely  have  escaped  dis¬
cussion  had  the  temper  of  the  time  permitted;  but
enthusiasm  will  not  believe  in  obstacles  to  the  grati¬
fication  of  its  hopes.  The  heads  of  Yelverton’s  bill

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

303

were  brought  in  and  passed  for  transmission;  and
the  heads  of  another  bill  were  passed  also,  which
being  practical,  was  of  more  real  importance.  The
concessions  made  in  the  last  session  to  the  Catholics
were  then  supposed  to  be  final,  but  the  first  removal
of  painful  restrictions  makes  those  which  remain  the
more  irksome.  The  principle  has  been  abandoned,
the  outworks  of  the  fortress  have  been  carried;  and,
as  a  matter  of  course,  the  attack  is  continued  while
anything  is  left  to  be  done.  Luke  Gardiner,  who  had
charge  of  the  bill  of  1780,  now  introduced  a  second.
As  the  law  stood  the  Catholics  could  take  leases  for  999
years ;  they  could  not  yet  acquire  freeholds.  Gardiner
said  his  object  was  to  raise  the  Catholics  of  Ireland
to  the  same  position  in  which  they  were  now  placed
in  England,  and  allow  them  to  purchase,  inherit,  and
hold  property  on  the  same  terms  as  other  subjects.
When  favours  were  asked  for  the  Catholics,  the  Eng¬
lish  Government  always  responded.  More  than  ever
were  the  Catholics  now  valuable  to  them  as  a  counter¬
poise  to  the  Volunteers.  The  Cabinet,  looking  only
to  the  present  moment,  had  no  doubts  of  the  policy  of
concession.  Opinions  in  Ireland,  even  in  the  patriot
camp,  were  divided.  Grattan,  whose  dream  was  of
a  revived  nationality,  declared  that  Ireland  would
never  prosper  till  its  inhabitants  were  4  a  people.’
Charlemont  was  hostile.  Flood,  either  from  con¬
viction  or  antagonism  to  Grattan,  was  prepared  to
resist  to  the  utmost,  on  Protestant  principles.  On
the  first  discussion  on  the  introduction  of  the  heads,
Eitzgibbon  was  the  most  rational  speaker.  He  ad¬
mitted  that  the  penal  laws  were  an  anachronism.
He  believed,  as  most  intelligent  men  in  Europe  then
believed,  that  Romanism  had  ceased  to  be  dangerous

CHAP.

H.

v — , —

1781.

December.

304

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  as  a  political  power.  Toleration,  lie  said,  had  become
—— — •  the  rule  of  the  world,  and  Ireland  must  not  be  left
December  behind.  The  Irish  Catholics  had  earned  a  restoration
of  their  rights  by  their  patience  under  protracted
disabilities.  He  advised  only  that  the  degree  of
concession  intended  should  be  carefully  considered  ;
that  what  was  to  be  done  should  be  done  completely,
and  that  the  subject  should  be  finally  disposed  of.
Leave  was  then  given.  The  heads  were  introduced,
to  be  debated  after  the  Christmas  recess.  The
supplies  were  voted.  Yelverton’s  bill  was  sent  to
England  for  approval.  Complimentary  addresses  were
exchanged  between  the  Viceroy  and  the  Speaker,  and
the  House  separated  till  the  29th  of  January.  The
first  part  of  the  session  had  belied  Lord  Carlisle’s
fears.  With  judicious  management,  and  with  the
help,  perhaps,  of  the  Catholic  Eelief  Bill,  the  re¬
mainder  of  it  he  hoped  might  be  got  over,  if  not
with  brilliancy,  yet  without  misfortune.  Though
some  constitutional  changes  might  be  necessary,  they
might  be  kept  within  limits.  Grattan’s  following  was
evidently  weak,  and  Flood  carried  no  one  with  him
but  a  handful  of  personal  admirers.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

305

SECTION  IV.

On  the  reassembling  of  Parliament  the  first  subject
which  came  on  for  consideration  in  the  House  of
Commons  was  the  Catholic  Relief  Bill.  The  dis¬
agreement  in  the  popular  party  and  the  objections  of
the  more  serious  politicians  had  become  wider  and
deeper  by  reflection.

Hely  Hutchinson,  who  always  spoke  to  the  purpose,
deprecated  hasty  legislation  on  a  ticklish  subject.  He
was  opposed  on  principle  to  the  continuance  of
penalties  on  conscience,  but  he  thought  that  the
reintroduction  of  the  Catholics  as  a  power  in  the
State  was  beginning  at  the  wrong  end.  He  was  in
favour  of  the  recognition  and  payment  of  the  Catholic
clergy  by  the  State.  He  recommended  the  institution
of  a  college  for  their  home  education,  where  they
would  escape  the  influences  to  which  they  were  ex¬
posed  in  France  and  Spain.

On  the  15th,  when  the  Bill  came  to  be  committed,,
Fitzgibbon  spoke.  He  said  that  till  that  morning  he
had  seen  no  danger  in  Mr.  Gardiner’s  proposal,  but
on  reading  the  Bill  carefully  he  had  discovered  that,
in  the  shape  in  which  it  was  offered  to  the  House,  the
first  clause  repealed  the  Act  of  Settlement  and  the
Act  of  Forfeiture,  would  thus  affect  the  titles  on  which
four-fifths  of  Irish  land  was  held,  and  tvould  throw
the  entire  country  into  confusion.

Of  course  there  was  a  general  panic,  which  was
not  diminished  by  the  warmth  displayed  by  the

VOL.  II.  x

CHAP.

II.

1782.

February.

February

5.

306

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

- - , - '

1782.

February.

Government  speakers  in  lauding  the  good  tumour
ST which  the  Catholics  had  endured  them  afflictions
The  Attorney-General  said  that  he  had  seen  at

Monaghan  at  the  same  moment  thJee  al°6  C°n|^.
gations  flowing  simultaneously  out  of  a  «  |
house,  a  church,  and  a  mass-house,  and  the  i
viduals  which  composed  them  mixing  m  the
with  every  mark  of  affection  and  good  will.

The  Attorney-General  might  have  found  the  ex¬
planation  in  the  laws  which  he  was  denouncing.
When  the  Catholics  were  indulged  they  had  attempte
massacre  and  confiscation;  when  they  were  bitted
Td  bridled  they  were  peaceable  and  good-humou^
That  this  was  the  correct  interpretation  may  be  see
in  the  fruits  of  religious  equality.  V

testant  prelate  of  the  disestablished  Church  wa
through  an  Irish  city  the  devout  Celt  displays  his
piety  by  spitting  on  him  as  he  passes.-  A  trut  w  ic
las  belme  now  so  painfully  evident  was  not  wholly
unperceived  in  1782.  Mr.  Flood  defended  the  original
imposition  of  the  Penal  Laws.  ‘  Ninety  years  ago
he  said,  ‘  the  question  was  whether  Popery  and  arbi-
™  power  should  be  established  in  the  person  of
Kino-  James,  or  the  Protestant  religion  m  the  person
of  Kino-  William.  Four-fifths  of  Ireland  were  foi
Kino-  James  ;  they  were  defeated.  I  rejoice  m  t  eir
defeat.  The  laws  that  followed  were  not  laws  o
persecution,  they  were  a  political  necessity.  Are
Lu  ’  he  asked,  ‘  prepared  for  a  new  government?
ww  will  be  the  consequence  if  you  give  Catho  ics

1  Irish  Debates ,  February  15,

1782.  ,  .  ,

2  Fact  in  one  instance  certainly.

It  was  told  to  me  by  the  bishop
who  was  himself  the  sufferer,  and

he  described  the  thing  not  as  having
happened  to  him  once,  but  as  since
the  disestablishment  happening  re¬
peatedly.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

307

equal  powers  with  Protestants?  Can  a  Protestant
Constitution  survive?  The  majority  will  attempt  to
alter  the  Constitution,  and  I  believe  they  wdll  be  re¬
pelled  by  the  minority.  We  will  give  all  toleration
to  your  religion  ;  we  will  not  give  you  political
power,  and  the  free  ownership  of  land  will  bring
political  power  in  its  rear.’ 1

To  this  argument  the  obvious  answer  was  that  the

CHAP.

ii.

"  17827*

February.

objection  was  too  late.  The  principle  had  been  con¬
ceded  wrhen  the  power  of  taking  leases  for  999  years
had  been  granted.  For  the  purpose  of  influencing
elections  a  tenure  for  thirty  generations  was  equiva¬
lent  to  a  freehold.  Nor  could  the  more  ardent  patriots
believe  in  the  danger  which  Flood  anticipated.  The
object  was  to  raise  the  down-trodden  Irish  Catholic,  to
fit  him  for  his  place  as  the  free  citizen  of  an  emancipated
country,  and  already  he  was  responding  to  the  call.

4  Ireland,’  said  Sir  Boyle  Eoche, 4  is  like  the  Phoenix
rising  from  its  ashes.  The  debates  on  these  laws  have
electrified  the  mass  of  the  people.  Instead  of  looking
down  like  slaves  they  throw  up  their  heads  like  men.’

Still,  on  this,  and  on  other  measures  on  which  the
patriotic  heart  was  set,  the  House  was  timid,  and
the  feeble  knees  required  to  be  strengthened.  Mr.
Grattan  fell  back  upon  his  friends  in  uniform,  who  in
politics  and  in  the  field  considered  themselves  Ire¬
land’s  real  sovereigns.

To  the  Volunteers  the  disaster  at  York  Town  had
been  an  Irish  victory.  Elate  and  confident,  they  at
once  in  their  clubs  repeated  the  resolutions  of  1780,
and  declared  that  Parliament  was  controlled  by  a
majority  corrupted  by  the  Castle.  Delegates  from  the
Ulster  corps  had  been  invited  to  meet  at  Dungannon,

1  Irish  Debates ,  February,  1782.
x  2

308

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  at  the  beginning  of  February,  to  consider  the  con-

. _ -Y_ _ _  dition  of  the  country.  The  appeal  which  Grattan

1782.  resolved  to  make  to  them  had  probably  been  pre-
concerted  when  the  delegates  had  arranged  to  assem-
-  ble.  Flood’s  opposition  was  troublesome.  Like  a
skilful  tactician  Grattan  invited  Flood  to  share  the
honours  of  a  campaign  to  most  of  the  objects  of  which
he  was  committed  as  deeply  as  Grattan  himself.  Grat¬
tan,  Flood,  and  Lord  Charlemont  met  privately  in
Dublin  to  draw  up  resolutions  which  the  Dungannon
delegates  were  to  adopt.

The  first,  framed  by  Grattan  himself,  was  ‘  That  a
claim  of  any  body  of  men,  other  than  the  King,  Lords,
and  Commons  of  Ireland,  to  make  laws  by  which  Ire¬
land  was  to  be  bound,  was  illegal,  unconstitutional,
and  a  grievance.’ 1

The  second,  which  was  Flood’s,  declared,  c  That  the
powers  exercised  by  the  Privy  Council  of  both  king¬
doms  under  colour  of  the  law  of  Poynings  were  un¬
constitutional  and  a  grievance.’

On  these  points  the  triumvirs  were  agreed.  The
second  contained  the  principle  of  Yelverton’s  Bill,
which  had  not  yet  been  returned  from  England.

Further  than  this  Grattan  knew  that  neither  Flood
nor  Charlemont  would  go  with  him.  He,  therefore,
without  consulting  them,  himself  added  a  third
resolution  :

c  That  we  (the  Volunteers)  hold  the  right  of  private
judgment  in  matters  of  religion  to  be  equally  sacred
in  others  as  in  ourselves ;  that  we  rejoice  in  the
relaxation  of  the  penal  laws  against  our  Roman  Ca¬
tholic  fellow-subjects,  and  that  we  conceive  these

1  Aimed  at  the  Gth  of  George  I.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OE  1782.

309

measures  to  be  fraught  with  the  happiest  consequences
to  the  union  and  prosperity  of  the  inhabitants  of
Ireland.’ 1

%

A  trusty  messenger  galloped  down  with  these
resolutions  to  Dungannon.  Two  hundred  and  forty
representatives  of  the  Ulster  companies  were  in
attendance  on  the  day  for  which  they  were  called.
The  streets  of  the  town  were  lined  with  Volunteer
troops.  The  delegates  assembled  in  the  church,
where  they  sate  in  consultation  till  nightfall.  At
eight  o’clock  the  propositions  were  unanimously
voted,  and  went  out  in  Charlemont’s  name  over  all
quarters  of  Ireland,  to  be  adopted  by  the  brother
delegates  of  the  corps  in  the  southern  provinces.

Inadvertence  in  England  gave  Grattan  unexpected
assistance.  The  universal  soreness  in  Ireland  on  the
subject  of  laws  affecting  them  being  passed  in  the
British  Parliament  was  so  notorious  that  the  prac¬
tice  had  been  avoided,  as  far  as  it  conveniently  could;
and  as  long  as  no  aggravated  case  was  allowed  to
arise,  there  was  a  hope  that  the  Irish  Parliament
might  abstain  from  challenging  the  right,  and  bring¬
ing  the  Legislatures  into  open  collision.  Unhappily,
the  name  of  Ireland  had  been  allowed  to  appear  in
four  trifling  measures  which  had  just  been  passed  at
Westminster.  Irish  jealousy  detected  at  once  a  ma¬
lignant  purpose,  and  with  these  Acts  in  his  hand  and
with  the  Dungannon  resolutions  at  his  back,  Grattan
rose  a  week  after  the  Catholic  debate  to  move  the
long-threatened  Declaration  of  the  Independence  of
the  Legislature  of  Ireland.  He  was  a  loyal  subject  of
the  King,  he  said.  He  professed  to  prize  the  connection

1  ‘  This  resolution  was  crammed  bag  after  he  was  mounted.’ — Life
by  Grattan  into  the  messenger’s  of  Grattan ,  vol.  ii.  p.  205.

CHAP.

II.

"~1782T

Eebruary.

February

15.

February

22.

310

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782.

February.

■with  Great  Britain  second  only  to  the  liberties  of
his  country,  but  he  charged  Lord  North’s  Government
with  conspiring  against  the  constitutional  freedom  of
Ireland.  With  4  Demosthenic  thunder  ’  he  insisted
that  he  would  never  submit  to  British  legislation,
and,  unlike  Yelverton,  he  insisted  that  now  was  the
moment,  now,  when  Britain’s  hands  were  tied  by  a
general  war,  for  Ireland  to  break  her  intolerable  chain.

How  much  of  Grattan’s  action  was  a  sincere  ema¬
nation  of  patriotism,  how  much  was  due  to  concerted
action  with  the  English  Whigs,  to  embarrass  and
overthrow  Lord  North’s  tottering  Administration,
was  known  to  Grattan  himself,  and  perhaps  to  no
other  person.  The  Whigs  believed  afterwards  that
he  had  played  with  them,  and  reproached  him  with
ingratitude.  It  is  certain,  at  any  rate,  that  without
their  assistance,  even  the  Volunteers  would  not  have
enabled  him  to  succeed.

The  Attorney- General  opposed  the  motion  as  ha¬
zardous,  unreasonable,  and  unnecessary.  Against  Mr.
Grattan’s  rhetoric  he  opposed  the  practical  fact  to
which  Fitzgibbon  had  alluded  before,  that  the  Act  of
Settlement  rested  on  the  Act  of  Forfeiture  passed  by
the  Long  Parliament  in  the  first  year  of  the  Irish
Rebellion.  A  declaration  that  the  Irish  Parliament
alone  could  pass  laws  to  bind  Ireland,  would  render
the  Act  of  F orfeiture  invalid,  would  ‘  loosen  the  bonds
of  society,  and  leave  the  whole  island  to  be  grappled
for  by  the  descendants  of  the  old  proprietors.’  Illusion
could  not  endure  the  contact  of  so  serious  a  reality.
The  Provost,  Gervase  Bushe,  even  George  Ponsonby,
took  the  Government  side,  and  Grattan  was  beaten
on  a  division  by  137  to  68.

One  impression  left  by  the  debate  was  remarkable.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

311

Y elverton  proposed  to  meet  the  legal  difficulty  by  4  a
Bill  for  quieting  possessions  held  under  the  Forfeiture
Act.’  Not  a  single  speaker  on  either  side,  not  even
the  Attorney-General,  though  challenged  repeatedly
to  give  his  opinion,  defended  the  principle  of  English
Acts  being  of  binding  force  in  Ireland.

CHAP.

ii.

'  1782"

February.

4  The  majority  by  which  the  motion  was  postponed,’
Lord  Carlisle  wrote  on  the  following  day,  4  will  satisfy
his  majesty’s  Ministers  that  Government  can  prevent
the  question  being  carried.  But  the  principle,  never¬
theless,  is  universally  insisted  on.  Every  rank  and
order  of  this  nation  are  possessed  of  it.  I  ques¬
tion  whether  any  lawyer  would  advise  his  client  to
bring  his  cause  to  an  issue  on  the  validity  of  a  British
Act  in  this  kingdom,  or  whether  a  jury  would  give  a
verdict  on  that  foundation.’ 1

Yet,  again,  it  was  the  English  conquest  which  alone
had  given  to  the  existing  owners  the  possession  of
Irish  land.  It  reposed  upon  English  authority.  If
the  Catholics,  according  to  the  Dungannon  resolu¬
tions,  were  to  secure  their  political  as  well  as  their
civil  rights,  even  the  English  legislative  authority  it
might  be  dangerous  to  part  with.  A  Protestant
House  of  Commons  might  pass  a  4  quieting  ’  Bill  as
Yelverton  suggested ;  but  a  House  returned  by  a
Catholic  majority  might  repeal  it.  This  unpleasant
possibility  was  brought  into  view  by  a  great  debate
immediately  after  Grattan’s  defeat  on  Mr.  Gardiner’s
Catholic  Belief  Bill.  Mr.  Gardiner,  carrying  out  the
Dungannon  spirit,  proposed  now  to  abolish  all  dis¬
tinctions  between  Catholic  and  Protestant.  The  first
clause  of  his  Bill,  as  he  had  remodelled  it,  declared

1  1  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  February  23,  1782.’

312

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  every  Irish  subject  who  would  subscribe  a  sim
- — — '  oath  of  allegiance  and  the  declaration  against  the
February,  jurisdiction  of  foreign  Prince  or  Potentate,  entitled
to  his  full  rights  as  a  citizen.  Fitzgibbon  pointed  out
the  consequences,  and  Gardiner  accepted  his  help  to
change  the  form  once  more.  The  single  Bill  was

O  O

divided  into  two.  The  first  affected  property  only.
The  Catholics  were  enabled  to  acquire  freehold,  to
buy  and  sell,  bequeath  and  inherit,  like  every  one
else.  To  this  there  was  no  opposition.  Mr.  Eden
walked  out  of  the  House  before  the  division  to  indi¬
cate  the  impartiality  of  the  Government,  and  the
Bill  was  carried.

The  second  affirmed  and  carried  out  the  principle
of  complete  religious  toleration,  repealed  the  laws
which  bore  upon  the  priests,  and  restored  to  Catholic
parents  their  rights  to  educate  their  children  whether
at  home  or  abroad.  This  Bill  was  postponed,  not
out  of  any  hostile  feeling,  but  from  difference  of
opinion  on  the  still  unsettled  question  of  mixed  or
separate  education.  On  the  right  of  Catholics  to
have  their  own  schools  no  question  was  raised.  On
whether  the  Act  should  be  repealed  which  forbade
them  to  send  their  children  to  be  educated  abroad,
there  arose  a  debate,  remarkable  as  proving  how  far
the  harshness  of  the  penal  laws  had  been  softened  in
practical  application.

Fitzgibbon  declared  that  so  far  from  consenting  to
the  repeal  of  the  foreign  Education  Act,  he  would
himself  move  for  the  introduction  of  such  a  law  if  it
did  not  already  exist.  c  He  would  not  suffer  the
Catholics  to  resort  to  regions  of  bigotry  and  super¬
stition,  where  they  would  imbibe  ideas  hostile  to
liberty,  neither  did  he  mean  that  they  should  receive

TIIE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

313

no  education.’  c  The  University  of  Dublin  was  already
open  to  Catholics  by  connivance .’  4  If  they  declined  to
receive  an  education  there,  it  was  not  on  account  of
religion,  for  no  religious  conformity  teas  required ,  but

onlv  because  Catholics  feared  their  children  would

•/

imbibe  the  principles  there  of  a  free  constitution/
Fitzgibbon  spoke  as  Member  for  the  University.  The
Provost  (Hely  Hutchinson)  rose  after  him.  Let  those
who  can  feel  the  ignominy  of  England’s  ill- success  in
Ireland  read  in  his  language  one  more  record  of  op¬
portunity  thrown  away.  c  My  opinion,’  the  Provost
said,  1  is  against  sending  Catholics  abroad  for  educa-
tion,  nor  would  I  establish  Popish  colleges  at  home.
Our  gracious  Sovereign,  who  is  legislator  for  the
University,  may,  I  think,  with  ease  be  prevailed  on
to  pass  a  statute  for  admitting  Catholics.  They  need
not  be  obliged  to  attend  the  Divinity  Professors.  They
may  have  one  of  their  own.  I  would  have  part  of  the
public  money  applied  to  their  use,  to  the  support  of
poor  lads  as  sizars,  and  to  provide  premiums  for  per¬
sons  of  merit.  I  would  have  them  go  into  examina¬
tions,  and  make  no  distinctions  between  them  and  the
Protestants  but  such  as  merit  might  claim.  If  these
people  dare  to  worship  God  in  their  own  way,  why
should  not  the  academic  badge  they  wear  be  a  mark
of  spirit  and  a  pledge  of  the  union  between  them  and
the  Protestants?  To  prepare  the  Catholics  for  the
University  I  would  increase  the  number  of  diocesan
schools,  and  have  the  Catholics  instructed  gratis  in
them.  They  should  receive  the  best  education  in  the
Established  University  at  the  public  expense,  but  by
no  means  should  Popish  colleges  be  allowed,  for  by
them  we  should  again  have  the  Press  groaning  with
theories  of  controversy,  college  against  college,  and

CHAP.

ii.

1782.

March.

314

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

subjects  of  religious  disputation  that  have  long  slept
would  again  awake,  and  awake  with  the  worst  passions
of  the  mind.7 1

There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men
Which,  taken  at  the  flood,  leads  on  to  fortune  ;

Omitted,  all  the  voyage  of  their  life
Is  bound  in  shallows  and  in  miseries.

The  history  of  Ireland  is  a  history  of  chances  lost.
Even  now,  at  the  eleventh  hour,  could  England  have
laid  hold  with  heartiness  of  a  policy  of  which  the
Provost  was  shadowing  out  a  part,  Catholics  and
Protestants  might  still  have  been  drawn  together  and
towards  the  mother  country;  and  disabilities  would
have  then  died  of  themselves  because  they  no  longer
rested  on  disunion  of  sentiment.  Even  a  united
Irish  nationality  might  have  been  safely  allowed  to
revive,  no  more  hostile  to  England  than  the  nation¬
alities  of  Wales  or  Scotland,  but  rising  out  of  and
resting  upon  an  innocent  and  honourable  pride.

It  was  not  to  be.  No  spirit  of  wisdom  was  presiding
over  the  Councils  of  i  Great  Britain,  whether  among:
Whigs  or  Tories.  It  was  with  no  desire  to  reconcile
Irish  Catholics  to  Protestantism  and  to  the  empire,
that  the  Irish  enthusiasts  for  reform  were  agitating;
to  replace  the  Catholics  in  the  Constitution,  but  to
conjure  into  life  the  deluding  phantom  of  Irish  inde¬
pendence,  to  separate  and  not  to  reconcile,  to  snatch
the  moment  of  England’s  weakness  to  extract  free¬
dom  for  Ireland,  which,  being  without  strength  to
preserve,  she  must  see  pass  from  her  like  a  shadow
of  a  dream.

Men  like  Fitzgibbon  and  the  Provost  might  con-
tend  within  their  own  circle  against  the  general

O  o

BOOK

VI.

17827

March.

1  Irish  Debates ,  March,  1782.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

315

madness,  but  every  day  the  Viceroy  found  the  atmo¬
sphere  more  heavily  charged  with  electricity.  He
had  done  his  utmost,  and  his  large  majorities  showed
the  strength  of  his  influence  in  Parliament;  but  out¬
side  the  walls  the  patriots  were  using  language  which
might  at  any  moment  change  into  open  violence.

In  a  most  secret  letter  of  the  3rd  of  March  Lord
Carlisle  explained  the  position  to  Lord  Hillsborough.

1  Mr.  Grattan,  from  a  natural  enthusiasm,  and  Mr.
Flood,  from  a  different  motive,  have  concurred  with
great  earnestness  in  bringing  forward  every  question
tending  to  assert  an  independent  right  of  legislation
in  Ireland.  I  have  in  no  case  suffered  the  smallest
diminution  of  the  asserted  rights  of  Great  Britain.
I  have  called  forth  the  whole  st  rength  of  Government
to  repel  every  such  attempt,  and  have  resisted  some  of
the  strongest  questions  which  were  ever  pressed  in  an
Irish  Parliament.  The  consequence  of  this  steadiness
has  been  great  and  uniform  success.  But  I  must  now
draw  your  Lordship’s  attention  beyond  the  considera¬
tion  of  parliamentary  triumphs,  which,  if  made  tlie
sole  object  of  attention,  may  produce  calamitous
consequences.  The  restless  and  reasoning  disposition
of  the  Volunteers,  which  do  not  fall  short  of  30,000
men  actually  in  arms,1  the  jealousy  with  which  the
interference  of  British  laws  has  long  been  considered,
the  approaching  meeting  of  the  corps  at  the  opening
of  the  spring,  the  instigation  of  the  men  who  from
different  motives  are  opposing  the  Government,  the
resentment  excited  by  the  uniform  success  of  my
Government,  are  all  circumstances  which  induce  me

CHAP.

ii.

"  1782.

March.

1  Grattan  spoke  of  them  as  100,000.

316

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782^

March.

to  look  forward  with  uneasiness.  Your  Lordship  can¬
not  be  ignorant  that  the  actual  exercise  of  the  autho-
rity  of  the  British  Parliament  over  Ireland  was
totally  impracticable  long  before  I  arrived  in  the
kingdom.  There  was  not  a  magistrate  or  revenue
officer,  however  dependent,  who  would  venture  to
enforce  an  English  law.  There  was  not  a  jury  in
the  kingdom  who  would  find  a  verdict  under  an
English  Act.  I  may  infer  that  I  can  close  the  ses¬
sion  without  suffering  a  vote  to  be  carried  contrary
to  my  wishes  ;  but  the  support,  and  possibly  the
existence  of  a  permanent  good  Government  in  this
kingdom,  depends  on  maintaining  the  many  respec¬
table  friends  of  my  administration  in  the  fair  opinion
of  their  countrymen.  Their  weight  is  not  only  es¬
sential  to  my  support  in  Parliament,  but  perhaps
more  materially  among  the  Volunteer  associations,
from  which  they  might  be  excluded  if  I  should  be
compelled  to  close  the  session  without  quieting  the
ferment.’ 1

Lord  Carlisle’s  majorities  were  not  entirely  due  to
Mr.  Eden’s  drafts  on  Mr.  Robinson.  Irish  members
would  engage  their  services,  and  yet  might  be  found
wanting,  as  had  been  many  times  experienced  at
critical  moments.  But  they  had  discovered  that  if
they  rushed  along  too  fast  on  the  patriotic  career,
they  might  blunder  into  positions  where  their  estates
would  be  in  danger.  They  had  gone  into  raptures
over  the  Volunteers,  but  the  sense  that  the  country
was  in  the  hands  of  armed  politicians  who  were  not
under  military  law  was,  on  reflection,  not  particularly

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  March  3,  1782.  Most
secret.’  S.  1\  0.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

317

pleasant.  1  It  was  the  unanimous  sentiment  of
every  able  man  in  the  kingdom,’  Lord  Carlisle  said,

‘  that  the  question  of  legislation  was  tending  to  some
serious  issue.’  The  Viceroy’s  earnest  desire  was  to
find  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty  which  moderate  people
would  accept.  It  was  not  a  question  of  mere  national
pride.  Irish  commerce  was  carried  on  under  the
British  flag  and  protected  by  the  British  navy.  Irish
commercial  interests  abroad  were  under  charge  of
British  consuls.  Laws  must  be  passed  from  time  to
time  in  the  British  Parliament  by  which  Ireland
would  be  constructively  affected.  Yelverton,  with
Lord  Carlisle’s  full  approval,  advised  that  every  Eng¬
lish  Act  comprehending  Ireland  should  be  re-enacted
in  the  Irish  Parliament.  Fitzgibbon  and  Hussey
Burgh  both  agreed  that  this  was  the  most  rational
solution.  Grattan  was  not  at  first  violently  hostile.
Flood  only  refused  to  listen  to  a  compromise,  and
would  hear  of  nothing  but  unconditional  surrender
of  the  English  right.  He  saw  an  opportunity  of
recovering  his  supremacy  as  the  incorruptible  assertor
of  Irish  liberties,  and  in  such  a  mood  it  was  as  useless
to  reason  with  him  as  with  the  orators  of  the  Volun¬
teers  and  the  multitude  who  repeated  their  common¬
places  in  every  corner  of  the  island.

The  situation  was  thus  becoming  really  dangerous.
Lord  Carlisle  sent  the  Cabinet  for  inspection  a  copy
of  papers  about  to  be  submitted  for  signature  to  the
grand  juries  at  the  approaching  assizes.  The  country
gentlemen  were  invited  to  accept  the  Dungannon  re¬
solutions  ;  to  pledge  themselves  to  the  Irish  nation
and  to  one  another  to  oppose  the  execution  of  any
statute  deriving  its  authority  from  England ;  to  sup-

CHAP.

ii.

17827

March.

318

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  port  Ireland’s  rights  with  life  and  fortune,  and  to
— ^ — -  promise  annually  to  renew  their  obligations  till  those
3iaitfi"  eights  had  been  definitely  conceded.1

Yelverton’s  measure  for  the  alteration  of  Poynings’
Act  was  still  waiting  in  England,  Lord  North’s
Cabinet,  already  at  its  last  gasp,  not  knowing  what
to  decide  about  it.  Being  one  at  least  of  the  mea¬
sures  on  which  Ireland’s  patriotic  heart  was  set,  Lord
Carlisle  thought  that  if  it  was  returned  immediately,
he  could  procure  a  compromise  on  the  question  of
legislative  authority,  and  induce  the  grand  juries  to
withhold  their  signatures.  If  Yelverton’s  bill  was
not  returned,  he  declared  himself  ready  to  be  guided
by  his  majesty’s  commands  and  by  the  wisdom  of  his
councils;  but  so  far  as  his  own  judgment  went,  he
declined  to  answer  for  the  consequences.  The  friends
of  Government  in  both  Houses  were  becoming*  fright-
ened.  If  the  suspense  was  protracted,  they  might  be
4  overawed  by  popular  violence,  and  pass  votes  dis¬
claiming  British  legislation.’  Mr.  Grattan  had  more
than  once  spoken  of  possible  hostile  resolutions  of
the  Irish  Houses,  4  as  parliamentary  ordinances  to  be
maintained  by  the  armed  associations.’  In  dread  of
matters  being  forced  into  so  dangerous  an  issue,  the
Viceroy  said  4  he  had  welcomed  the  help  of  Yelver-
ton,  Burgh,  and  Fitzgibbon.’2

A  ministerial  crisis  being  now  rapidly  approach¬
ing  in  England,  the  Irish  Parliament  adjourned  for  a
month  on  the  14th  of  March.  Before  the  separation,
Grattan  moved  and  carried  a  call  of  the  House  of
Commons  for  the  18th  of  April.  On  that  day  all
members  were  invited  to  be  in  their  places  as  they

1  1  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  2  1  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord
Hillsborough, March  7.  Most  secret.’  Hillsborough,  March  10.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

319

tendered  the  rights  of  Ireland.  These  trying  ques¬
tions  would  then  he  revived,  perhaps,  under  more
favourable  auspices.  Lord  Carlisle  could  not  but
confess  that  he  had  been  in  some  degree  infected  by
Irish  sentiment  in  the  iudgment  which  he  formed
upon  them.  He  had  found,  in  common  with  every
Viceroy  who  preceded  him,  that  when  he  spoke  to
the  Cabinet  of  wrongs  done  to  Ireland,  and  recom¬
mended  a  measure  or  measures  as  tending  to  remedy
them,  he  had  been  received  either  with  insolent
neglect  or  contemptuous  refusal.  English  rule  in
Ireland  had  become  so  shameful  a  parody  of  all  that
is  meant  by  righteous  and  legitimate  authority,  that
nature  herself  repudiated  it.  Ireland  could  not  and
would  not  be  governed  any  longer  by  English  laws.
Lord  Carlisle  thought,  and  avowed  that  he  thought,
that  she  might  be  governed  well  and  happily  by  laws
of  her  own  ;  while,  if  England  refused  to  consent  to  an
arrangement,  he  anticipated  inevitable  convulsions,
the  end  of  which  no  one  could  foresee.1

Before  the  letter  in  which  Lord  Carlisle  expressed
these  sentiments  reached  England,  Lord  North's
administration  was  at  an  end.  Lord  Kockingham  had
been  sent  for  by  the  king,  and  the  Opposition,  who
had  condemned  the  entire  policy  of  the  Government
abroad  and  at  home,  in  America  and  in  Ireland,  was
about  to  pass  to  the  direction  of  the  empire.

CHAP.

ii.

^17827

March.

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Carlisle  to  Lord  Hillsborough,  March  19,  1782.’

320

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

~7827

March.

SECTION  y.

The  surrender  of  Lord  Cornwallis  was  the  concluding
scene  of  the  efforts  of  England  to  recover  her  re¬
volted  colonies.  The  steady  opposition  of  the  Whigs
had  been  ineffectual  so  long  as  apparent  but  useless
victories  attended  the  English  campaigns.  A  second
capture  of  a  complete  army  gave  force  to  arguments
to  which  the  national  pride  had  refused  to  listen.
Motions  made  in  the  British  Parliament  to  discon¬
tinue  the  war  in  December  and  January  were  resisted
by  reduced  majorities.  On  the  22nd  of  February
the  majority  was  reduced  to  one.  On  the  27th  the
Opposition  carried  an  address  to  the  king,  who  ac¬
quiesced  in  what  was  now  unavoidable.  Lord  North
resigned,  and  Rockingham,  Fox,  and  Shelburne  were
called  into  office  to  wind  up  the  quarrel.  The  battle
had  been  fought  along  the  entire  line  of  ministerial
policy.  Both  Fox  and  Rockingham  had  supported
Grattan  on  the  alteration  of  the  Mutiny  Bill,  and
Lord  Carlisle’s  change  of  opinion  did  not  save  him
from  being  involved  in  the  fate  of  his  friends.  Ire¬
land  was  no  longer  to  be  thwarted  in  developing  her
Constitution  according  to  her  own  fancies,  and  the
disgrace  of  Lord  North’s  representative  was  made
a  peace-offering  to  the  indignation  of  the  patriots.
Lord  Carlisle  was  treated  with  singular  discourtesy.
The  resignation  of  the  Ministry  was  no  sooner  known
in  Dublin  than  Eden  hastened  over  to  place  Lord
Rockingham  in  possession  of  the  exact  situation  of
the  country.  Eden  found,  on  arriving  in  London,

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

321

that  he  had  crossed  a  curt  despatch,  informing  Lord  chap.
Carlisle  that  the  king  had  no  longer  occasion  for  his  - — I^—
services  as  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Yorkshire.  It  was  a
peculiarly  offensive  method  of  informing  him  that  he
must  resign  the  Yiceroyalty.  The  Cabinet  had
already  chosen  a  successor  for  him  in  the  Duke  of

•j

Portland.

They  would  have  acted  less  imprudently  if  they
had  waited  for  the  information  which  Eden  would
have  given  them,  for,  as  the  event  proved,  they  were
entirely  ignorant  of  the  spirit  which  they  were  about
to  encounter.  They  had  assumed  that  as  soon  as
his  friends  were  in  power  Grattan  would  at  once
work  in  harmony  with  them.  Though  they  hated
Tories  and  Tory  principles,  they  had  inherited  the
traditions  of  English  statesmen.  They  were  trained

politicians,  unable  to  believe  that  the  rash  project

*

of  an  Ireland  really  independent  could  be  seriously
entertained  by  a  reasonable  man  ;  still  less,  if  a  few
enthusiasts  had  formed  so  wild  a  dream,  were  they
prepared  to  countenance  it.  They  supposed  that  they
had  only  to  supersede  Lord  North’s  Viceroy  by  a
nobleman  of  their  own  school  to  find  the  stormy
waters  settle  into  repose.

Lord  Rockingham’s  eyes  might  have  been  opened
had  he  read  Lord  Carlisle’s  last  despatch.  Had  that
nobleman  been  continued  in  office  the  Yelverton
compromise  might  have  been  accepted.  But  Eden
found  that  his  chief  had  been  treated  in  a  fashion
1  which  amounted  to  personal  insult.’  When  he  told
Lord  Shelburne  that  the  hasty  appointment  of  the
Duke  of  Portland  would  work  mischief,  Shelburne
answered  briefly  that  he  did  not  agree  with  him  ;  and
Eden,  naturally  indignant,  ‘  refused  to  hold  further

VOL.  II.  y

322

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  intercourse  with,  the  Ministry  ’  on  the  Irish  subject.1
— He  rose  instead,  the  day  after  this  conversation,  in  his
Ipfn’  place  in  ^ie  H°use  Commons.  He  declared  Ire¬
land  to  be  on  the  edge  of  civil  war  ;  and  to  shield
Lord  Carlisle  from  the  undeserved  imputation  of
having  caused  so  dangerous  an  excitement  by  resist¬
ance  to  the  wishes  of  the  people,  he  moved  him¬
self,  on  his  own  responsibility,  the  repeal  of  the
6th  of  George  the  First.2  It  was  a  rash  act  on  his
part,  rising  out  of  violent  resentment.  The  House
showed  such  serious  displeasure,  that  he  withdrew  the
motion  almost  as  soon  as  it  had  been  made.  Colonel
Luttrell  (Lord  Carhampton  afterwards)  enquired
whether  the  repeal  of  that  Act  would  satisfy  Ireland.
Eden  could  not  say  that  it  would,  but  declared  that
peace  could  not  be  preserved  without  it.  Fox  rose
very  angry.  4  He/  he  said,  4  was  now  responsible  for
the  honour  of  his  country,  and  would  not  consent  to  see
England  humbled  at  the  feet  of  Ireland.’  4  The  situa-
tion  was  worse  than  he  had  feared,  and  the  persons  to
blame  for  it  were  Eden  himself  and  Lord  Carlisle.’
The  blame  lay  rather  with  Fox  himself  and  his  Whig
friends,  who  had  encouraged  Grattan  for  their  own
purposes.  They  had  sown  the  seed,  and  they  were
to  srather  the  harvest.  Portland  had  sent  Charles

O

Sheridan  over  to  learn  Grattan’s  views.  Sheridan
wrote  that  Grattan  told  him  that  the  Declaration  of
Independence  would  infallibly  be  passed  after  the
recess.  The  Volunteers  had  pledged  life  and  fortune
to  carry  it,  and  nothing  less  would  now  satisfy  the

1  1  Mr.  Eden  to  Lord  Shelburne,  he  once  more  reminded,  which

April  5,  1  782.’ — Life  of  Grattan ,  declared,  totidem  verbis,  the  right  of
vol.  ii.  the  English  Parliament  tc  legislate

2  The  English  Act,  let  the  reader  for  Ireland.

/

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

323

people.  At  tlie  time  of  the  adjournment  they  might
have  allowed  the  question  of  right  to  sleep,  if  they
could  have  been  assured  that  the  power  would  not  be
exercised.  But  public  sentiment  had  changed  ;  no¬
thing  short  of  the  repeal  of  the  offensive  Act  would
now  preserve  the  union  between  the  two  countries.

It  was  true,  then,  that  Independence  was  really
contemplated.  The  connection  was  to  be  reduced  to
the  tie  of  a  common  sovereign.  Ireland  was  to  be
as  Hanover,  or  the  alternative  was  to  be  total  separa¬
tion.  If  total  separation  was  not  rather  to  follow  as
the  consequence  of  such  a  wild  arrangement,  a  thou¬
sand  delicate  problems  would  have  to  be  considered
and  provided  for.  The  Cabinet  was  still  incredulous
that  Grattan  could  mean  to  precipitate  a  resolution
of  such  pregnant  quality  as  if  it  were  on  a  question
of  common  politics.  Lord  Charlemont  at  any  rate
must  retain  his  senses,  and  Fox  wrote  to  him  to  beg
at  least  for  a  short  delay.  A  Viceroy  was  going
over  whose  sentiments  Tvere  identical  with  Lord
Charlemont’s.  Why  should  there  be  differences  be¬
tween  them  ?  The  interests  of  Ireland  and  England
could  not  be  divided.  Nothing  more  could  be  needed
than  the  establishment  of  Whig  principles  in  every
part  of  the  empire.1  Rockingham  wrote  in  the  same
tone.  He  was  unable  to  believe,  he  said,  that  an
adjournment  of  the  House  of  Commons  for  a  fort¬
night  or  three  weeks  would  not  be  consented  to.
Portland  must  have  time  to  consult  the  leading
members  of  the  Patriot  party.  ‘  He  could  not  think  it
good  policy  in  the  House  of  Commons  of  Ireland  to

CHAP.

ii.

1782?

April,

t  ‘  C.  J.  Fox  to  Lord  Charlemont,  April  4.’ — Life  of  Grattan,  vol.  ii.

y  2

324

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782^

April.

carry  a  measure  of  so  onerous  a  character  with
precipitancy.’ 1

English  Whig  statesmen  never  have  understood
Ireland,  and  perhaps  never  will  understand  it.  In  the
Irish  people  there  is  one  serious  aspiration  nursed  in
their  heart  of  hearts  and  never  parted  with,  and  that
is  separation  from  England.  Whatever  the  pretext  for
immediate  agitation,  this  is  what  they  mean,  and  every
concession  is  valued  only  as  a  step  towards  the  one
great  end.  Nothing  else  will  satisfy  them,  for  nothing
else  meets  their  wishes.  But  as  their  object  is  one
which  reason  declares  to  be  unattainable,  so  they  never
pursue  it  by  reasonable  means.  They  wish  passion¬
ately;  they  are  unable  to  propose  deliberately;  their
politics  are  the  blind  movements  of  impulsive  enthu¬
siasm,  and  English  Liberals  treat  them  as  if  they  were
serious,  and  play  with  them,  and  lead  them  to  form
hopes,  which  as  soon  as  those  hopes  take  their  na¬
tural  shape  they  are  obliged  to  disappoint.

Had  Grattan’s  theory  of  an  Irish  constitution  been
formed  deliberately  he  would  have  avoided  the  ap¬
pearance  of  haste.  The  more  gravely  the  step  which
he  desired  was  taken,  the  more  surely  it  would  have
been  irrevocable.  But  he  knew  too  well  the  materials
of  which  his  followers  were  composed.  He  knew
that  if  once  the  Duke  of  Portland  was  allowed  to  talk
in  private  with  them,  the  patriot  phalanx  would  dis¬
solve  into  air.  Men  like  Charlemont,  and  Hussey
Burgh,  and  Yelverton  had  not  parted  with  their
senses,  and  if  a  responsible  statesman  laid  before  them
the  difficulties  which  they  would  have  to  encounter
before  they  had  committed  themselves,  they  would

1  1  The  Marquis  of  Rockingham  to  Lord  Charlemont,  April  9.’ —
Ihid.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

i

recoil  from  their  own  schemes.  Grattan,  therefore,
refused  to  allow  a  single  hour  for  consideration.
Portland  hastened  over  to  be  in  time  for  the  call  of
the  House  on  the  16th  of  April.  He  carried  with  him
discretionary  powers  unusually  large.1  He  still  hoped
that  he  might  find  Grattan  less  unmanageable  than
Sheridan  reported.  If  he  was  disappointed,  if  mat¬
ters  came  to  the  worst,  and  if  conditions  were  insisted
on  to  which  England  could  not  submit  with  dignity,
he  was  permitted,  as  a  last  alternative,  to  throw  up
the  Government,  and  to  leave  the  Irish  Protestant  and
Catholic  face  to  face  with  an  independence  even  more
complete  than  they  had  desired.

On  landing,  he  again  tried  to  obtain  a  few  days’  ad¬
journment.  4  Heat  and  passion,’  he  was  obliged  to  re¬
port,  ‘had  taken  stronger  hold  than  persons  in  England
could  be  aware  of ;  and  it  was  the  unanimous  opinion
of  every  gentleman  with  whom  he  conversed  that  the
attempt  would  be  ineffectual.’  He  did  not  see  Grattan,
but  continued  to  communicate  with  him  through
Charles  Sheridan.  The  patriot  demands  had  taken
fuller  shape  in  the  recess.  Ireland  now  required,
1,  an  independent  Legislature  ;  2,  a  modification  of
Poynings’  Act  to  abolish  the  power  of  the  English  and
Irish  Council  in  altering  Bills  ;  3,  a  Biennial  Mutiny
Bill ;  and  one  more  point  now  first  introduced,  a  sur¬
render  of  the  right  of  appeal  to  England  from  the
Irish  Courts  of  Law.  Grattan  enquired  whether  on
these  points  the  Duke  had  come  prepared  to  satisfy
Ireland’s  expectations.  The  Duke  had  brought  a
formal  message  to  the  Irish  Parliament  that  he  was

325

CHAP.

II.

"  1782.

April.

1  ‘Among  others,  a  warrant  to  of  Portland  to  the  Earl  of  Shel-

the  Postmaster-General  to  detain  burne,  April  15,  1782.’  S.  P.  0.

and  open  suspicious  letters. — 1)

326

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  sent  to  consider  their  wishes  ;  it  would  be  answered
— y — ■ — •  by  an  address  ;  and  if  the  Duke  would  allow  him  to
mention  these  four  subjects,  and  inform  the  House
that  they  would  be  conceded,  Grattan  declared  him¬
self  ready  to  move  the  address  in  the  place  of  the
Declaration  of  Rights.  The  Duke  required  a  copy  of
what  Grattan  intended  to  say.  4  On  perusal  of  it,’  he
said,  4 1  found  the  points  contended  for  marked  with
such  harshness  and  insisted  on  with  such  resolute
pertinacity  that  I  did  not  hesitate  to  return  the
paper.’ 1

The  Speaker  and  the  Provost  appeared  to  unite  in
condemning  Grattan’s  language,  and  undertook  them¬
selves  to  draw  an  address  not  liable  to  objection,
which  might  equally  prevent  4  the  Declaration  of
Rights.’  This,  too,  when  it  was  produced,  the  Duke
found  himself  unable  to  sanction,  for  it  demanded  the
repeal  of  the  6th  of  George  I.

4  In  this  dilemma,’  he  wrote,  4 1  found  myself  within
half  an  hour  of  the  meeting  of  Parliament  with  only  a
choice  of  difficidties.  I  was  certain  that  no  effectual,
and  doubtful  if  any,  resistance  could  be  made  to  the
Declaration  which  Mr.  Grattan  was  to  move.  I  was
ill-informed  of  the  strength  of  the  Administration.  I
had  to  apprehend  the  effects  of  disappointment
upon  the  minds  of  those  who  supported  Lord  Carlisle
on  condition  of  being  recompensed  at  the  end  of  the
session.’ 2

Thus  circumstanced,  Portland  himself  sketched  a
neutral  address,  which  he  gave  to  Ponsonby  and
Conolly  to  be  used  at  their  discretion.  He  told  the

i  ^  m  *  ?  jpum

1  1  Duke  of  Portland  to  Lord  Shelburne,  April  1G.  Most  secret.’
S.  P.  0.  3  Ibid.

I

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

32

Council  plainly  that  the  Cabinet  would  consent  to  no
specific  measures  till  better  informed  of  the  wishes  of
the  people.  He  found  to  his  additional  mortification
that  Lord  Carlisle’s  recall  was  most  unpopular,  that
the  House  meditated  a  vote  of  thanks  to  him  and
to  Eden,  with  a  recommendation  of  the  latter  to  the
King  for  some  mark  of  distinguished  favour.

CHAP.

II.

"17827

April.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

■

SECTION  VI.

Now  at  length  the  fateful  hour  had  come  when  the
sun  of  Ireland’s  glory  was  to  break  in  meridian
splendour  through  the  clouds  which  had  so  long
overshadowed  her.  For  a  month  every  Irish  heart
had  beat  high  with  hope.  On  the  16th  of  April
Mr.  Grattan  was  to  move  a  Declaration  of  Rights,
which  recalled  America’s  Declaration  of  Independence ;
and  the  House  of  Commons,  schooled  by  the  Volun¬
teers,  and  itself  in  a  brief  dream  of  patriotic  intoxi¬
cation,  -was  by  its  vote  to  tell  England  and  the  world
that  Ireland’s  thraldom  was  ended.  A  grand  review
on  the  17th  was  to  celebrate  the  national  triumph.
The  Volunteers  had  poured  into  Dublin  from  every
part  of  Leinster.  They  were  marching  in  uniform
along  the  streets  and  quays,  with  the  harp  banners
flying,  and  bands  playing  the  national  airs.  Cavalry
were  prancing  in  a  splendour  which  told  for  many  a
year  on  the  estates  of  the  noble  lords  who  were  their
colonels  and  patrons.  Artillery,  served  out  of  the  Go¬
vernment  stores,  with  the  Woolwich  stamp  on  them,
were  booming  at  intervals  defiance  of  the  foreign
enemy,  Great  Britain  being  the  foreigner.  The
nation  was  showing  herself  gloriously  in  arms  for  the
occasion  when  her  chosen  hero  was  to  announce  her
regeneration  to  an  admiring  world.

Amidst  these  scenes  Portland  drove  from  the
Castle  to  the  Parliament  House.

The  message  was  read  by  Hely  Hutchinson.  The
King,  it  briefly  said,  being  concerned  to  find  that

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

329

there  was  discontent  among  his  loyal  subjects  of  Ire-  chap.
land,  recommended  the  Lords  and  Commons  to  take  > — r^—
it  into  immediate  consideration.  Ponsonby  followed
with  Portland’s  address,  which  was  a  mere  echo  of
the  message.

Then  Grattan  rose.  He  had  been  ill.  He  looked
worn  and  anxious,  but  in  his  opening  sentence  he
assumed  that  his  cause  was  won.

4 1  am  now,’  he  said,  4  to  address  a  free  people.

Ages  have  passed  away,  and  this  is  the  first  moment
in  which  you  could  be  distinguished  by  that  appella¬
tion.  I  have  spoken  on  the  subject  of  your  liberty  so
often  that  I  have  nothing  to  add,  and  have  only  to  ad¬
mire  by  what  heaven-directed  steps  you  have  pro¬
ceeded  until  the  whole  faculty  of  the  nation  is  braced
up  to  the  act  of  her  own  deliverance.  I  found  Ire¬
land  on  her  knees.  I  watched  over  her  with  an
eternal  solicitude.  I  have  traced  her  progress  from
injuries  to  arms,  and  from  arms  to  liberty.  Spirit  of
Swift,  spirit  of  Molyneux,  your  genius  has  prevailed.

Ireland  is  now  a  nation.  In  that  new  character  I  hail
her,  and  bowing  to  her  august  presence  I  say,  Esto
Perpetua.’

Into  what  wild  tumult  of  applause  floors  and  gal¬
leries  burst  at  hearing  these  words  it  is  needless  to
tell.  Neither  is  it  needed  to  follow  further  the  stream
of  eloquence  which  has  passed  into  the  standard
manuals  of  oratory  among  the  schoolbooks  of  two
hemispheres.  The  brilliance  of  oratory  is  at  all  times
and  from  the  very  nature  of  the  art  in  the  inverse
ratio  of  the  truth  contained  in  it ;  and  as  there  never
was  a  more  shining  speech  delivered  in  the  English
language,  so  never  was  there  speech  with  less  sub¬
stance  in  it  which  would  bear  the  test  of  time.

330

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

"T782!"

April,

Nations  are  not  born  on  the  floors  of  debating
societies,  nor  on  the  parade-ground  of  volunteers.
Freedom  must  be  won  on  the  battle-field  or  it  is
perishable  as  the  breath  that  boasts  of  it.

In  truth  and  fact,  Ireland,  bound  to  England  by
situation,  and  inhabited  by  a  people  who  would  howl
for  liberty  but  never  fight  for  it,  had  snatched  from
the  embarrassments  of  her  neighbour  what  she  could
neither  keep  nor  use  worthily  while  it  was  hers  ;
and  this  glorious  outburst  of  Grattan’s  is  the  sharpest
satire  on  the  race  whom  he  was  flattering  with  his
vain  bombast.

But  the  passing  moment  was  his  own.  The  Ame¬
rican  wound  was  unhealed.  There  had  been  enough
of  bloodshed,  enough  of  coercion,  coercion  especially
of  Ireland,  which  in  her  depression  had  been  so  scan¬
dalously  mishandled.  England  by  injustice  had
trained  the  Irish  into  anarchy.  Whether  they  would
make  better  laws  for  themselves,  and  obey  them,
was  an  experiment  at  least  worth  the  trying.1

The  rhetorical  part  of  the  performance  being  over,
Mr.  Grattan  moved  an  amendment  to  the  address  to

assure  the  King  of  the  loyalty  of  the  Irish,  but  to  tell
him  at  the  same  time  that  c  Ireland  was  a  distinct  king¬
dom  with  a  separate  Parliament,  and  that  this  Parlia-

1  1  Whether  Ireland  was  prepared
to  resist  by  force  if  Grattan’s  pro¬
positions  had  been  rejected  is  a
point  on  which  there  were  diffe¬
rences  of  opinion.  Grattan  himself
said,  Yes.  His  friend,  Mr.  Day,
says  for  him,  Mr.  Grattan  was  re¬
solved  to  assist,  even  by  arms,  if
driven  to  it,  the  liberties  of  Ire¬
land.’ — Life  of  Grattan ,  vol.  ii.  p.
272.  ‘  Lord  Clare  says,  No,  and  im¬
plies  that  the  Duke  of  Portland  was

deceived  by  idle  bravado.  “  I  can
assert  with  perfect  confidence,”
Clare  said,  in  his  speech  on  the
Union,  “  that  no  gentleman  of  De-
land  would  at  that  day  have  drawn
his  sword  against  Great  Britain,
and  it  certainly  -was  the  duty  of  the
King’s  servants,  in  whom  his  re¬
presentative  reposed  a  confidence,
to  have  explained  this  to  the
Duke.”  ’

TI1E  CONSTITUTION  OF  1732.

331

ment  alone  had  a  right  to  pass  laws  tor  her.’  4  In  the
maintenance  of  that  right  the  liberties  of  Irishmen
consisted,  and  they  would  only  yield  it  with  their
lives.’  The  points  were  then  rehearsed  which  England
was  required  to  concede,  and  the  demonstration  over,
the  House  then  consented  to  be  adjourned  while
reference  was  made  to  the  Cabinet.

Irish  vanity  had  been  gratified,  and  Portland  thought
it  possible  that  after  the  display  some  cooler  thought
might  follow.  He  held  private  conferences  with
hopeful  members.  He  talked  of  negotiation.  If  Ire¬
land  were  to  receive  such  large  concessions  she  must
give  something  in  return,  and  he  hinted  at  a  land-tax.
Language  of  this  kind  was  premature.  For  the  mo¬
ment  the  whole  nation  was  delirious.  Grattan
desired  a  friend  in  London  to  tell  Lord  Shelburne
that  negotiation  was  impossible.  Ireland  demanded
her  rights,  and  did  not  mean  to  pay  for  them.
The  alternative  he  scarcely  condescended  to  veil.  4  If
our  requests  are  refused,’  he  said,  4  we  retire  within
ourselves,  preserving  our  allegiance,  but  not  executing
English  laws  cr  English  judgments.  We  consume
our  own  manufactures  and  keep  on  terms  of  amity
with  England,  but  with  that  diffidence  which  must
exist  if  she  is  so  infatuated  as  to  take  away  our

i  i

To  show  the  Duke  the  uselessness  of  intrigue,  one
of  the  earliest  acts  of  the  House  of  Commons  on  its  re¬
assembling  was  to  pass  the  vote  of  thanks  to  Lord  Car¬
lisle,  which  he  had  deprecated  as  an  insult  to  himself.

4  It  is  no  longer,’  Portland  wrote  to  Shelburne  on  the
26th  of  April,2  4  the  Parliament  of  Ireland  that  is  to  be

CHAP.

ii.

*17827

April.

1  ‘  II.  Grattan  to  Mr.  Day,  April  2  S.  P.  O.  ‘  Most  secret  and  con-
22,  1782.’ — Life  of  Grattan ,  vol.  ii.  fidential.’

S.  v

\

332

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

rook  managed  or  attended  to,  it  is  the  whole  of  this  country.

' — It  is  the  Church,  the  law,  the  army  (I  fear  when  I  con-
ApHi*  sider  how  it  is  composed),  the  merchant,  the  trades¬
man,  the  manufacturer,  the  farmer,  the  labourer,  the
Catholic,  the  Dissenter,  the  Protestant.  All  sects,  all
sorts  and  descriptions  of  men,  unanimously  call  on
Great  Britain  for  a  full  and  unequivocal  satisfaction.
They  know  and  feel  their  strength.  They  know  it  is
not  in  your  power  to  send  over  such  a  force  as  will
compel  them  to  relinquish  their  claims  ;  and  having
so  recent  an  example  of  the  fatal  consequences  of
coercive  measures  they  are  in  no  fear  that  Great  Bri¬
tain  will  attempt  a  second  experiment.  For  myself,
during  the  preservation  of  the  remains  of  the  British
Empire,  my  opinion  is  that  you  should  concede  to  this
country  the  full  enjoyment  of  a  free  and  independent
Legislature,  but  that  a  line  should  be  drawn  to  pre¬
vent  their  interference  in  matters  of  state  and  external
commerce.  Modify  Poynings,  Act  for  them.  The
abuse  of  it  by  the  Privy  Council  of  this  kingdom  has
been  singularly  offensive.  As  to  the  judicature,  I
know  not  what  to  advise.  As  I  undertook  this  ardu¬
ous  employment  with  hopes  which  I  had  soon  the
mortification  to  be  obliged  to  relinquish,  but  with
views  of  which  I  shall  never  lose  sight,  I  think  it  my
duty  to  state  shortly  what  I  conceive  will  be  the  con¬
sequences  of  rejecting  or  delaying  to  satisfy  the
wishes  of  this  country.  For  that  a  few  words  will
suffice.  In  either  case  there  would  be  an  end  of  all
government.’

The  Duke  of  Portland,  in  his  inexperience  of
Ireland,  believed  all  that  was  said  to  him.  Shelburne
understood  his  countrymen  better,  and  was  more
sceptical.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

333

4  In  all  such  contentions,’  he  replied,  c  men  asked  ciiap.

for  more  at  the  beginning  than  they  expected  to  - ^ —

get.  It  was  possible  the  Irish  Parliament  would  Apru’

recede  in  some  degree  from  its  extreme  demands.’

If  this  was  not  so,  and  4  if  the  ties  which  had  hitherto
subsisted  between  the  two  countries  were  to  be
loosened  or  cut  asunder,’  he  enquired,  4  what  plan  had
been  thought  of  to  preserve  the  remaining  connection ;  ’

4  how  confusion  was  to  be  prevented  from  the  separate
action  of  Parliament,  with  distinct  and  equal  powers
without  any  operating  centre  ?’ 1

England  was  not  required  to  answer  by  return
of  mail  to  questions  affecting  the  integrity  of  the
empire.  Time  was  allowed  her  to  consider,  and
Portland  meanwhile  was  continuing  to  feel  his  way
under  the  surface,  and  beginning  to  find  men  ready
to  listen  to  him.  He  mentioned  three  or  four  persons
who  had  been  removed  from  the  Privy  Council  for
opposing  the  Government.  He  had  ascertained,  he
said,  that  they  could  be  depended  on  for  the  future,
and  he  wished  to  replace  these.  It  is  instructive  to
find  that  Mr.  Flood  was  one  of  them.  Stung  by  his
want  of  success  among  his  old  friends,  Flood  had
given  signs  that  he  was  once  more  marketable.  The
Viceroy  admitted,  however,  that  he  was  less  certain
of  him  than  of  the  others  4  I  must  ask  a  discre¬
tionary  power,’  he  wrote,  4  in  carrying  into  effect  the
commands  I  solicit  respecting  Mr.  Flood.  I  would
not  restore  him  unless  I  was  persuaded  he  would  feel
a  just  sense  of  the  King’s  goodness  to  him.’  These
gentlemen  were  not  all.  The  Lords  and  Commons
recovering  their  presence  of  mind  began  to  bid  for

1  ‘  Lord  Shelburne  to  the  Duke  of  Portland,  April  29.  Secret.’

S.  P.  0.

334

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782.

May.

i

favour  again  with  something  like  the  old  eagerness.
Ireland  was  not  yet  independent,  and  while  they
had  still  something  to  give  which  England  wanted
they  made  the  most  of  the  opportunity.  So  pressing
were  they  and  so  barefaced  that,  glad  as  he  was  to
gain  support,  he  could  not  quite  restrain  a  solemn
astonishment.

1  If  his  majesty’s  magnanimity  and  liberality,’  he
said,  4  should  influence  the  Parliament  of  Great
Britain  to  concede  with  grace  the  material  point,  I
believe  that  the  royal  favour  might  be  dispensed  in
this  kingdom  with  a  more  sparing  and  economical
hand,  and  that  the  honour  of  serving  the  Crown  would
take  precedence  of  the  emoluments  to  which  I  fear
the  attention  of  the  King’s  servants  in  this  kingdom
has  been  of  late  too  much  directed.’  1

Not  vet  did  Portland  understand  Ireland.  He
•/

was  to  discover  that  so  far  from  a  loftier  spirit  being
generated  by  an  emancipated  constitution,  the  shrewd
Irish  politicians  most  valued  the  rights  on  which  they
were  insisting,  as  a  lever  by  which  to  extort  a  larger
price  for  their  services.

May  came  and  England  was  still  pausing  on  her
reply.  On  the  4th,  the  Irish  Parliament  again  ad¬
journed  for  three  weeks,  and  the  Duke,  presuming  on
Grattan’s  patience,  tried  to  persuade  him  to  be  content
with  some  c  middle  term,’  and,  perhaps,  refer  matters
to  a  commission.  Assuming  that  Portland  was  acting
under  directions  from  the  Cabinet,  and  possibly  afraid
that  he  might  be  too  successful,  Grattan  wrote  directly
to  Fox  to  beg  him  not  to  delude  himself.  Every  point
must  be  yielded.  He  and  his  friends  had  pledged

1  1  To  Lord  Shelburne,  private  and  confidential,  April  21,  1782/
S.  P.  0.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

335

their  lives  and  fortunes,  and  could  not  and  would  not
give  way.  4  My  country,’  he  said  haughtily,  4  must
have  been  much  misunderstood  if  it  is  thought  she
has  asked  for  a  thing  which  she  cannot  give  her¬
self.  I  agree  with  you  in  wishing  for  a  settlement,
but  nothing  less  than  what  has  been  stated  will  satisfy
Ireland.  There  must  be  no  foreign  legislation,  no
foreign  judicature,  no  legislative  council,  no  negotia¬
tion,  no  commissioners.’ 1 2  To  the  Viceroy,  too,  Grattan
made  it  equally  plain  that  4  middle  terms  ’  need  not
be  thought  of.

4  There  is  still  an  appearance  of  Government,’  the
Duke  reported  to  Fox,  on  the  28th  of  April,  4  but  if
you  delay  or  refuse  to  be  liberal,  Government  can¬
not  exist  here  in  its  present  form,  and  the  sooner  you
recall  your  lieutenant  and  renounce  all  claim  to  this
country  the  better.’ L>  Still  more  emphatically,  and
showing  how  clearly  the  alternative  was  before  his
own  mind,  and  had  been  considered  in  the  Cabinet
before  he  left  England,  he  wrote  on  the  6th  of  May
to  Lord  Shelburne  : —

4  Every  clay’s  experience  convinces  me  not  only  of
the  impossibility  of  prevailing  on  this  country  to  re¬
cede  from  any  one  of  the  claims  set  forth  in  the
addresses,  but  of  the  danger  of  new  ones  being
started.  The  hope  I  expressed  of  reserving  the  final
judicature,  if  not  totally,  at  least  by  retaining  a  writ  of
error,  no  longer  exists.’  4  It  is  in  vain  to  argue  on
the  disadvantages  which  I  conceive  the  alteration  of
the  Act  of  Henry  VII.3  will  produce  in  this  country.
The  wishes  of  the  people  are  fixed  ;  and  reasoning

CHAP.

ii.

1  1  Grattan  to  Fox,  May  G,  1782.’
— Life  of  Grattan ,  vol.  ii.

2  i  The  Duke  of  Portland  to  Fox,

April  28,  1782.’ — Life  of  Grattan ,
vol.  ii.

3  Povninp:s’  Act.

*  c

L

col

336

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

-  -  --

1782.

May.

among  ourselves  as  to  what  is  for  or  against  their
interests,  is  as  much  too  late  as  it  has  been  fruitless
and  delusive  in  respect  to  other  countries.  I  consider
the  question  is  carried.  I  shall  proceed,  therefore,
to  state  the  plan  which  I  hope  might  lay  the  foundation
for  new  relations  and  permanent  friendship.  I  re¬
commend  the  positive  assurance  to  be  given  them  of
the  alteration  of  the  Mutiny  Bill,  the  modification  of
Poynings’  Act,  the  repeal  of  the  6th  of  George  I.,
writs  of  error  to  be  no  longer  issued  at  our  Court  of
King’s  Bench.  England  in  return  must  insist  on  “a
settlement  of  the  precise  limits  of  independence  which
is  required,”  the  consideration  which  should  be  given
for  the  protection  expended,  and  the  share  which  Ire¬
land  must  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  empire.
The  regulation  of  trade  would  very  properly  make  a
part  of  a  treaty,  and  the  dissatisfaction  expressed  by
many  commercial  persons  at  the  delusive  advantages
of  free  trade  would  be  a  fit  subject  for  discussion.’  ‘  In
my  apprehension,’  Portland  went  on,  c  proposals  such
as  I  have  stated  cannot  be  resisted  in  Parliament  with
any  effect.  The  refusal  to  accede  to  them,  or  to  appoint
Commissioners  for  a  final  adjustment  on  the  ground
of  their  own  address,  when  they  are  assured  that
persons  are  properly  authorised  for  that  purpose,  would
be  such  an  indication  of  sinister  designs  as  ivould  war¬
rant  your  direction  to  me  to  throw  up  the  Government
and  leave  them  to  that  fate  which  their  folly  and  treachery
should  deserve.  If  such  should  be  the  sentiments  of
the  King’s  servants,  after  using  every  endeavour  to
bring  them  to  a  sense  of  their  condition,  and  of  the
consequences  of  such  a  refusal,  I  should  hesitate  as
little  to  order  the  yacht  and  leave  them  to  be
the  victims  of  their  own  insanity,  as  I  should  say
that  it  would  be  useless  to  attempt  to  coerce  them,

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

837

and  that  the  country  on  such  terms  would  not  be
worth  possessing.’

‘  I  feel  the  strongest  and  most  poignant  reluctance
in  being  obliged  to  recommend  the  mode  of  relation
which  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  suggest.  I  see  no
other  resource,  for  I  am  convinced  that  the  spirit  of
this  country  is  raised  so  high,  that  she  would  expose
herself  to  any  hazard  rather  than  relinquish  or  retract
any  of  the  claims  she  has  insisted  on.’  ‘  It  is  my
duty  further  to  state  to  your  lordship  that  unless  it  is
determined  that  the  knot  which  hinds  the  two  countries
should  he  severed  for  ever ,  it  is  necessary  I  should  be
authorised  as  soon  as  possible  to  assure  the  leaders  of
the  Opposition  of  the  intention  of  the  English  Ad¬
ministration  to  exert  their  influence  in  convincing
the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain  of  the  propriety  of
conceding  the  points  required  by  the  Irish  Parliament,
for  without  such  assurance  it  is  vain  to  ask  their
assistance  in  any  shape  whatever.’  1

Could  England  have  anticipated  at  this  moment
the  splendid  triumphs  of  her  arms  with  which  the  war
which  lost  her  America  was  about,  notwithstand¬
ing,  to  be  closed,  the  Cabinet  might,  perhaps,  have
decided  to  read  Ireland  the  lesson  which  she  so  much
needed,  and  to  leave  her,  as  Portland  suggested,  to  be
4  the  victim  of  her  own  insanity.’  The  United  States
were  free,  but  the  allied  powers  were  to  gain  little  by
having  espoused  their  quarrel.  At  the  beginning  of
the  year  no  light  had  yet  broken  on  the  gloomy
prospect.  An  expedition  against  the  Dutch  at  the

1  1  The  Duke  of  Portland  to
Lord  Shelburne.  Secret.  May  6.’
Abridged.  I  quote  from  the  ori¬
ginal  letters  of  the  Duke  of  Port-

YOL.  II.  Z

land  in  the  State  Paper  Office.  Ex¬
tracts  from  them  were  laid  by  Mr.
Pitt  before  Parliament  during  the
debates  on  the  Union.

CHAP.

II.

1782.

May.

338

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782?

Cape  had  failed.  Minorca,  after  a  defence  only  less
gallant  than  Elliott’s,  had  fallen  on  the  5th  of  Feb¬
ruary.  Gibraltar  held  out,  but  the  fate  of  Minorca
was  ominous  that  Gibraltar,  too,  might  not  resist  for
ever.  De  Grasse  had  returned,  after  Cornwallis’s
surrender,  to  the  West  Indies  with  the  united  fleets
of  France  and  Spain,  and  one  after  another  the  Lee¬
ward  Islands  had  surrendered  to  their  overwhelm¬
ing  strength.  Jamaica’s  turn  was  next  to  follow.
Jamaica,  however,  was  not  to  be  lost  without  an  effort
to  save  it,  and  Sir  George  Rodney  returned  to  the
West  India  station  with  all  the  force  which  England
could  supply.  With  instinctive  Irish  dislike  of  dis-:
tinguished  Englishmen  Burke  had  depreciated  Rod¬
ney’s  ability,  and  on  the  change  of  ministry  an  Ad¬
miralty  order  had  been  issued  for  his  recall.  Before
the  messenger  could  sail  with  it  the  work  had  been
gloriously  finished.  Rodney  came  up  with  de  Grasse
on  the  evening  of  the  1 1th  of  April,  forced  him  into
action  in  the  morning,  and  before  nightfall  the  enor¬
mous  armament  was  taken,  sunk,  or  scattered.  De
Grasse  himself  was  a  prisoner,  Jamaica  was  saved,
and  France  was  paid  home  for  her  share  in  the
capitulation  of  York  Town.

Beaten  from  the  West  Indies  the  French  and
Spaniards  turned  all  their  efforts  on  Gibraltar.  Forty
thousand  men  were  collected  for  a  land  attack.  The
ruined  trenches  were  repaired  and  remounted  with
170  guns.  The  Due  de  Crillon,  the  conqueror  of
Minorca,  took  the  command.  The  Comte  d’ Artois
and  the  Due  de  Bourbon  came  to  be  present  in  person
at  the  crowning  humiliation  which  was  to  fall  on  the
ancient  enemy.  Enormous  floating  batteries,  bomb
proof  against  such  guns  as  had  been  hitherto  in  use,

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

339

thronged  with  men  and  armed  with  the  largest  cannon  chap.
which  skill  could  construct,  were  anchored  under  the  > — ^ — -

1  roo

batteries,  with  the  combined  fleets  lying  behind  to  Septemb’er<
support  them.  On  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  Sep¬
tember,  the  most  terrible  bombardment  ever  borne
by  a  single  fortress  was  opened  by  sea  and  land  on
Elliott  and  his  five  thousand  English.  The  rigid
blockade  now  long  unrelieved  had  reduced  them  to
rice  and  bread,  and  to  half  rations  of  those.  The
1  roast  potatoes’  of  Gibraltar  were  the  red  hot  shot
with  which  Elliott  replied  to  the  hail  of  shell  which
rained  upon  him.  All  the  forenoon  the  balls  dropped
hissing  into  the  sea  from  off  the  impenetrable  armour
of  the  floating  platforms.  As  the  sun  began  to  slope
to  the  west  light  columns  of  smoke  were  seen  ascend^
ing  from  them,  first  here,  then  there,  and  then  all
along  the  line.  Through  telescopes  the  crews  were
observed  leaving  their  guns  and  rushing  to  and  fro
with  water-buckets,  and  still  the  smoke  gained  upon
them,  and  through  the  smoke,  clearer  and  brighter  as
daylight  waned,  came  swirling  tongues  of  flame.  The
doomed  batteries  lay  incapable  of  motion,  and  fiercer
yet  flew  the  red  hot  shot  from  the  casemates  upon
them  till  they  became  a  roaring  bank  of  fire  floating
on  the  sea.  No  answering  shell  came  any  longer
from  their  portholes.  The  seamen  and  artillerymen
were  seen  leaping  into  the  water  to  escape  the  flames,
and  struggling  back  into  the  flames  to  escape,  the
water;  while  at  awful  intervals  magazine  after  maga¬
zine  exploded,  and  in  a  glare  of  lurid  splendour,
blazing  timbers  and  torn  limbs  of  men  were  shot  as
from  a  volcano  into  the  sulphur  loaded  air.

Boats  went  out  from  the  quay  and  saved  all  that
could  be  found  alive.  The  ships  of  the  besiegers  lay

340

BOOK

VI.

1782.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND*

paralysed  by  the  appalling  ruin,  and  after  that  awful
-  night  no  more  attempts  were  made  to  drive  the
English  from  the  rock  which  they  had  so  magnificently
defended.  A  few  days  later  Lord  Howe  came  with
a  fleet  from  England.  The  French  and  Spanish
squadron,  though  superior  in  numbers,  dared  not  face
him,  and  slunk  away  into  their  own  harbours.  The
war  was  ended.  The  American  colonies  were  lost  ;
but  Great  Britain  still  held  fast  grasped  the  sceptre
which  the  greatest  powers  in  Europe  had  in  vain
sought  to  tear  from  her,  and  sat  down  with  the
bloody  laurels  about  her  brow  still  sovereign  of  the
seas.

At  such  a  moment  she  could  have  afforded  with
neither  fear  nor  shame  to  have  granted  to  Ireland  the
independence  which  Grattan  threatened  that  if  un-
eonceded  Ireland  would  take  for  herself.  No  foreign

O

power  could  have  penetrated  the  floating  patrol  with
which  England  could  have  surrounded  her  shores,  and
shut  her  up  within  her  own  limits.  Protestant  and
Catholic,  Dissenter  and  Churchman,  Anglo-Irish-
man  and  Celt,  would  have  enjoyed  to  the  full  the
freedom  for  which  they  were  so  clamorous.  A  few
years  of  liberty  on  those  terms  would  probably  have
satisfied  Grattan.  The  mutinous  colony  would  have
discovered  the  meaning  of  the  c  Nationality  ’  which
they  were  so  eager  to  revive,  and  such  of  the  popu¬
lation  of  both  races  as  survived  when  another  Mac
Morrough  re-invited  England’s  interference,  would
have  been  contented  to  remain  for  the  future  members
of  the  British  Empire  on  less  uneasy  terms.

Circumstances  forbade  the  experiment.  The  vic¬
tory  came  too  late,  and  Portland  had  to  yield  uncon¬
ditionally.  On  the  17th  of  May,  before  the  news

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

341

arrived  of  Rodney’s  victory,  Lord  Shelburne  and
Fox  invited  the  two  Houses  of  the  British  Parliament
to  do  what  Eden  had  been  rebuked  for  proposing  a
month  before,  and  repeal  the  statute  of  George  I.
Fox  spoke  frankly,  and,  in  the  main,  with  truth.  He
admitted  that  Ireland  had  a  right  to  distrust  Bri¬
tish  legislation  4  because  it  had  hitherto  been  em¬
ployed  only  to  oppress  and  distress  her.’  Had  she
never  felt  the  English  power  over  her  as  4  a  curse  ’
she  would  never  have  complained  of  it.  Fatally  for
the  interests  of  both  countries,  England  had  used  its
strength  to  establish  an  impolitic  monopoly  in  trade
to  enrich  one  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  So  lately  as
but  four  years  since,  when  the  Irish  asked  to  have
their  rights  restored  to  them,  Parliament  refused  to
listen.  Demands  were  disregarded  which  were  no
less  modest  than  just.  The  influence  of  ministers  was
exerted  against  them,  perhaps  for  the  purpose  of  pre¬
serving  a  few  votes  on  other  occasions,  and  the  rights
and  distresses  of  Ireland  were  forgotten.  Circum¬
stances  had  changed.  The  Irish  were  now  ambitious
of  larger  concessions,  and  he  advised  that  they  should
be  granted.  It  was  not  that  he  was  afraid,  but  he
would  rather,  he  said,  see  Ireland  totally  separated
than  kept  in  obedience  by  force.  He  undertook  for
them,  like  many  an  eager  statesman  before  and  since,
that  if  they  had  what  they  now  asked,  4  they  would
be  attached  to  England  even  to  bigotry.’

In  neither  House  was  there  any  opposition.  The
necessary  measures  could  not  be  despatched  on  the
instant,  but  resolutions  which  would  be  received  as
binding  were  passed  unanimously,  and  were  forwarded
at  once  by  Lord  Shelburne  to  Portland.

The  repeal  of  the  Act  of  George  I.,  Shelburne  said,

CHAP.

n.

~17827

May.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  would  remove  what  the  Irish  termed  the  principal
— li — '  cause  of  their  discontent.  The  Writ  of  Error  would
May2  ©iven  UP  also  if  they  persisted  in  demanding  it.
Irish  Bills  should  be  no  longer  altered  or  suppressed
in  Council.  The  Mutiny  Bill  should  be  made  bien¬
nial,  and  no  conditions  should  be  insisted  on.  The
Irish  would  be  expected  to  make  some  suitable
return,  but  what  the  return  w~as  to  be  should  be  left
to  their  honour,  good  faith,  and  generosity.  On  one
point  only,  to  prevent  future  differences,  there  must
be  a  distinct  understanding.  The  Cabinet  must
know  what  powers  were  to  be  reserved  to  the  Crown.1

All  was  now  over.  The  Irish  Parliament  came
together  again  after  the  three  weeks’  adjournment,2  to
hear  from  the  Viceroy’s  lips  that  England  had  given
way  on  the  four  points,  and  that  they  had  obtained
their  desire.  The  announcement  was  conveyed  with
the  more  dignity  that  it  was  accompanied  with  the
accounts  which  had  now  come  in  from  the  West
Indies.

In  the  ecstasy  of  joy  into  which  Ireland  precipitated
herself,  it  seemed  as  if  Fox’s  anticipations  were  really
to  be  fulfilled.  Sir  Lucius  O’Brien  exclaimed  that
the  strength  of  three  millions  of  people  was  added  to
the  British  standard.  Cordial  now,  as  before  he  had
been  determined,  Grattan  grasped  England’s  hand  as
of  a  recovered  friend.  Confidence  in  Ireland’s  ho¬
nour  should  never  be  placed  in  vain.  4  We  were
pledged  to  recover  our  rights,’  he  said.  4  We  are
now  pledged  to  Great  Britain,  which,  by  acceding  to
our  claims,  has  put  an  end  to  all  further  questions.’
England’s  victories  were  now  Ireland’s.  Ireland

1  1  Shelburne  to  Portland,  May  18,  1782/  S.  P.  0.

2  May  27.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

should  have  a  share  in  all  her  future  glories.  Mr.
Grattan  concluded  by  moving  for  a  grant,  which  was
conceded  instantly,  of  a  hundred  thousand  pounds
and  twenty  thousand  seamen  as  a  contribution  to
the  navy  of  Great  Britain.

When  the  exultation  over  the  political  triumph  was
exhausted,  the  next  thought  was  of  the  hero  by
whom  it  had  been  won.  Mr.  Bagenal,  the  same  who
fought  De  Blaquiere,  moved  for  a  committee  to
purchase  an  estate  and  build  a  suitable  mansion  for
Ireland’s  illustrious  benefactor,  Henry  Grattan.

4  Far  be  it  from  me,’  said  the  enthusiastic  gentle¬
man,  4  to  compare  even  the  services  of  a  Marlborough
to  those  for  which  we  stand  indebted.  We  have  no
deductions  to  make  from  our  gratitude.  Without
superstition,  men  may  well  record  him  among  the
most  prosperous  interpositions  of  Heaven.’ 1

Grattan  rose  to  protest,  but  his  voice  was  drowned
in  shouts  of  4  Adjourn.’  A  day  was  appointed  for  a
general  thanksgiving.  An  address  of  gratitude  was
voted  to  the  Crown,  and  addresses  of  thanks  and
congratulations  to  Portland  and  to  Rodney.  But
the  first  thought  of  everyone  was,  4  What  should  a
generous  country  do  for  Grattan  ?  ’  The  Duke  was
as  bitter  at  the  meditated  profusion  as  if  the  revenue
was  a  fund  sacred  to  Parliamentary  corruption.

4  Such  is  the  inattention  to  the  distressed  circum¬
stances  of  the  country,’  he  said,  4  that  some  manage¬
ment  was  necessary  to  keep  this  idea  within  bounds.
I  tried,  but  ineffectually,  to  have  confined  them  to  a
recommendation  of  Mr.  Grattan  to  the  favour  of  the
Crown,  or  at  least  to  have  got  the  quantum  of  reward

343

CHAP.

II.

1782.

May.

1  Irish  Debates ,  May  27,  1782.

344

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  left  to  his  majesty.  I  next  endeavoured  for  their
-22 — ✓  own  sakes  to  prevail  on  them  to  adopt  the  mode  of
May**  annuity  to  Mr.  Grattan  and  his  heirs,  and  on  its
being  represented  that  a  house  was  necessary  as  well
as  an  income,  I  expressed  my  readiness  to  request  his
majesty  to  permit  the  Lodge  lately  contracted  for  in  the
Phoenix  Park  for  the  summer  residence  of  the  Lord-
Lieutenant  to  be  settled  on  Mr.  Grattan.  For  this  I
was  the  more  anxious  as,  in  addition  to  the  very  ex¬
travagant  price  which  the  public  have  agreed  to  pay
for  it,  I  am  persuaded  that  it  will  require  at  least
10,000/.  more  to  make  it  fit  for  the  reception  of  the
chief  governor.  No  argument,  however,  would  avail,
and  nothing  would  have  prevented  the  vote  in  favour
of  Mr.  Grattan,  amounting  to  as  large  a  sum  as,  or
possibly  exceeding,  that  given  towards  raising  sea¬
men  (100,000/.),  but  the  interposition  and  firmness  of
Mr.  Grattan’s  own  particular  friends,  who  assured  the
House  Mr.  Grattan  would  certainly  refuse  so  glaring
a  mark  of  profusion.71

Fifty  thousand  pounds  was  the  sum  at  last  agreed
on,  with  a  further  grant  for  a  house,  many  members,
however,  still  raising  their  voices  in  protest.  Mr.
Ogle,  of  Wexford,  hoped  that  Ireland  was  not  imitat¬
ing  Athens,  which  rewarded  Miltiades  with  a  picture.
The  Provost,  flying  into  rhetoric  in  his  old  days,  said
that  Chatham  had  received  four  thousand  a  year  for
his  own  life  and  his  son’s,  and  4  great  as  were  the  abili¬
ties  of  Chatham  he  was  less  deserving  than  the  object
of  the  present  motion.7

Grattan  himself  lent  no  countenance  to  this  idle
adulation.  He  accepted  his  50,000/.  as  a  retaining

1  L  The  Duke  of  Portland  to  Lord  Shelburne,  June  5,  1782/  S.  P.  O.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

fee,  and  declared  that  thenceforth  his  services  were
mortgaged  to  Ireland.  He  would  accept  no  office
and  enter  into  no  engagement  which  might  embarrass
him  in  his  duty  to  his  country.

Nothing  now  remained  but  to  celebrate  in  some
fitting  way  the  birthday  of  Irish  nationality.  Un¬
happily,  as  an  Irish  patriotic  writer  exclaims  on
the  occasion,  4  it  was  written  in  the  book  of  fate
that  the  felicity  of  Ireland  should  be  short-lived.’
Grattan  had  been  modest  in  his  victory,  however
unscrupulous  the  means  by  which  he  obtained  it  ;
and  however  worthless  it  was  ultimately  to  prove,
in  the  eyes  of  the  Irish  nation  it  was  of  infinite  value.
Had  he  consented  to  a  compromise  he  could  not  have
named  a  reward  too  high  for  Rockingham  and  Port¬
land  to  have  thrust  upon  him.  Even  patriots  cannot
subsist  on  air,  and  in  allowing  a  modest  provision  to
be  settled  upon  him,  Mr.  Grattan  was  rather  confer¬
ring  an  honour  than  receiving  a  favour.  So  every
rational  person  must  have  regarded  the  grant  of  the
Parliament,  but  there  were  members  of  the  House  of
Commons  who  were  not  rational.  Was  Grattan  to
have  a  splendid  reward,  and  was  the  antagonist  of
Lord  Townshend,  who  had  fought  for  Ireland  when
Grattan  was  a  child,  was  Henry  Flood,  the  veteran
warrior  of  liberty,  to  have  nothing  ?  Mr.  Montgo¬
mery,  of  Donegal,  rose  to  remind  the  House  4  of  the
best,  the  most  able,  the  most  indefatigable,  the  most
sincere  man  that  had  ever  sacrificed  private  interest
to  the  advantage  of  his  country.  Mr.  Flood  had  re¬
linquished  the  most  lucrative  office  in  the  State  rather
than  desert  the  constitution  of  Ireland.’  He  moved
an  address  to  the  King,  to  restore  Flood  to  the  Vice-
Treasurer  ship.  4  He  would  not  move,’  he  said,  4  for  a

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND,

pecuniary  reward,  as  he  knew  the  right  hon.  gen¬
tleman  was  above  receiving  an  alms  from  his
country/

The  advocacy  of  Flood  did  not  require  an  insult  to
Grattan,  an  insult  the  more  uncalled  for  as  Grattan
was  at  once  poor  and  profusely  generous,  and  Flood
had  a  large  private  fortune.  The  House  listened  with
surprise  and  annoyance.  Colonel  Fitzpatrick,  the
Secretary,  seeing  how  bad  an  effect  Montgomery  had
produced,  replied  coldly  that  the  Yice-Treasurership
was  no  longer  vacant.  Montgomery  did  not  improve
his  friend’s  chances  by  his  rejoinder.  4  He  had  indeed
heard,’  he  said,  4  that  the  place  had  been  bestowed  on
a  certain  insignificant  and  contemptible  Sir  George
Yonge,  whose  ill-offices  to  Ireland  might  possibly
at  some  time  be  properly  rewarded,’  but  at  present
Sir  George  Yonge  might  be  required  to  give  way.

Fitzpatrick  placed  himself  in  the  hands  of  the
House.  If  the  House  pleased  to  vote  an  address  to
remove  Sir  George  Yonge  in  Mr.  Flood’s  favour,  he
said  he  could  make  no  objection.

But  now  up  started  Sir  George  Yonge’s  friends,
among  them  Sir  Henry  Cavendish,  a  noted  fire-eater,
as  the  reader  will  remember.  4  The  charges  against
that  gentleman,’  Sir  Henry  said,  4  he  would  prove
false,  false,  false,  absolutely  false  verbatim  et  literatim.’

F  olio  wing  so  immediately  on  the  grand  movement
which  was  to  give  Ireland  a  renewal  of  life,  this  petty
outburst  of  feeling  was  unlucky  and  unpromising.
What  followed  was  very  much  worse.  Had  Flood’s
pretensions  been  modestly  put  forward,  the  House
would  very  likely  have  supported  them.  Introduced
as  they  had  been  introduced  by  Montgomery,  his
claims  were  ignored  and  thrust  aside.  Those  who

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

347

had  once  hung  upon  his  lips  slighted  him.  He  had
lost  the  office  for  which  he  was  so  anxious.  His
advances  to  Portland  had  not  recovered  for  him  his
seat  in  the  Council,  and  he  was  childishly  disap¬
pointed.  With  a  transparent  jealousy  he  looked  for
flaws  in  Grattan’s  workmanship.  He  discovered
that  after  all  both  Grattan  and  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  were  the  dupes  of  English  cunning,  and  if
within  the  walls  of  the  House  he  counted  but  few
followers,  he  found  credulous  listeners  in  the  Vo¬
lunteers  and  the  mob,  whose  suspicions  were  ready
to  kindle  at  every  word  uttered  against  the  here¬
ditary  oppressors.

At  Ireland’s  desire  England  had  repealed  the  6th
of  George  I.  Mr.  Flood  insisted  that  the  repeal
was  nothing,  because  what  England  surrendered
England  might  resume.  He  required,  and  the  Vo¬
lunteers  echoed  his  demand,  that  the  British  Parlia¬
ment  should  pass  a  special  Act  renouncing  for  ever
all  pretence  of  legislating  for  Ireland.  It  was  ob¬
vious  folly,  for  one  Parliament  could  not  bind  its
successor.  An  Act  which  one  Parliament  passed
another  might  repeal.  Nay,  the  very  appeal  to
Britain  to  renounce  a  right  implied  that  it  at  pre¬
sent  existed.

4  If  the  security  which  the  honourable  gentleman
desires  be  a  British  statute,’  said  Grattan,  4  I  re¬
ject  it.  I  would  reject  Magna  Charta  under  a
British  statute.  We  have  not  come  to  England  for
a  charter  but  with  a  charter,  and  we  have  asked  her
to  cancel  all  her  declarations  made  in  opposition  to  it.
This  is  the  true  idea  of  the  situation  of  Ireland.
If  we  go  on  wdth  a  spirit  of  insatiety,  supposing  ideal
dangers,  we  may  find  food  for  perpetual  discontent.’

CHAP.

ii.

^1782."

June.

348

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

1782.

June.

Grattan,  too,  was  hereafter  to  find  food  for  dis¬
content  on  equally  imaginary  grounds,  but  compared
with  Flood  he  was  sane.  The  sense  and  nonsense  of
the  House  of  Commons  alike  condemned  an  absurd
outburst,  which  was  so  plainly  the  creation  of  spleen
and  envy.

The  6th  of  George  I.,  said  Yelverton,  asserts  the
power  of  the  British  Legislature  to  bind  Ireland.  The
repeal  of  the  law  is  a  renunciation  as  plain  as  words
can  make  it.

‘  Our  asking  a  renunciation,’  said  Bagenal,  with  an
illustration  too  familiar  to  Irish  experience,  1  would
be  the  revival  of  the  claim.  A  woman  is  violated.  A
man  usurps  the  powers  of  a  husband,  gives  out  she  is
his  wife,  lavishes  her  fortune  upon  prostitutes,  at  last
abandons  her.  Is  it  prudent  of  that  woman  to  sue
for  a  divorce  ?  Might  not  such  a  suit  be  pleaded  in
proof  of  a  claim  of  which  no  other  evidence  can  be
produced  ?  ’

Nothing  satisfied  Flood.  He  replied  with  a  tem¬
pest  of  words  which  raged  for  hours  and  ended  in  a
shriek.

1  Was  the  voice  with  which  I  utter  this,’  he  said,

6  the  last  effort  of  expiring  nature  ;  was  the  accent
which  conveys  it  to  you  the  breath  which  was  to
waft  me  to  that  grave  to  which  we  all  tend,  and  to
which  my  footsteps  rapidly  accelerate,  I  would  go  on ;

I  would  make  my  exit  by  a  loud  demand  of  your
rights.’

Oratory  is  the  saddest  of  efforts  when  the  audience
is  out  of  sympathy  with  the  speaker.  The  House
knew  Flood  and  knew  his  motives.  They  would  not
have  the  renunciation  in  any  form.  Leave  was  asked
to  bring  in  a  Bill  declaring  the  sole  and  exclusive

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.  3  4  9

right  of  the  Irish  Parliament  to  make  laws  in  all  cases  chap.

whatever,  internal  or  external,  for  the  kingdom  of  ^ ^ _ ,

Ireland.  Such  a  Bill,  had  it  been  passed,  would  have
given  Ireland  separate  foreign  relations,  and  a  com¬
plete  separate  code  of  commercial  policy.  The  House
rejected  it  without  a  division.  But  the  House  stulti¬
fied  itself  immediately  after  by  resolving  that  leave
had  been  refused  because  the  exclusive  right  of  legis¬
lation  in  the  Irish  Parliament  in  all  cases,  internal  and
external ,  had  been  already  asserted  by  Ireland  and
fully,  irrevocably,  and  finally  acknowledged  by
England.7 1

They  had  rushed  in  the  wild  haste  of  enthusiasm
into  what  they  called  constitutional  liberty ;  and
ere  it  was  a  month  old,  they  were  quarrelling  over
its  limits,  and  were  unable  to  say  clearly  what  rights
they  had  gained,  or  in  what  their  liberty  consisted.

In  the  midst  of  their  differences,  however,  they
had  not  neglected  important  work,  and  many  mea¬
sures — some  foolish,  some  excellent,  and  too  long
delayed— -were  swept  through  by  the  impetuous
torrent  of  this  memorable  session.  Poynings’  Act
was  shaken  off.  Heads  of  intended  Bills  were  no
longer  submitted  to  the  'Privy  Councils  of  England
and  Ireland  to  be  amended  or  approved  before  they
could  take  the  form  of  laws,  and  as  such  be  voted
upon.  The  Irish  Parliament  drew  its  Bills,  like  the
English  Parliament,  for  the  Crown  to  accept  or  reject.

The  process  was  simplified.  A  power,  which  had
been  abused,  was  abolished ;  but  a  precaution,  which
for  300  years  had  prevented  a  direct  collision  between
the  Legislatures  of  the  two  countries,  no  longer

1  Irish  Debates ,  June  19,  1782,  Commons'  Journals ,  Ibid.

350

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK  existed.  The  Writs  of  Error,  by  which  disputed
— *  causes  might  be  transferred  by  appeal  from  the  Irish
^une2*  English  courts  of  law,  ceased  to  be  issued.

The  Irish  House  of  Peers  was  made  the  final  court
of  appeal  in  Irish  cases,  with  a  result  which  will
be  apparent  on  the  first  important  question  which
came  before  the  jurisdiction  of  that  tribunal.  The
two  Catholic  Relief  Bills,  introduced  by  Mr.  Gar¬
diner,  were  carried.  Catholics  might  now  purchase
freeholds  like  other  subjects,  open  schools,  and  edu¬
cate  their  children  when  and  how  they  pleased.
Their  stables  were  no  longer  open  to  inspection,  or
their  horses  above  the  value  of  five  pounds  liable  to
be  seized  by  the  Government,  or  taken  from  them  by
informers.1  A  cheap  and  inonerous  system  of  re¬
gistration  was  adopted  for  the  Catholic  priests  ;  and
the  Acts  which  in  any  shape  interfered  with  the  free¬
dom  of  religious  worship  were  repealed.2  The
Habeas  Corpus  Act,  so  long  withheld,  was  conceded.
The  tenure  of  the  Irish  judges  was  placed  at  last  on
the  English  level.  Presbyterian  marriages,  so  long
and  so  bitterly  disputed  by  the  bishops,  were  made
valid  in  law.  The  Perpetual  Mutiny  Act,  fought
over  with  so  much  obstinacy,  became  biennial,  and  the
Irish  Parliament  acquired  constitutional  control  over
the  Irish  military  establishments.

Now,  at  last,  all  obstacles  to  the  Irish  millennium
were  gone  ;  every  measure  had  been  granted  which
the  people  had  demanded  as  necessary  to  their  hap¬
piness.  The  new  era  might  now  begin,  and  the

1  The  horses  of  Mr.  Wyse  were
once  taken  from  him  under  the
Penal  Act,  from  a  plea  of  some  an¬
ticipated  disturbance.  Wyse  the
next  day,  like  another  Jason,  drove

his  carriage  into  Waterford  with
four  bulls.

2  21  &  22  George  III.  c.  24.  s.
62.  Irish  statutes.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

351

business  of  the  year  was  wound  up  by  an  address  of
congratulation  to  the  Duke  of  Portland,  drawn  by
Grattan  himself.

‘We  have  seen/  so  the  address  said,  ‘the  judges
rendered  independent  of  the  Crown  ;  the  mutiny
law  abridged  in  duration  ;  the  jurisdiction  of  the
hereditary  judges  of  the  land  restored  ;  the  vicious
mode  of  passing  laws  in  this  land  reformed  ;  the  sole
and  exclusive  right  of  legislation,  external  as  well
as  internal,  in  the  Irish  Parliament  firmly  asserted
on  the  part  of  Ireland  and  unequivocally  acknow¬
ledged  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain.  We  have  seen
this  great  national  arrangement  established  on  a
basis  which  secures  the  tranquillity  of  Ireland,  and
unites  the  affections  as  well  as  the  interests  of  both
kingdoms.  The  name  of  Bentinck  will  remain  en¬
graved  on  our  hearts  ;  and  whenever  your  Grace
shall  withdraw  from  the  administration  of  the  affairs
of  this  country,  you  will  be  attended,  not  by  forced
and  jaded  benedictions,  but  by  the  manly  and  dignified
love  of  a  free  people.’

A  last  effort  was  made  by  Flood  to  disturb  the
general  harmony.  He  moved  an  amendment,  that
England’s  concessions  were  still  insufficient,  for  the
English  Parliament  had  still  power  to  revoke  them  ;
and  ‘  that  the  people  of  Ireland  were  growing  more
and  more  of  that  opinion.’  It  was  perfectly  true,
and  the  difficulty  rose  from  the  nature  of  the  case,
which  nothing  which  Mr.  Flood  might  do  could
remedy.  So  long  as  England  was  the  stronger
country,  prudence  and  respect  for  her  engagements
could  alone  prevent  her  from  asserting  her  superiority.
The  dead  could  not  bind  the  living,  and  each  genera¬
tion  would  have  its  own  view  of  its  obligations.  It

CHAP.

II.

7782^

J  line.

35&

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VI.

7 782?

June.

will  be  seen  that  the  Parliament  of  Great  Britain
humoured  afterwards  the  nervous  sensitiveness  of
Ireland  so  far  as  to  paint  the  lily,  and  to  confirm  its
acts  by  further  words  of  assurance  ;  but  no  addi¬
tional  promises  could  add  strength  to  the  engagements
to  which  the  honour  of  the  existing  representation
was  pledged  already.  The  Irish  Parliament  refused
for  the  present  to  allow  Mr.  Flood  to  alarm  it.  His
amendment  was  rejected.  His  attempt  to  supplant
Grattan  in  the  confidence  of  the  House  of  Commons
by  affectation  of  superior  discernment  was  a  decisive
failure  ;  and  unable  to  endure  the  spectacle  of  his
rival’s  triumph,  and  of  the  national  exultation,
which  he  had  not  been  the  instrument  of  producing,
he  left  the  country  and  went  to  England.

4  His  objects,’  wrote  Portland,  4  are  to  me,  and  I
believe  to  everyone  else,  a  perfect  secret.  Although
his  character  is  so  well  known,  I  think  it  my  duty  to
apprise  the  Cabinet  of  his  arrival,  and  to  give  it,  as
my  opinion,  that  his  ambition  is  so  immeasurable
that  no  dependence  can  be  placed  upon  any  engage¬
ments  which  he  may  be  induced  to  form.’ 1

Adoring  friends  took  charge  of  his  reputation  in
his  absence.  Beside  the  Duke’s  disparaging  com¬
ments  may  be  placed  a  sketch  of  Flood  presented  to
an  ungrateful  House  of  Commons  by  Martin,  the
member  for  James  Town.

4  Mr.  Flood  is  the  greatest  character  that  has  ever
adorned  this  country  ;  a  character  not  to  be  profaned
by  the  tongue  of  impious  men ;  whose  name  will  die
only  when  our  constitution  expires,  whose  tran¬
scendent  abilities  will  be  handed  down  to  posterity
while  the  history  of  this  planet  shall  be  read  ;  the

1  1  Duke  of  Portland  to  Secretary  Townshend,  August  9.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  1782.

353

present  adoration  of  this  age,  whose  death  will  here-  chap.
after  be  lamented  as  the  bitterest  calamity  with  « — ^ —
which  an  angry  heaven  has  visited  this  island,  whose
transcendent  merit  is  such  that  it  keeps  the  merit  of
every  other  man  at  an  awful  and  respectful  distance,
whose  abilities  are  of  such  a  godlike  nature,  that  I
protest,  if  ever  I  shall  stand  forward,  the  advocate
of  the  present  era,  I  shall  do  it  by  telling  my  son,
if  God  shall  ever  bless  me  with  a  child,  that  the
period  in  which  I  existed  was  preferable  to  that  in
which  he  may  live,  because  I  lived  in  the  same  era
and  had  the  honour  to  be  born  in  the  same  country
with  that  great  man.’ 1

Mr.  Flood  had  still  nine  years  of  public  life  before
him,  in  which  to  show  whether  his  admirers  or  his
detractors  had  formed  the  clearer  estimate  of  his
character.  Meantime  a  chapter  of  Irish  history  had
been  closed,  a  fresh  page  turned,  and  the  floor  swept
clean  for  the  opening  of  a  new  era.  In  July  Lord
Rockingham  died.  Fox  and  his  immediate  followers
retired  from  the  Cabinet ;  and  Shelburne  became
Prime  Minister,  with  William  Pitt  for  Chancellor  of
the  Exchequer.  The  Duke  of  Portland  having  done
his  work  was  glad  to  leave  the  scene  of  his  eventful
labours,  while  the  halcyon  days  of  hope  were  still
unclouded ;  and  Lord  Temple,  who  had  married  the
heiress  of  the  Nugents,  and  was  then  the  representa¬
tive  of  a  great  Irish  house,  was  chosen  for  the  first
Viceroy  of  the  emancipated  Ireland.

1  Irish  Debates,  1782.

VOL.  II.

A  A

354

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK  VII.

.  —

CHAPTER  I.

THE  CONVENTION.

SECTION  I.

book  Mr.  Grattan  had  created  a  nation,  but  from  the

VII

— haste  with  which  the  infant  had  been  brought  to
birth  its  limbs  were  half  formed,  and  its  constitution
critical.  The  Catholics  recovered  their  civil  rights,
but  Ireland  was  still  politically  Protestant.  The
connection  with  England  was  reduced  to  the  tie  of
the  common  sovereign.  The  Irish  Parliament  claimed
an  independent  power  of  legislation,  external  as  well
as  internal.  Was  Ireland  to  have  a  separate  foreign
policy,1  her  own  Ministers  at  foreign  courts,  her  own
consuls  at  the  ports  where  she  sold  her  merchandise  ?
Was  she  to  create  a  navy  of  her  own  to  defend  her
interests  on  the  high  seas?  Was  she  to  maintain
cruisers  to  protect  her  coasts  from  smugglers  ?  Or
if  she  was  still  to  depend  on  the  British  navy,  was

1  ‘  The  Irish  Parliament  was,  in
fact,  ambitious  of  having  a  voice  in
matters  of  peace  or  war,  and  hinted
as  much  at  the  time  when  peace
was  made.  “  If,”  Lord  North  pro¬
perly  replied,  “the  King  was  to

take  the  advice  of  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  in  matters  relating  to  war  aud
peace,  the  utmost  confusion  must  be
the  consequence.” — Lord  North  to
the  Earl  of  Northington,  November
3,1783.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

355

she  to  contribute  a  specified  sum  to  the  support  of  it,  chap.

or  was  she  to  be  left  always,  as  in  the  late  session,  _ _ \ _

to  4  her  own  generosity  ?  ’  Her  incipient  manufac-  178*’
tures  were  said  to  require  protection.  Was  she  to  be
allowed  to  lay  prohibitive  duties  on  competing  Eng¬
lish  goods,  and  if  so,  was  England  to  be  bound
under  the  terms  of  the  linen  compact  to  exclude  the
linens  of  Russia  and  Germany  from  her  markets,
while  she  admitted  the  produce  of  the  Irish  looms
duty-free  ?  Again,  was  Ireland  to  have  a  share  in  the
close  trade  of  Great  Britain  with  her  colonies,  while
she  refused  Great  Britain  a  voice  in  the  terms  on
which  the  trade  was  to  be  carried  on  ?  These  points  and
many  others  lay  within  the  legislative  limits  which
had  been  challenged  by  the  Irish  patriots.  The  Con¬
stitution  of  1782  would  have  possessed  more  vitality
if  the  period  of  gestation  had  been  prolonged  till  the
statesmen  of  both  countries  had  considered  and  pro¬
vided  for  them.  But  the  sanguine  Irish  tempera¬
ment  was  impatient  of  delay.  The  opportunity  was
seized  when  patriotism  was  at  fever  heat.  The  favour¬
able  moment,  once  lost,  might  never  have  returned.

Nor  was  it  only  on  the  side  of  the  relations  with
England  that  difficulties  threatened  to  arise.  The  Dun¬
gannon  resolutions  had  declared  that  the  King,  Lords,
and  Commons  of  Ireland  had  alone  a  right  to  pass  laws
which  Irishmen  were  bound  to  obey.  Yet  beside
King,  Lords,  and  Commons  there  existed  still  a  rival
authority,  created  by  the  Irish  people  themselves,
whose  function  was  to  keep  Parliament  to  its  work.

In  the  Phoenix  Park  were  seen  daily  exercising  the
Artillery  companies  of  an  army  which,  being  the  re¬
presentative  of  the  national  strength  of  Ireland,  was,
in  its  own  opinion,  the  guardian  of  her  liberties,  the

A  A  2

356

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  ultimate  expression  of  the  national  mind,  and  only

— responsible  to  itself.

i'82.  With  the  peace  the  excuse  had  ceased  for  the  ex¬
istence  of  the  Volunteers.  But  the  Volunteers  showed
ho  disposition  to  disband.  When  the  session  of  1782
ended,  the  number  on  the  rolls  was  130,000.  There
were,  perhaps,  50,000  with  the  colours.  The  Volun¬
teer  army  in  theory  was  purely  Protestant.  Catholics
were  still  forbidden  to  possess  arms.  But  the  Catho¬
lics  had  subscribed  liberally,  and  in  the  general
enthusiasm  the  opinions  of  the  rank  and  file  had  not
been  looked  into  too  curiously.  Thus  this  singular
body,  which  in  the  judgment  of  Irishmen  was  the
wonder  of  mankind,  and  had  raised  their  country  to
a  level  with  the  great  military  powers  of  Europe,  had
become  what  the  Parliament  was  not  —  a  substan¬
tially  national  institution,  and  possessed  and  pre¬
served  alone  the  confidence  of  the  people.

The  composition  of  the  force  deserves  more  parti¬
cular  notice.  It  had  been  raised  by  private  subscrip¬
tion,  or  at  the  expense  of  enthusiastic  individuals.
There  was  no  system  of  general  finance  ;  there  were
no  stores,  no  arsenal,  no  commissariat.  In  the
towns  there  were  lawyers’  corps,  doctors’  corps,
shopkeepers’  corps,  merchants’  corps,  artisan  corps.
The  cavalry  companies  were  mounted,  officered,
and  accoutred  by  the  country  gentlemen  from  their
household  servants,  farm  servants,  and  tenants,  and  the
cost  was  provided  by  mortgages  on  their  lands.  It  wras
said  in  Ireland  that  when  the  heir  of  an  estate  came
of  age  money  was  raised  to  pay  off  encumbrances.
The  money  was  had  and  was  spent,  but  from  some
cause  the  encumbrances  remained.  Light-hearted,
extravagant,  all  living  beyond  their  means,  the  gen-

I

THE  CONVENTION.

357

tlemen  of  Ireland  had  4  fewer  cares  than  any  people  chap.
in  the  world.’  1  Debt/  says  Sir  Jonah  Barrington,  • — i — -
4  gave  new  zest  to  the  dissipation  which  created  it.’  178“*
Adored  by  their  dependents,  so  long  as  they  prac¬
tised  no  economy  and  did  not  vex  them  with  im¬
provements  or  increase  of  rents,  they  lived  from  hand
to  mouth,  taking  no  thought  for  the  morrow;  while
the  humblest  peasant  on  the  estate  knew  no  law  but
the  master’s  word,  and  was  ready  to  defy  in  his  name
all  the  constables  and  bailiffs  of  the  land.  Out  of
such  a  following  a  Volunteer  regiment  was  easily
formed.  A  mortgage,  more  or  less,  mattered  little,
and  with  the  prospect  of  the  boundless  wealth  which
was  to  flow  into  Ireland  with  the  attainment  of
liberty,  was  regarded  as  a  promising  investment.

Each  gentleman  vied  with  his  neighbour  in  the
splendour  with  which  he  could  bring  his  corps  to  a
review.  Mounted  squadrons  wheeled  and  caracoled
in  all  the  hues  of  the  birds  of  the  tropics — green  and
scarlet,  white  and  blue,  gold  and  silver.  Too  curious
enquiry  may,  perhaps,  trace  the  last  effects  of  the
effervescence  in  the  disappearance  of  many  names
from  the  roll  of  the  Irish  gentry.  The  brief  blaze
of  glory  was  extinguished  in  bankruptcy.

Lord  Charlemont  commanded  in  chief ;  the  Duke
of  Leinster  in  his  own  province.  Guards  were  mounted
at  the  gates  of  these  two  noblemen.  Escorts  followed
them  in  the  streets.  Sentinels  stood  at  the  doors  of
their  boxes  when  they  visited  the  theatres.  Yet,
with  all  this  magnificence,  the  regiments  could  not
be  moved  two  days’  march  from  their  homes,  and
the  functions  which  they  combined  of  soldiers  and
politicians  necessitated  the  placing  persons  in  high
commands  who  were  better  in  debating  clubs  than  in

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  the  field.  The  colonel  of  the  Phoenix  Park  Artillery

VII  •  •  •  J

. — r— —  Corps,  for  instance,  was  a  Dublin  ironmonger,  named
Napper  Tandy,  who  had  pushed  himself  into  noto¬
riety  as  the  bullying  demagogue  of  the  corporation ;
small,  ugly,  ill-shaped,  with  no  talent  but  for  speech;
a  coward  in  action,  a  noisy  fool  in  council.  Homer
had  drawn  tapper’s  portrait  three  thousand  years
before  in  c  T  her  sites.’

The  corps  officered  by  the  gentry,  too,  might
have  been  found  wanting  in  time  of  trial  for  other

causes.

Mr.  Bagenal,  an  enthusiastic  admirer  of  Grattan,
had  been  among  the  most  active  promoters  of  the
Volunteer  movement.  Beauchamp  Bagenal  was  the
<  Admirable  Crichton  ’  of  his  day — the  preceptor  and
shining  example  of  the  rising  generation  of  aspiring
Irishmen.1  He  had  inherited  a  large  fortune.  He
had  travelled  in  splendour  on  the  Continent,  had
fought  a  prince,  jilted  a  princess,  run  away  with  a
Spanish  duchess,  broken  into  a  convent  in  search  of
a  nun,  made  the  Doge  of  Venice  drunk,  and  per¬
formed  fifty  other  exploits  no  less  extraordinary.
When  the  Volunteers  began  to  arm,  none  were  more
forward  with  help  and  encouragement  than  Beau-

1  He  was  the  most  notorious
duellist  of  his  day.  He  had  called
out  De  Blaquiere  only  to  try  his
mettle.  He  occasionally  submitted
his  younger  friends  to  the  same
test.  His  relation  and  godson,
Bagenal  Harvey,  who  was  hanged
afterwards  for  treason,  was  once
staying  with  him  at  his  house  at
Dunleckny.  The  old  gentleman
took  his  guest  out  for  a  walk  one
morning  in  the  park,  fastened  some
absurd  quarrel  upon  him,  produced
pistols,  and  forced  him  to  fight.

Bagenal  Harvey,  finding  there  was
no  escape,  did  the  best  that  he
could  for  himself,  took  a  steady
aim,  and  sent  a  ball  through  Beau¬
champ  Bagenal’s  coat.  Instead  of
shooting  at  him  in  return,  old  Ba¬
genal  exclaimed,  *  You  damned
young  villain !  you  had  like  to  have
killed  your  godfather ;  yes,  you
dog,  or  your  father,  too,  for  any¬
thing  I  know  to  the  contrary.  I
only  wanted  to  see  if  you  were
brave.  Go  in,  and  order  breakfast.
I  shall  be  at  home  directly.’

THE  CONVENTION.

359

champ  Bagenal.  J onah  Barrington  was  present  when
he  reviewed  the  Carlow  and  Kilkenny  regiments  in
his  park  at  Dunleckny.  He  drove  between  the  lines
in  an  open  carriage  with  six  horses,  a  bottle  of  claret
in  one  hand  and  a  glass  in  the  other,  drinking  the
officers’  healths.  The  officers  were  called  up  singly
to  the  side  of  the  carriage,  and  were  made  to  drain  a
tumbler  of  claret  in  turn  to  the  Volunteers  of  Ireland.
In  the  evening  there  was  a  ball  and  supper  at  the
house.  The  rank  and  file  for  whom  there  was  no
room  under  the  roof  camped  out  in  the  summer  night
with  unlimited  wine  and  whisky ;  and  in  the  .morn¬
ing  the  park  was  like  a  field  of  battle,  strewed  over
with  prostrate  bodies,  unable  to  move — 4  the  most
curious  exhibition,’  observes  Sir  Jonah,  4  which  could
be  conceived  by  persons  not  accustomed  to  those  days
of  dissipation.’

The  existence  of  a  large  force,  so  constructed  and
so  disciplined,  was  an  awkward  feature  in  a  young
Constitution,  not  the  less  so  that  the  political  self-con¬
fidence  of  the  Volunteers  was  on  a  level  with  their  esti¬
mate  of  themselves  as  soldiers;  and  that  they  were
aware  that,  except  for  them,  the  Constitution  would
never  have  come  into  being.  Business  was  at  a
standstill.  The  artisan  had  left  his  home,  the  farmer
his  fields,  the  lawyer  his  chambers — all  to  regenerate
their  country.  They  had  no  misgivings  as  to  their
own  capacity,  and  they  did  not  mean  to  go  back  to
their  ordinary  callings  till  the  country  was  regene¬
rated  to  their  minds.  As  Denis  Daly  expressed  him¬
self  to  Grattan —

4  The  Volunteers  are  ready  to  determine  any  ques¬
tion  in  the  whole  circle  of  the  sciences  which  shall  be
proposed  to  them,  and  to  burn  any  unfortunate  per¬
son  that  doubts  their  infallibility.’

I _

CHAP.

I.

17827

360

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VIL

1782.

SECTION  II.

The  armed  guardians  of  Irish  liberty  had  occasion  to
be  watchful.  The  Irish  Parliament,  in  its  first  exu¬
berance  of  gratitude,  had  voted  2,000  men  for  the
naval  service.  On  the  conclusion  of  peace,  many
ships  were  put  out  of  commission.  The  additional
seamen  were  unneeded,  and  it  was  suggested  that
5,000  out  of  the  whole  number  should  be  formed
into  regiments  for  service  on  land.  The  Argus-
eyes  of  the  Volunteers  discovered  in  the  proposal
an  insidious  purpose  of  restoring  the  regular  army
to  its  full  complement,  as  a  step  towards  dispensing
with  their  services.  Lord  Temple,  who  arrived
at  the  Castle  to  find  himself  sitting  on  a  volcano,
was  obliged  to  deprecate  with  the  most  passionate
earnestness  so  dangerous  a  scheme.1

A  people  on  the  watch  for  treachery  see  malignant
designs  in  the  most  innocent  accidents.  The  first
alarm  had  no  sooner  subsided,  than  a  fresh  aggression
set  the  country  in  a  flame.  Irish  causes,  it  had
been  agreed,  were  for  the  future  to  be  decided  in  the
Irish  courts.  An  outstanding  Irish  case  which  had
been  long  since  carried  by  appeal  to  England,  came
on  in  the  King’s  Bench  in  the  Autumn  Term  of  1782,
and  Lord  Mansfield  gave  judgment  upon  it.  The
Irish,  who  owed  the  recovery  of  their  privileges  to

%

1  1 1  do  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  chance  of  raising  a  further  body  of
such  a  proposal,  even  if  it  was  men  for  the  sea  service.  —  Lord
warranted  by  the  terms  of  the  vote  Temple  to  Secretary  Townshend.
— which,  in  fact,  is  not  the  case —  Secret  and  private.  September  21,
would  entirely  annihilate  every  1782.’  S.P.O.

THE  CONVENTION.

circumstances  which  no  longer  existed,  were  on  the
watch  for  symptoms  that  England  meant  again  to
enslave  them.  A  people  can  afford  to  be  calm  who,
in  possession  of  their  natural  rights,  feel  that  if  as¬
sailed  they  can  maintain  them  by  force.  The  Irish
had  no  such  confidence.  The  Volunteers  who  had
.already  taken  Flood’s  side  against  Grattan  on  the
insufficiency  of  the  late  concession,  shrieked  imme¬
diately  that  Ireland  was  betrayed.

Temple,  in  despair,  appeared  to  share  their  sus¬
picions.  4  Having  struggled/  he  said,  4  in  resisting
ideal  grievances,  I  could  not  explain  away  this  busi¬
ness.  I  do  not  wonder  at  the  ferment  into  which  all
ranks  of  people  are  thrown.  England  is  obliged  by
every  tie  of  natural  faith  to  complete  a  compact  which
is  clearly  incomplete.’  Something,  he  insisted,  must
be  done,  and  done  instantly,  to  compose  the  alarm,
even  if  an  Act  of  Parliament  had  to  be  passed  to
annul  Lord  Mansfield’s  decision.1  Innocent  of  the
faintest  design  to  disturb  Ireland’s  peace  of  mind,
Lord  Shelburne’s  Cabinet  professed  its  willingness  to
do  whatever  she  desired.  The  judgment  had  been
given  on  a  case  already  before  the  English  Court.
The  situation  could  not  recur,  for  writs  of  error  being
no  longer  issued,  no  more  cases  could  be  referred.
Yet  whatever  satisfaction  Ireland  demanded  they
were  ready  to  give.  The  advanced  patriots  asked  for
Flood’s  Renunciation  Bill.  Flood’s  4  Renunciation
Bill  ’  they  should  have,  and  Mr.  Townshend  intro¬
duced  a  bill  into  the  British  Parliament  for  4  removing
doubts  ’  and  affirming  the  final  competence  of  the
Irish  Courts  in  all  cases  whatever,2  William  Grenville,

1  1  Lord  Temple  to  Secretary  secret.’  S.  P.  O.

Townshend,  November  20.  Most  2  23  George  III.  cap.  28.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

Lord  Temple’s  secretary,  coming  over  to  explain  and
support  the  Irish  plea.

In  both  Houses  during  the  passage  of  this  Bill  the
position  in  which  Ireland  was  placing  herself  was
naturally  remarked  upon.  Lord  Aberdeen  enquired
whether  the  Irish  tie  was  to  be  no  more  than  the
Hanoverian,  or  whether  the  Irish  people  were  still
subjects  of  the  British  Crown.  If  they  were  to  be  on
the  footing  of  the  Hanoverians,  they  were  aliens  and
could  not  sit  in  the  British  Legislature.  A  union
was  hinted  at  as  the  best  solution  of  the  problem,
and  though  the  Renunciation  Bill  was  carried,  it  was
carried  against  the  opinions  of  Fox  and  of  the  Duke
of  Portland.

To  smooth  the  ruffled  waters  and  gratify  the
national  vanity,  Lord  Temple  instituted  in  March
the  new  order  of  the  Knights  of  St.  Patrick.  On  the
17th,  St.  Patrick’s  Day,  the  leading  members  of  the
Irish  aristocracy  were  installed  with  becoming  mag¬
nificence.  But  the  Volunteers  were  not  to  be  caught
with  gilded  chaff  or  compliments  to  the  peerage.
They  had  serious  business  still  on  hand.  Lord  Shel¬
burne  went  out  of  office.  The  Coalition  Government
came  in  with  Portland  at  its  head,  and  Fox  and  North
as  joint  Secretaries  of  State.  The  anomaly,  in
many  ways  absurd,  was  less  mischievous  as  it
affected  Ireland,  for  Portland,  who  knew  the  secret
history  of  the  transactions  of  1782,  was  resolute  to
give  way  no  further.  He  saw  that  Temple  was  made
of  too  soft  material  to  deal  successfully  with  an  un¬
reasonable  people.  He  recalled  him  in  spite  of  the
outcry  that  he  was  taking  away  Ireland’s  friend,
and  Robert  Henley,  Earl  of  Northington,  was  sent  in
his  place  to  open  Parliament  for  the  autumn  session.

THE  CONVENTION.

363

Under  the  Octennial  Act,  the  Parliament  elected
in  1776  had  still  a  year’s  life  in  it,  but  the  alteration
of  the  constitution  had  changed  the  relations  between
the  Legislature  and  the  Castle.  Their  increased  inde¬
pendence  enabled  both  Peers  and  Commoners  to  com¬
mand  higher  terms  for  their  support,  and  Lord
Northington  found  on  his  arrival  a  general  demand
for  a  dissolution.  The  old  system,  it  was  very  evi¬
dent,  was  not  only  to  continue,  but  to  flourish  with
added  vigour.  Larger  liberty  among  men  who  had
not  earned  it  by  their  own  virtue  meant  what,  under
such  circumstances,  it  must  always  mean,  larger  folly
and  grosser  corruption.

No  disguise  was  attempted,  no  affectation  of  turning
away  the  eyes,  while  the  bribe  was  silently  accepted.

4  I  am  met,’  Lord  Northington  wrote,  4  with  preten¬
sions  and  claims  of  various  natures  which  I  would
gladly  have  had  more  time  to  consider,  to  arrange
the  interests,  satisfy  the  expectations  of  the  claimants,
and  acquire  the  strength  which  Government  ought
to  have  at  the  opening  of  a  new  Parliament.  I  have
no  reason  to  feel  much  anxiety  with  regard  to  the
strength  which  is  to  be  obtained  by  the  support  of
considerable  interests,  as  I  have  received  flattering
assurances  of  their  good  disposition.’ 1

In  one  quarter  only,  and  where  he  had  least  looked
for  it,  the  Viceroy  encountered  difficulties.  The
boroughs  belonging  to  the  bishops  the  Castle  had
always  regarded  as  Crown  property,  4  as  providing
opportunities  of  bringing  into  Parliament  persons  con¬
nected  with  the  Government.’  The  new  ideas  of  liberty
had  reached  the  Right  Reverend  Bench.  The  Bishops

CHAP.

i.

17837

July.

1  1  The  Earl  of  Northington  to  Lord  North,  July  1,  1783/

364

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1783.

’Lily.

of  Ferns  and  Ossory  when  applied  to  in  the  usual  way
answered  4  that  their  seats  were  already  disposed  of.’
Was  the  English  lion  so  dead  that  even  the  bench
could  spurn  at  it  ?  Northington  wrote  for  instructions
4  in  so  extraordinary  a  case.’  4  Was  he  to  signify  to
those  prelates  his  majesty’s  disapprobation  of  their
conduct  ?  ’

4  The  King  is  unwilling  to  interfere,’  Lord  North
replied,  4  but  he  agrees  with  your  Excellency  that  it
is  extremely  improper  conduct.’ 1

A  Parliament  elected  under  the  influence  of  lords
and  gentlemen  who  were  seeking  visibly  their  per¬
sonal  interests,  was  not  likely  to  be  satisfactory  to
Ireland  in  its  existing  state  of  inflated  excitement.
There  had  been  a  bad  harvest.  The  potato  crop  had
failed  ;  work  of  all  kinds  had  been  neglected  in  the
mania  for  volunteering;  and  instead  of  a  millennium,
in  spite  of  the  Renunciation  Bill,  there  was  a  prospect
of  absolute  famine.  The  most  mischievous  conse¬
quence  of  a  really  unjust  legislation,  such  as  Ireland
had  suffered  under  before  the  removal  of  the  trade
restrictions,  is  that  it  teaches  people  to  look  to  poli¬
tical  changes  as  a  sure  remedy  for  what  is  amiss  with
them.  Ireland  had  really  no  industrial  grievance
left.  She  needed  only  quiet  and  industry  to  become
as  prosperous  as  Scotland  or  England.  Political
agitation  was  an  easier,  and,  as  the  Irish  believed,  a
more  certain  road  to  renovation.  Pitt  had  begun  to
speak  in  England  of  a  reform  of  Parliament.  Ireland,
too,  began  to  talk  of  reforming  her  Parliament.  The
Constitution  of  ’82  had  been  believed  to  be  the  crest
of  the  mountain  till  it  was  achieved.  From  the

1  1  The  Earl  of  Northington  to  to  the  Earl  of  Northington,  July
Lord  North,  July  1.  Lord  North  11,  1783.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

365

brow  of  tlie  ridge  another  peak  had  come  into  sight.
All  would  not  be  well,  indeed  nothing  would  be  well,
without  a  free  legislature  and  a  free  constitution.
The  Irish  House  of  Commons  was  undoubtedly  an
absurd  caricature.  If  Ireland  was  to  be  governed  by
a  Parliament  at  all,  it  could  not  be  other  than  a  cari¬
cature,  so  long  as  the  connection  with  England  was
maintained.  The  majority  of  the  Irish  people  desired
entire  independence.  An  assembly  which  fairly  repre¬
sented  them  would  reflect  wishes  which  could  be  real¬
ised  only  by  separation,  and,  therefore,  any  assembly
calling  itself  representative  must  in  a  greater  or  less
degree  be  an  unreality  so  long  as  the  connection  with
England  continued.  The  privilege  asserted  and  ob¬
tained  for  the  Irish  Parliament  in  the  late  changes
made  the  retention  of  political  power  in  the  hands
of  those  who  were  amenable  to  influence  more  than
ever  a  constitutional  necessity.  To  reform  the  House
of  Commons  was  avowedly  to  give  power  to  those
classes  who  demanded  objects  incompatible  with
dependence  on  the  English  Crown,  to  precipitate
internal  quarrels,  and  bring  about  either  total  separa¬
tion  or  a  forced  incorporation  in  the  Empire.  The
House  as  it  stood  was  formed  exclusively  of  Pro¬
testants.  The  experiment  of  an  assembly  composed
of  representatives  of  both  creeds  had  been  tried  and
had  failed.  The  House  was  formed  also  almost  ex¬
clusively  of  Protestants  of  the  Established  Church.
The  Presbyterians  were  not  disfranchised,  but  their
county  influence  was  small,  and  in  the  boroughs  the
members  were  returned  usually  by  the  corporations
from  which  they  had  been  hitherto  excluded  by  the
Test  Act.  Two  members  sate  for  each  of  the  32
counties.  The  boroughs  and  cities  returned  236.

CHAP.

i.

1783.

366

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  The  county  electors  were  free,  subject  only  to  the

_-ItTL— -  influence  of  the  landowners.  Sixty  borough  seats

1  IJQQ

were  partially  free;  i.  e.  the  electors,  if  careless  of
consequences,  might,  by  an  effort,  make  an  inde¬
pendent  choice.  A  hundred  and  seventy-six  seats
out  of  the  whole  number  of  three  hundred,  were  the
property  of  bishops,  peers,  and  commoners.  They
were  bought  and  sold  without  disguise.  The  per¬
petual  advowson  (if  the  phrase  may  be  used)  of  a
borough  was  worth  eight  or  nine  thousand  pounds.
A  single  seat  in  a  single  Parliament  could  be  had  for
2,000/.,  and  the  purchaser  avowedly  intended  to  re¬
coup  himself  by  the  sale  of  his  vote.  Under  such  a
system  the  Volunteers  discovered  that  the  victory
which  they  had  achieved  was  valueless.  The  Castle,
with  its  patronage  and  its  pension  list,  would  always  be
too  much  for  them.  Accident  had  enabled  them  to
obtain  free  trade  and  the  free  constitution,  but  the
conditions  favourable  to  them  might  never  recur.
The  net  would  again  close  round  them  and  they  would
be  slaves  once  more.  The  Volunteers  saw  the  danger
to  their  liberties  ;  experience  had  painfully  taught
them  that  England,  if  she  recovered  her  authority,
might  again  abuse  it.  And  they  were  possessed  with
the  flattering  illusion  which  was  pervading  the  air  of
Europe,  that  public  virtue  is  not  the  parent  of  liberty,
but  its  child ;  that  to  emancipate  a  people  from  control,
and  place  the  power  of  the  State  in  their  hands,  was
to  raise  their  character  to  a  level  with  their  new
duties,  and  unlock  all  the  gates  to  them  which  led  to
prosperity  and  happiness.

There  is  no  word  in  human  language  which  so
charms  the  ear  as  liberty.  There  is  no  word  which
so  little  pains  have  been  taken  to  define,  or  which  is

THE  CONVENTION.

367

used  to  express  ideas  more  opposite.  There  is  a
liberty  which  is  the  liberty  of  a  child  or  a  savage,  the
liberty  of  animals,  the  vagrant  liberty,  which  obeys
no  restraint,  for  it  is  conscious  of  no  obligation.
There  is  a  liberty  which  arises  from  the  subjugation  of
self  and  the  control  of  circumstances,  whihh  consists
in  knowledge  of  what  ought  to  be  done,  and  a  power
to  do  it  obtained  by  patient  labour  and  discipline.
The  artisan  or  the  artist  learns  in  an  apprenticeship
under  the  guidance  of  others  to  conquer  the  diffi¬
culties  of  his  profession.  When  the  conquest  is
complete  he  is  free.  He  has  liberty — he  commands
his  tools,  he  commands  his  own  faculties.  He  has
become  a  master.

It  is  with  life  as  a  whole,  as  with  the  occupations
into  which  life  is  divided.  Those  only  are  free  men
who  have  had  patience  to  learn  the  conditions  of  a
useful  and  honourable  existence,  who  have  overcome
their  own  ignorance  and  their  own  selfishness,  who
have  become  masters  of  themselves.

The  first  liberty  is  the  liberty  of  anarchy,  which  to
a  man  should  be  a  supreme  object  of  detestation.  The
second  liberty  is  the  liberty  of  law,  which  has  made
the  name  the  symbol  of  honour,  and  has  made  the
thing  the  supreme  object  of  desire.  But  the  enthu¬
siasm  for  true  liberty  has  in  these  modern  times  been
transferred  to  its  opposite.  With  a  singular  inversion
of  cause  and  effect,  men  have  seen  in  liberty  not  the
exercise  and  the  reward  of  virtues  which  have  been
acquired  under  restraint,  but  some  natural  fountain,
a  draught  from  which  is  to  operate  as  a  spell  for  the
regeneration  of  our  nature.  Freedom  as  they  picture
it  to  themselves  is  like  air  and  light,  a  condition  in
which  the  seeds  of  excellence  are  alone  able  to

CHAP.

i.

1783.

July.

368

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

m

7783?

July.

germinate.  Who  is  free?  asked  the  ancient  sage,  and
he  answered  his  own  question.  The  wise  man  who
is  master  of  himself.  Who  is  free  ?  asks  the  modern
liberal  politician,  and  he  answers,  the  man  who  has  a
voice  in  making  the  laws  which  he  is  expected  to
obey.  Does  the  freedom  of  a  painter  consist  in  his
having  himself  consented  to  the  laws  of  perspective,
and  light  and  shade  ?  That  nation  is  the  most  free
where  the  laws,  by  whomsoever  framed,  correspond
most  nearly  to  the  will  of  the  Maker  of  the  universe,
by  whom,  and  not  by  human  suffrage,  the  code  of
rules  is  laid  down  for  our  obedience.  That  nation
is  most  a  slave  which  has  ceased  to  believe  that
such  divinely  appointed  laws  exist,  and  will  only  be
bound  by  the  Acts  which  it  places  on  its  statute
book.

Considerations  like  these  were  too  homely  for  the
minds  of  practical  politicians  of  the  eighteenth  century.
The  world  was  growing  weary  of  its  aristocracies.
Political  reform  was  the  cry  of  the  hour,  and  it
must  be  allowed  for  the  Irish  enthusiasts  that  there
was  no  country  in  Europe  in  which  the  ruling  families
had  made  a  worse  use  of  the  power  committed  to
them.  The  further  the  secrets  of  Irish  administration
are  looked  into  the  more  uniform  the  spectacle ;  noble
lords  and  gentlemen  recruiting  the  fortunes  which
they  had  ruined  in  idle  extravagance  by  selling  their
political  influence,  while  their  special  duties  as  guar¬
dians  of  the  law  and  rulers  over  their  tenantry  were
not  only  undischarged,  but  not  so  much  as  known  to
exist.

Pitt  was  moving  with  his  own  ends.  The  Volun¬
teers  followed  the  example  for  theirs.  Delegates
met  throughout  the  summer  at  Belfast  and  Lisburn.

THE  CONVENTION.

369

Schemes  were  sent  out,  and  outlines  of  them  scattered
for  approval  through  the  southern  provinces.  The
first  convention  at  Dungannon  had  succeeded  so
brilliantly  that  a  second  was  determined  on,  to  be
held  at  the  same  place  on  the  8th  of  September.

As  a  preparation  for  this  meeting  an  address  was
issued  to  the  Volunteer  army  of  Ulster.  They  were
informed  4  that  the  Imperial  Crown  of  Ireland  had
been  restored  by  their  efforts  to  its  original  splen¬
dour,  and  the  nation  to  its  inherent  rights  as  an  inde¬
pendent  state  ;  ’  4  the  distracted  inhabitants  had  been
united  in  an  indissoluble  bond  through  an  unparal¬
leled  combination  of  the  civil  and  military  authority;  ’

4  it  now  remained  to  abolish  the  courtly  mercenaries
who  preyed  on  the  vitals  of  public  virtue,  and  prevent
the  return  of  venal  majorities  to  support  dishonour¬
able  measures.’

When  September  arrived  the  delegates  came  toge¬
ther,  representatives  of  270  companies;  and  this  time,
unprompted  by  Grattan,  they  set  out  of  their  own
accord  the  symbol  or  formula  of  their  new  faith.

1.  4  Freedom,’ these  philosophers  had  discovered,

4  is  the  indefeasible  right  of  Irishmen  and  Britons,
derived  from  the  Author  of  their  being,  of  which  no
power  on  earth  has  a  right  to  deprive  them.’  They
did  not  say  in  what  freedom  consisted,  or  where,  or
in  what  way,  God  Almighty  had  bestowed  it  on  them.
They  merely  insisted  on  the  fact  as  a  preliminary
article  of  faith.

2.  4  Those  only  are  free,’  they  went  on,  4  who  are
governed  by  no  laws  but  those  to  which  they  assent
either  in  person  or  by  their  representatives  freely
chosen.’  If  this  was  true,  minorities  who  protest
against  laws  passed  by  a  majority  are  either  entitled

VOL.  II.  b  B

CHAP.
.  I.

1783.

July.

370

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK
VI T.

1783.

September,

to  disobey,  or  they  are  deprived  of  what  the  first
resolution  declared  to  be  their  inalienable  right.

3.  4  The  elective  franchise  shall  extend  to  those,
and  those  only,  who  will  exercise  it  for  the  public
good.’  The  elective  franchise,  by  the  old  laws  of
Europe,  belonged  to  the  freemen  :  to  those  who  in
some  practical  department  of  life  had  proved  their
competence  as  masters  of  their  craft.  Who,  on  the
principles  of  the  Dungannon  delegates,  could  decide  on
the  fitness  of  the  electors,  or  the  meaning  of  the  words
public  good  ?

Yet  these  propositions  appeared  to  the  soldier
statesmen  at  Dungannon  to  be  axioms  which  could
form  the  basis  of  a  revolution.  By  the  light  of  them
they  framed  a  list  of  reforms  which  were  required  in
the  representation.  Till  these  reforms  were  granted,
they  insisted  on  a  refusal  of  the  supplies  by  the  House
of  Commons  ;  and  to  hold  the  House  of  Commons  to
its  work  they  concluded  to  choose  delegates  from  the
Volunteers  of  every  county  in  Ireland,  who  should
meet  and  sit  in  Dublin  simultaneously  with  the  Par¬
liament — a  second  legislative  assembly — to  guide,  and
if  necessary  to  controul  and  overawe,  the  constitutional
chambers.

Characteristic  as  these  resolutions  were  in  them¬
selves,  they  were  the  more  noteworthy  from  the  per¬
sons  with  whom  they  originated.  The  leading  spirits
of  the  second  meeting  at  Dungannon  were  Lord
Charlemont  and  Lord  Farnham,  Sir  Capel  Molyneux,
Colonel  Stewart  of  Down,1  the  Bishop  of  Derry,  Tom
Conolly,  and  Colonel  Montgomery.  Noblemen  and
gentlemen  of  high  character  and  station  could  deli-

1  Afterwards  Marquis  of  Londonderry,  and  father  of  Lord  Castle-
reagh.

v

THE  CONVENTION.

371

berately  recommend  the  constitution  of  a  military
convention  to  meet  at  the  capital,  and  dictate  mea¬
sures  to  an  unwilling  Parliament  in  the  name  of  the
national  army.  They  could  even  persuade  themselves
that  they  were  engaged  in  a  sacred  service,1  and  they
closed  their  proceedings  with  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme
Ruler  of  the  Universe,  and  with  special  thanks  to  his
minister,  the  Bishop  of  Derry,  the  steady  friend  of
Ireland.

CHAP.

i.

v — , — -

1783.

September.

1  They  described  the  convention  forms  of  a  free  government  would

1  as  a  solemn  act  of  the  Volunteer  be  a  curse,  and  existence  cease  to

army  of  Ireland  to  demand  rights  be  a  blessing.’
without  which  the  unanimated

bb  2

372

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

1783.

September.

SECTION  III.

Satisfied  with  the  results  of  his  communications  with
the  patrons  of  the  Irish  boroughs,  Lord  Northington
at  first  looked  at  the  proceedings  at  Dungannon  with
no  serious  alarm  ; 1  but  he,  too,  like  Temple,  consi¬
dered  that  concession  of  some  kind  must  still  be
the  rule.  Annual  Parliaments  were  desired,  and,
he  thought,  ought  to  be  allowed.  An  absentee  tax
would  be  again  proposed.  This  he  hoped  to  defeat,
but  it  was  important  to  secure  the  confidence  of  Par¬
liament  by  acquiescence  in  reasonable  demands.  The
Irish  sugar  refiners  persisted  in  asking  for  protection,
and  to  Northington  the  choice  seemed  only  to  lie  be¬
tween  moderate  duties  which  would  give  them  a  fair
profit,  and  duties  so  high  as  to  exclude  English  com¬
petition.  The  silk  and  woollen  manufacturers  also
asked  for  protection,  and  had  powerful  friends.  The
Viceroy  hoped  to  be  allowed  to  tell  Parliament  either
that  the  Irish  duties  on  English  silks  and  woollens
would  be  increased,  or  that  the  English  duties  on  Irish
silks  and  woollens  would  be  lowered.2

The§e  questions  had  been  foreseen  in  England,  and
ought  to  have  been  provided  for  when  the  constitution
of  ’82  was  conceded.  Ireland  meant  to  retaliate  for
the  restrictive  duties,  and  the  covenant  of  peace  was

1  ‘A  Parliamentary  reform  is
the  grand  subject  intended  to  be
proposed  by  the  delegation  of  the
V olunteer  corps.  There  can  be  little
room  for  apprehension  with  regard
to  the  fate  of  this  question  when

the  present  constitution  of  the  House
of  Commons  in  this  country  is  re¬
ferred  to. — The  Earl  of  Northington
to  Lord  North,  September  23, 1783.’
S.  P.  0.

2  Ibid.

4

THE  CONVENTION.

373

to  bear  immediate  fruits  in  fresb  quarrels.  Nor  was  chap.
an  armed  convention  so  light  a  thing  as  it  appeared  to  * — — ,
Lord  Northington.  Mr.  Fox,  when  he  agreed  re-  November
luctantly  to  let  Grattan  have  his  way,  had  determined
to  yield  no  further,  even  if  the  alternative  was  the
abandonment  of  the  island.

In  the  prolonged  existence  of  an  armed  force  inter¬
fering  with  the  Legislature,  and  owing  no  obedience
to  the  executive  government,  he  saw  an  anomaly
pregnant  with  danger.

4  The  situation,’  he  said,  4  in  an  elaborate  and  admi¬
rable  letter  to  the  Viceroy,  4  is  most  critical.  Unless
the  Volunteers  dissolve  in  a  reasonable  time,  Govern¬
ment,  and  even  the  name  of  it,  must  be  at  an  end,  and
on  the  event  of  the  present  session  of  your  Parliament
the  question  will  entirely  depend.  If  you  show
firmness,  and  that  firmness  is  seconded  by  the  aris¬
tocracy  and  Parliament,  their  dissolution  is  a  certain
and  not  distant  event ;  otherwise  I  reckon  their  go¬
vernment,  or  rather  anarchy,  as  firmly  established  as
such  a  thing  is  capable  of  being,  but  your  govern¬
ment  is  certainly  annihilated.  I  mean  by  firmness
the  determination  not  to  be  swayed  in  the  slightest
degree  by  the  Volunteers,  nor  to  attend  to  any  petition
that  may  come  from  them.  The  concessions  made  in
the  Duke  of  Portland’s  time  were  declared  sufficient.

The  account  must  be  considered  as  closed,  and  must
never  again  be  opened  on  any  pretence  whatever.  The
firmness  of  the  aristocracy  will  depend  on  the  degree
of  it  shown  in  the  Castle.  Peace  is  the  natural  pe¬
riod  of  Volunteers.  If  they  are  encouraged  to  enlist
after  this  time,  all  is  gone,  and  our  connection  with
Ireland  is  worse  than  none  at  all.  The  Volunteers
never  were,  depend  upon  it,  so  considerable  as  they

374

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  were  represented.  If  they  are  resisted,  I  am  satisfied
VIL  -  they  will  be  defeated.  If  they  are  suffered  to  carry
XT178?'  their  points  by  timidity  or  acquiescence,  it  is  as  much
over  with  English  government  in  Ireland  as  if  they
had  carried  them  by  force.  Ireland  has  more  to  fear
from  us  than  we  from  her.  Her  linen  trade,  which  is
her  staple,  depends  entirely  on  the  protection  of  this
country.  We  cannot  go  on  acquiescing  in  something
new  for  the  sake  of  pleasing  Ireland.  But,  situated
as  you  are  among  Irishmen — who,  next  to  a  job  for
themselves,  love  nothing  so  well  as  a  job  for  their
country — and  hardly  ever  seeing  anyone  who  talks  to
you  soundly  on  our  side  of  the  question,  it  is  next  to
impossible  but  that  you  must  fall  insensibly  into  Irish
ideas/  1

The  regular  force  in  Ireland  had  been  quietly
restored  to  its  normal  complement.  As  there  might
be  occasion  for  its  service,  Fox  wrote  at  the  same  time
to  General  Burgoyne,  who  was  in  command.

4  If,’  he  said,  4  either  the  Parliamentary  reform  in
any  shape,  however  modified,  or  any  other  point
claimed  by  the  Volunteers  be  conceded,  Ireland  is  irre-
trievably  lost  for  ever.  The  question  is  whether  the
constitution  which  the  Irish  patriots  are  so  proud  of
having  established  shall  exist,  or  whether  the  Govern¬
ment  shall  be  as  purely  military  as  it  was  under  the
Praetorian  bands.  If  the  Volunteers  are  baffled  they
must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  dissolve,  or  bring  it  to
an  immediate  crisis,  on  the  event  of  which,  supposing
Parliament  to  be  silent,  I  do  not  believe  you  can  en¬
tertain  a  serious  apprehension.  If  they  petition  in  the
most  humble  strain  it  should  make  no  difference.

1  ‘Mr.  Fox  to  Lord  Nortbington,  November  1.’ — Abridged.  Life  of
Grattan,  vol.  iii.  p.  106.

THE  CONVENTION.

375

There  can  be  but  one  measure  either  for  dignity  or
safety,  and  that  measure,  from  Sergeant  Adair’s  re¬
ports,  I  am  now  led  to  hope  could  be  taken.  I  mean  a
declaration  against  taking  into  consideration  the  re¬
quest  of  persons  met  in  arms  in  Dublin  for  the  avowed
purpose  of  obtaining  their  ends  by  force.  It  is  a  crisis,
you  may  depend  upon  it.  I  believe  that  a  proper
spirit  exerted  now  is  the  only  possible  chance  of  sav¬
ing  us  from  total  separation  or  civil  war,  between
which  two  evils  I  have  not  the  firmness  to  choose.’ 1

In  1780  free  trade  was  to  have  bound  the  two
countries  together  for  ever.  In  1782  it  was  to  be
the  repeal  of  the  6th  of  George  I.  and  the  new  consti¬
tution.  Now,  when  the  ink  was  scarcely  dry  upon  the
parchment  on  which  the  Acts  of  Liberation  had  been
enrolled,  England  and  Ireland  were  further  apart  than
before.  The  Irish  Parliament  had  met  before  Fox’s
letter  was  written.  The  Viceroy  had  opened  the
session  with  a  speech  which  said  nothing.  The  address
was  carried  without  opposition,  and  also  a  vote  of
thanks  to  the  Volunteers,  whose  convention  was  still
three  weeks  distant.  The  stillness  was  not  of  very  long
duration.  The  question  had  to  be  tried  in  the  new
House  of  Commons  which  of  the  two  competing  cham¬
pions  for  popular  favour  was  the  recognised  leader  of
Irish  patriotism.  On  the  28th  Sir  Henry  Cavendish
moved  a  resolution  for  a  reduction  of  expenditure.
Flood,  whose  mysterious  mission  to  England  had  led
to  nothing,  sprung  to  the  front,  and  violently  advo¬
cated  a  diminution  of  the  military  establishment.  The
meaning  was  obvious.  A  collision  was  possible  be¬
tween  the  Volunteers  and  the  regular  army.  There

CHAP.

i.

~i78^r

October.

October

1 4.

l  <

Mr.  Fox  to  General  Burgoyne,  November  7.’ — Abridged.  Life  of
Grattan ,  vol.  iii.

a

I  r

\

376  THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  were  now  12,000  British  troops  in  the  island,  and
- '  the  Government  might  rely  upon  them  to  resist  the

October,  dictation  intended  to  be  exercised.

Fox  and  Portland  depended  on  Grattan  to  support
them  in  their  present  difficulty.  They  had  stood  by
him  in  his  early  struggles  with  Lord  North.  They
had  received  distinct  assurances  from  him  that  the
concessions  of  ’82  should  not  be  followed  by  fresh
demands,  and  had  made  themselves  responsible  to  the
British  Parliament  that  Ireland  would  be  satisfied.
They  expected  him  to  assist  them  in  resisting  an
alarming  proposal  pressed  unconstitutionally  by  a  body
of  men  who  had  discovered  their  power,  and  were
prepared  to  abuse  it.  Grattan  knew  their  feelings,
and  recognised  his  obligations.  He  had  himself
once  encouraged  the  Volunteers  to  interfere  with  Par¬
liament.  It  was  on  him  that  the  duty  rested  of  now
bringing  their  presumption  within  bounds.  He  was
himself  an  ardent  reformer  ;  but,  enthusiastic  as  he
was,  he  did  not  conceal  from  himself  that  in  a  country
like  Ireland  a  redistribution  of  political  power,  pre¬
cipitated  by  the  bayonets  of  the  Volunteers,  would
lead  to  the  wildest  confusion.  In  spite  of  his  good
nature,  he  had  resented  the  attempt  of  Flood  to  steal
from  him  the  laurels  of  the  last  campaign.  He  dis¬
trusted  his  rival’s  honesty.  He  did  not  respect  his
intellect.

Flood,  whose  manner  was  affected,  had  commenced
his  speech  on  the  reduction  of  the  army  with  an  apo¬
logy  for  an  illness  which  did  not  appear  to  be  serious.
Grattan  rose  after  him  to  oppose  this  motion.  He
would  not  occupy  the  time  of  the  House,  he  said,
with  speaking  of  his  personal  infirmities.  He  reminded
Flood  that  when  he  accepted  office  under  Lord  Har-

THE  CONVENTION.

377

court,  he  had  supported  him  in  unbounded  extrava¬
gance.  At  a  time  when  England  had  acted  justly
and  even  generously  towards  Ireland,  when  she  was
still  feeling  the  wounds  of  the  late  war,  and  com¬
forting  herself  with  the  belief  that  she  had  secured
Ireland’s  friendship,  he  thought  it  inopportune,  unbe¬
coming,  ungracious,  to  press  upon  her  retrenchments
in  the  army.

Grattan’s  conduct  was  signally  creditable  to  him,
for  it  was  certain  to  be  unpopular.  Flood  saw  his
advantage.  Now  was  the  time  to  make  himself  first
in  the  affection  of  the  Volunteers.

c  It  requires  but  little  candour,’  he  said,  ‘  to  make  a
nocturnal  attack  on  my  infirmity.  I  am  not  afraid
of  the  right  honourable  gentleman.  I  will  meet  him
anywhere  on  any  ground,  by  night  or  day.  I  would
stand  poorly  in  my  own  estimation  and  in  my  coun¬
try’s  opinion  if  I  did  not  stand  far  above  him.  I  do
not  come  dressed  in  a  rich  wardrobe  of  words  to  de¬
lude  the  people.  I  am  not  one  who,  after  saying  Par¬
liament  was  a  Parliament  of  prostitutes,  made  their
voices  subservient  to  my  interest.  I  am  not  the  men¬
dicant  patriot  who  was  bought  by  my  country  for  a
sum  of  money,  and  then  sold  my  country  for  prompt
payment.  I  was  never  bought  by  the  people,  nor
ever  sold  them.  Give  me  leave  to  say  if  the  gentle¬
man  enters  often  into  this  kind  of  colloquy  he  will
not  have  much  to  boast  of  at  the  end  of  the  session.’

The  Speaker  did  not  interfere  with  this  harangue.
The  cries  of  4  Order !  ’  if  such  cries  were  raised,  were
drowned  in  the  applause  of  the  little  band  who  had
resented  the  elevation  of  Grattan  above  their  own
idol.  Flood,  who  had  sued  for  the  Castle  livery,
even  under  Lord  Townshend ;  Flood,  who  had

CHAP.

i.

1783.

November.

378

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1783.

November.

whined  to  Lord  Harcourt  that  he  had  parted  with
his  popularity  to  please  him  ;  Flood,  whose  vanity
was  dissatisfied  with  the  best’  office  in  the  Crown’s
gift,  and  now  at  last  had  only  stepped  to  the  front
of  the  patriots  when  he  found  Portland  would  not
be  duped  into  restoring  him  to  his  seat  in  the  Privy
Council  ;  Flood,  of  all  public  men  in  Ireland,  could
least  afford  to  challenge  a  retrospect  into  his  poli¬
tical  history.  Grattan,  though  his  sins  were  many,
had  not  deserved  to  be  taunted  with  the  name  of
mendicant  patriot.  If  Grattan,  in  his  reply,  laid  on
the  lash  too  heavily,  never  was  chastisement  more
wantonly  provoked.  He  rose  among  the  cheers  of
his  friends  in  the  House,  and  cheers  and  gibes
mingled  from  the  galleries.

‘  I  will  suppose,’  he  said — affecting  at  the  outset  to
put  a  hypothetical  case,  but  speedily  dropping  the
effort  and  speaking  directly  at  bis  antagonist — 4 1
will  suppose  a  public  character,  a  man  not  now  in
this  House,  but  who  formerly  might  have  been.  I
will  suppose  it  was  his  constant  practice  to  abuse
any  man  who  differed  from  him,  and  to  betray  every
man  who  trusted  him.  I  will  begin  from  his  cradle,
and  divide  his  life  into  three  stages.  In  the  first  he
was  intemperate,  in  the  second  corrupt,  in  the  third
seditious.  Suppose  him  a  great  egotist,  his  honour
equal  to  his  oath,  and  I  will  stop  him  and  say
(here  looking  full  at  Flood)  Sir,  your  talents  are  not
so  great  as  your  life  is  infamous.  You  were  silent
for  years,  and  you  were  silent  for  money.  When
affairs  of  consequence  to  the  nation  were  debating,
you  might  be  seen  passing  by  these  doors  like  a
guilty  spirit  waiting  for  the  moment  of  putting  the
question  that  you  might  hop  in,  and  give  your  venal

THE  CONVENTION.

379

vote;  or  at  times,  with  a  vulgar  brogue,  aping  the
manners  and  affecting  the  infirmities  of  Lord  Chat¬
ham,  or  like  a  kettledrummer  lathering  yourself  into
popularity  to  catch  the  vulgar.  Or  you  might  be
seen  hovering  over  the  dome  like  an  ill-omened
bird  of  night,  with  sepulchral  note,  a  cadaverous
aspect,  and  broken  beak,  ready  to  stoop  and  pounce
upon  your  prey.  You  can  be  trusted  by  no  man.
The  people  cannot  trust  you.  The  Ministers  can¬
not  trust  you.  You  deal  out  the  most  impartial
treachery  to  both.  You  tell  the  nation  it  is  ruined
by  other  men,  while  it  is  sold  by  you.  You  fled
from  the  embargo  ;  you  fled  from  the  sugar  bill,
I  therefore  tell  you,  in  the  face  of  the  country,  before
all  the  world,  and  to  your  beard,  you  are  not  an
honest  man.’

Those  who  have  witnessed  an  Irish  row  in  its
wildest  form  may  imagine  the  scene  which  followed.
Floor  and  galleries  were  full,  and  every  Irishman
was  on  fire.  Flood  sate  for  a  moment,  as  if  stunned.
He  rose  at  last,  stared  about  him,  and  stammered  a
few  words  which  were  lost  in  the  tempest  of  noise.
The  Speaker,  finally  compelling  some  kind  of  silence,
said  that  he  had  listened  to  the  contest  between  two
such  distinguished  men  with  inexpressible  pain,  and
entreated  Flood  to  sit  down.  Flood  obeyed,  and  pre¬
sently  walked  out.  Grattan  followed.  Each  consulted
their  friends,  and  a  duel  was  arranged  for  the  next
morning.  The  Sergeant-at-Arms  took  them  both  into
custody,  and  they  were  bound  over  to  keep  the  peace.
The  storm,  as  brief  as  it  was  furious,  died  away;  but
a  Parliament  in  which  two  leading  members  could
rate  each  other  like  fishwomen  was  unlikely  to  com¬
mand  authority  in  Ireland,  or  confidence  in  the  sister
country.

CHAP.

"~1783.

November.

380

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION"  IV.

book  The  Cabinet  bad  insisted  that  the  Volunteer  con-

- - r-^— '  vention  should  be  encountered  with  firmness.  They

November,  had  even  recommended  that  it  should  be  prevented
from  meeting  by  force,  if  nothing  else  would  serve.
Lord  Northington  was  a  coward,  and  he  had  cowards
all  about  him.  The  Volunteers  had  been  twice
thanked  by  the  House  of  Commons  as  saviours  of
their  country ;  they  had  been  courted  by  Temple
and  flattered  by  Colonel  Fitzpatrick.  Not  one  mem¬
ber  of  the  Privy  Council  could  be  found  4  to  advocate
the  idea  of  Government  interfering  to  forbid  the
meeting.’ 1

On  the  10th  of  November  Dublin  was  to  witness
the  presence  of  two  rival  representative  assemblies,
sitting  one  on  each  side  of  the  river,  and  dividing
between  them  the  allegiance  of  Ireland.  Every  pro¬
vince  had  responded  to  the  invitation  to  send  deputies.
Three  hundred  members  had  been  chosen  to  match
the  number  of  the  House  of  Commons,  the  moving
spirit  among  them  being  the  Bishop  of  Derry,  other¬
wise  known  as  Earl  of  Bristol,  who  had  received
the  thanks  of  the  Volunteers  at  Dungannon.

Frederick  Augustus  Hervey  was  the  most  singular
representative  of  the  class  of  bishops  who  had  been
chosen  to  preside  over  the  spiritual  destinies  of  the
Irish  people.  He  had  been  appointed  during  the
short  viceroyalty  of  his  brother,  and  as  long  as  the

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Northington  to  Mr.  Fox,  November  17, 1783.’

*

THE  CONVENTION.

late  earl  lived  he  had  been  known  only  as  an  eccen¬
tric  person  of  unepiscopal  habits,  who  had  built  a
vast  palace  in  a  wild  corner  of  his  diocese.  The  earl
dying  childless,  the  bishop  succeeded  to  the  title
and  a  large  fortune,  and  rather  from  love  of  excite¬
ment  and  vanity  than  from  personal  interest  in  Ire¬
land,  he  assumed  the  character  of  a  warlike  prelate
of  the  Middle  Ages.

He  was  connected  with  the  wildest  blood  in  the
country.  George  Robert  Fitzgerald,  of  Turlow,  near
Castlebar,  notorious,  even  in  those  reckless  days,  for
his  defiance  of  all  laws,  human  and  divine,  was  his
sister’s  son,  and  commanded  a  regiment  of  Volunteers
whom  the  bishop  had  raised,  with  a  second  regiment
whom  he  had  collected  himself  out  of  his  vagabond  de¬
pendents  at  Turlow.  George  Robert  had  ruled  as  ab¬
solutely  among  the  bogs  and  mountains  of  Mayo  as
the  Mac  Williams  of  the  days  of  Elizabeth  and  James.
Like  many  of  his  countrymen  who  essentially  re¬
sembled  him,  he  showed  little  in  his  exterior  of  the
real  man.  He  was  refined  in  manner,  and  soft
and  smooth  of  speech.  He  had  travelled,  and  had
rivalled  Beauchamp  Bagenal  in  the  variety  of  his
exploits  and  adventures  ;  and  he  was  so  often  in
scrapes,  from  which  only  sword  or  pistol  could  extri¬
cate  him,  that  he  wore  a  chain-shirt  under  his
clothes.1  He  had  inherited  his  temper  in  his  blood.

1  Dick  Martin  was  counsel  for
the  prosecution  when  George  Ro¬
bert  was  tried  for  ill-treating  his
father.  Dick  said  the  wretched
father  had  indeed  committed  many
crimes,  the  worst  of  them  being
that  he  had  begotten  the  prisoner.
George  Robert  glanced  at  him.
‘  Martin  !  ’  he  said,  ‘  you  look  very

healthy.  You  take  good  care  of
your  constitution  ;  but,  I  tell  you,
you  have  this  day  taken  very  bad
care  of  your  life.’  A  duel  followed.
Fitzgerald’s  first  shot  missed.  Mar¬
tin,  to  make  sure  of  his  man,
walked  up,  and  touched  his  breast
with  his  pistol  before  he  fired.
Fitzgerald  staggered,  from  the

381

CHAP.

I.

— . - -

1783.

November.

382

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  His  father  had  been  a  lawless  ruffian.  George  Robert,
' — -r- — '  thinking  the  father  lived  too  long,  shut  him  up  for
November,  three  years  in  a  cave  with  a  muzzled  bear,  and  in
this  condition  the  old  man  was  lying  at  the  time  of
the  Dublin  convention.1

These  two — the  bishop  and  his  nephew — were  the
principal  figures  in  the  scene.  When  the  day  came
the  whole  city  was  out  ;  the  footways  lined  with
armed  Volunteers,  the  windows  crowded  with  spec¬
tators.  The  Royal  Exchange  had  been  first  thought
of  as  the  place  of  assembly.  The  Rotunda,  at  the
top  of  Sackville  Street,  was  substituted  for  the  Ex¬
change,  as  more  central  and  convenient.  Thither
were  streaming  the  deputies  in  uniform,  the  streets
all  ablaze  with  scarlet  and  green  and  gold  and  azure.
Grenadier  corps  marched  first,  with  Irish  battle-
axes  and  muskets  slung  across  their  shoulders.
Behind  the  grenadiers  came  the  delegates,  two  and
two,  in  uniform,  with  side-arms,  each  wearing  a
green  scarf.  Then  the  barrister  corps,  brilliantly
decked  out  with  buttons,  carrying  for  a  motto,  ‘Vox
populi  suprema  lex.’  In  the  rear  came  Napper
Tandy,  with  the  Dublin  artillery,  the  guns  dressed
out  in  ribands,  each  with  a  scroll  about  its  muzzle,
saying  in  conspicuous  letters,  ‘  Open  thou  our  mouths,
oh  Lord,  and  our  lips  shall  show  forth  thy  praise.’
The  bishop  himself  entered  Dublin  with  the  state  and
manner  of  a  monarch,  as  if  he  expected  to  be  chosen

force  of  the  blow;  but,  to  Mar¬
tin’s  astonishment,  turned  round,
drew  his  second  pistol,  fired  at,  and
hit  him.  The  chain-shirt  had
stopped  the  ball.

1  George  Robert  was  hanged  a
few  years  after  at  Castlebar.  He
had  been  sentenced  to  three  years’

imprisonment  for  some  crime.  The
Marquis  of  Buckinghamshire  par¬
doned  him,  after  a  few  months’  de¬
tention.  He  went  down  to  Turlow,
and  immediately  afterwards  mur¬
dered  one  of  his  own  people.  For
this  offence  he  was  tried,  convicted,
and  finally  hanged.

THE  CONVENTION.

383

King  of  Ireland.  He  sate  in  an  open  landau,  chap.
drawn  by  six  horses,  magnificently  apparelled  in  • — i — -
purple,  with  white  gloves,  gold-fringed,  and  gold  Number
tassels  dangling  from  them,  and  buckles  of  diamonds
on  knee  and  shoe.  His  own  mounted  servants,  in
gorgeous  liveries,  attended  on  either  side  of  his  car¬
riage.  George  Robert  rode  in  front,  with  a  squadron
of  dragoons  in  gold  and  scarlet  uniforms,  on  the  finest
horses  which  could  be  bought  in  the  land.  A  second
squadron  brought  up  the  rear  in  equal  splendour,
and  thus,  with  slow  and  regal  pace,  the  procession
passed  on,  Volunteers  falling  in,  with  bands  playing
and  colours  flying,  the  crowd  shouting  4  Long  life  to
the  bishop  !  ’  the  bishop  bowing  to  the  crowd.

Passing  through  College  Green,  the  right  reverend
earl  paused  at  the  door  of  the  Parliament  House.

The  dragoons  halted.  The  trumpets  were  blown.

The  Lords  and  Commons,  who  had  just  finished
prayers,  came  out  to  pay  their  respects,  and  gaze  on
the  extraordinary  scene.  The  bishop  saluted  ;  the
bishop’s  guard  presented  arms ;  the  band  struck
up  the  Volunteers’  march,  and  having  thus,  as  he
supposed,  produced  a  proper  impression,  the  august
being  waved  his  hand.  The  horses  again  moved;  the
cavalcade  swept  on,  amidst  screams  and  shouts,  past
King  William’s  statue,  over  the  river,  and  up  the
broad  line  of  Sackville  Street.  As  the  carriage  ap¬
proached  the  Rotunda,  the  artillery  opened,  and  be¬
tween  the  guns  pealed  wild  hurrahs ;  the  delegates
were  entering  the  hall.  The  bishop  passed  in  after
them,  to  show  himself,  scattered  condescending  smiles
and  patronizing  words  of  encouragement,  and  then
retiring,  to  give  them  an  opportunity  of  electing  him,
as  he  expected,  to  the  chair,  drove  to  his  house,  with

384

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

' - - Y - *

1783.

November.

the  same  state,  to  entertain  the  leading  members  of
the  assembly  at  a  magnificent  dinner.

Lord  Northington  meanwhile  had  not  been  idle.
Though  afraid  to  encounter  the  V olunteers  with  open
resistance,  he  had  known  how  to  sow  divisions  among
them,  and  they  had  come  together  predisposed  to
quarrel  on  elementary  principles.  All  the  delegates
were  for  reform,  all  were  members  of  the  Estab¬
lished  Church ;  and  among  churchmen  at  least  a
moiety  were  determined  Protestants.  The  Bishop  of
Derry  and  the  extreme  party  were  for  Catholic  eman¬
cipation  and  separation  from  England.  Lord  Charle-
mont  and  the  country  gentlemen  who  acted  with  him,
though  enthusiastic  for  1782,  and  anxious  for  a  more
creditable  Parliament,  were  not  disposed  to  place
themselves  at  the  mercy  of  a  numerical  majority  of
Papists,  or  to  run  the  risk  of  a  repeal  of  the  Act  of
Settlement.  Both  the  Viceroy  and  Burgoyne  had
preferred  diplomacy  to  force.  They  had  discovered
the  line  of  division,  and  had  judiciously  operated  on
it ;  and  thus  when,  on  the  bishop’s  departure,  the
election  of  chairman  came  on,  the  choice  was  found
to  have  fallen,  not  on  the  right  reverend  English
nobleman,  but  on  Lord  Charlemont.  Successful  so
far,  the  V iceroy  still  feared  that  if  the  Catholic  mil¬
lions  were  roused  to  demand  the  suffrage,  or  if  they
were  ever  supposed  to  be  anxious  to  obtain  it,  a
majority  in  the  Convention  might  yet  press  it  upon
Parliament;  and  he  ventured  on  a  manoeuvre  highly
characteristic  of  his  cunning,  feeble  nature.  4  My
plan,’  he  said,  4  was,  by  means  of  our  friends  in  the
assembly,  to  perplex  its  proceedings  and  create  con¬
fusion.’  Sir  Boyle  Roche,  one  of  the  delegates,  a
light,  absurd  person,  declared  in  the  convention  on

THE  CONVENTION.

385

the  second  day  of  the  meeting,  that  he  was  commis¬
sioned  by  Lord  Ivenmare  to  say  that  the  Catholics
did  not  wish  to  press  their  claims  to  the  franchise,
and  disavowed  a  desire  for  an  immediate  alteration
in  their  position.  The  support  of  the  Catholics  was
vital  to  the  success  of  the  party  of  revolution.  Sir
Boyle’s  statement  was  received  with  confusion  and
astonishment.  The  Catholic  committee  in  Dublin
protested  that  he  was  not  speaking  for  them.  6  They
did  not  differ  so  widely  from  the  rest  of  mankind  as
by  their  own  act  to  prevent  the  removal  of  their
shackles.’  The  Bishop  of  Derry,  their  chief  advo¬
cate  and  champion,  was  loud  and  fierce  in  his  denials.
A  day  or  two  later  there  came  a  letter  from  Lord
Ivenmare  himself,  declaring  with  equal  distinctness
that  he  had  given  no  authority  for  the  use  of  his  name.

Sir  Boyle  being  called  on  to  explain,  gave  a  simple
account  of  his  performances.  He  had  observed  with
concern,  he  said,  the  court  paid  to  the  Catholics  by  a
knot  of  factious  politicians.  They  had  been  led  to
believe  that  the  resolutions  of  the  Convention  were
to  be  law,  and  that  its  first  act  was  to  be  Catholic
emancipation.  He  conceived  the  time  had  come  when
Lord  Ken  mare  and  the  more  respectable  members  of
the  Catholic  communion  should  disavow  these  violent
counsels.  They  were  in  the  country,  and  could  not
be  consulted;  and  supposing  himself  to  be  acquainted
with  their  views,  he  had  ventured  to  speak  in  their
behalf.

Though  he  assumed  the  responsibility,  there  can
be  little  doubt  that  he  acted  at  the  instigation  of
the  Viceroy  ;  and  Northington  may  have  felt  jus¬
tified  by  the  deferential  tone  invariably  adopted  to¬
wards  the  Castle  by  the  Catholic  nobility.  In  any

VOL.  ii.  c  c

CHAP.

~"l783T"

November.

386

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  other  country  such  an  extraordinary  piece  of  auda-
> — city  might  have  had  fatal  consequences.  In  Ireland,
November  s^range  to  say,  it  succeeded.  In  the  interval  of  un¬
certainty  the  Anti- Catholic  party  in  the  Convention
had  time  to  organize  themselves.  The  exposure
came  too  late.  A  committee  was  chosen  to  draw  up
the  intended  Reform  Bill.  The  Bishop  of  Derry  was
excluded  from  it.  Flood,  who,  with  all  his  violence,
was  still  opposed  to  the  Catholic  claims,  affected  ill¬
ness,  appeared,  when  forced  to  come  forward,  swathed
in  flannels,  and  talked  mysteriously  in  broken  sen¬
tences.  The  cry  of  the  Church  in  danger  was  still
powerful,  even  among  the  hot  spirits  in  the  Rotunda ;
and  as  the  Reform  Bill  took  shape,  it  became  known
that  the  admission  of  the  Catholics  to  the  franchise
was  not  to  form  part  of  the  scheme.

The  danger  was  not  over,  however.  Beyond  the
Convention,  there  was  still  the  Dublin  mob.  4  The
country  was  full  of  disorder,  madness,  and  inconsis¬
tency.’1  The  city  swarmed  with  enthusiastic  politi¬
cians,  who  unfortunately  had  muskets  and  cannon.
The  storm  outside,  if  it  raged  with  sufficient  violence,
might  yet  carry  the  Convention  off  its  feet,  and  the
Parliament  was  hesitating  and  frightened.  George
Robert  Fitzgerald  gave  Convention  banquets.  The
Bishop  of  Derry  rode  abroad  daily  with  his  escort  of
dragoons  amidst  adoring  crowds.  He  called  one  day
on  Lord  Charlemont  at  Marino.2  4  Things  are  going
well,  my  Lord,’  he  said,  rubbing  his  hands.  4  We
shall  have  blood,  my  Lord,  we  shall  have  blood  !  ’
George  Robert  tried  hard  to  gain  Grattan.  Finding
Grattan  cold,  he  invited  him  to  dinner,  and  placed  a
band  of  ruffians  in  ambush  to  make  short  work  of

1  ‘  The  Earl  of  Northington  to  2  Lord  Charlemont’s  villa  out-
Fox,  November  17/  side  Dublin.

THE  CONVENTION.

387

him.  Grattan  saved  himself  by  dining  that  evening  chap.
at  the  Castle.  > — i — «

At  length  the  crisis  came.  The  Convention  com*  Novera'ter
mittee  produced  its  bill,  which  Flood,  who,  like  many  20-
other  patriot  members,  had  a  seat  both  in  the  Ro¬
tunda  and  the  House  of  Commons,  was  to  introduce
to  Parliament.  The  Irish  Constitution  was  on  its
trial.  No  matter  how  limited  the  present  demands
of  the  Convention,  the  principle  was  at  stake.  In
which  of  the  two  assemblies  now  sitting  in  Dublin
lay  the  real  power  of  legislating  for  Ireland?  Flood
was  now  at  the  height  of  his  glory.  In  him,  and
no  longer  in  Grattan,  were  centred  the  hopes  of  Ire¬
land’s  patriots.  On  the  29th  of  November  he  rose  to
discharge  his  task.  The  galleries  were  crowded  with
the  fiercest  of  the  mob.  Dangerous-looking  groups  of
ruffians  lounged  about  the  doors.  Conscious  of  the
danger  of  scattering  fire  in  the  midst  of  such  com¬
bustible  material,  Flood  was  in  manner  studiously
quiet,  and  the  matter  of  what  he  proposed  was  mode¬
rate.  The  franchise  in  city  or  borough  was  to  be
confined  to  Protestant  freeholders  and  leaseholders.

The  close  boroughs,  whose  representatives  were  at
present  returned  by  the  Corporations,  were  to  be
abolished;  and  members  were  to  swear,  on  taking
their  seats,  that  they  had  used  no  corrupt  means
to  obtain  them.  Colonel  Brownlow  seconded  the
motion,  and  then  Yelverton,  who  was  now  Attorney-
General,  rose  for  the  Government.

No  suspicion  could  rest  on  the  patriotism  of  Yel¬
verton,  who  had  carried  the  modifications  of  Poyn-
ings’  Act.  He  refused  to  enter  into  the  merits  of  the
Bill.  It  was  sufficient  for  him  that  it  originated
with  a  body  of  armed  men  external  to  the  House.

c  c  2

LI

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

4  We  sit  not  here,’  he  said,  ‘to  register  the  edicts
of  another  Assembly,  or  receive  propositions  at  the
point  of  the  bayonet.  When  the  Volunteers  form
themselves  into  a  debating  society,  and  with  that
rude  instrument,  the  bayonet,  probe  and  explore  the
Constitution,  my  respect  for  them  is  destroyed.  It
is  vain,  whatever  be  pretended,  to  shut  our  eyes  to
what  every  one  has  seen  and  heard — armed  men
walking  bareheaded  through  the  streets  under  a
military  escort,  courting  the  smiles  of  the  multitude,
meeting  in  that  Pantheon  of  divinities  the  Rotunda,
forming  committees  and  sub-committees,  receiving
reports  and  petitions,  and  going  through  the  mockery
of  a  Parliament.  .  .  .  Is  this  a  time  to  alter  the

Constitution  ?  Will  the  armed  associations,  wise  as
they  may  be,  be  able  to  form  a  better  ?  Before  they
have  for  a  single  Session  entered  on  the  enjoyment  of
it,  like  children  they  throw  away  the  bauble  for  which,
with  the  eagerness  of  infantine  caprice,  they  have
struggled.  I  say  to  the  Volunteers,  you  shall  not
throw  from  you  the  blessings  which  you  possess.
Cultivate  your  prosperity.  Enjoy  the  fruits  of  your
virtue.  Beat  your  swords  into  ploughshares.  Return
to  your  occupations.  Leave  legislation  in  those
hands  in  which  the  laws  have  placed  it.  .  .  .  Our
preservation  depends  on  the  vote  we  shall  now
give.  We  are  on  a  precipice.  To  recede  a  step
more  plunges  us  into  ruin.’

The  debate  which  followed  was  said  to  be  the
hottest  ever  heard  within  the  walls  of  the  Irish
House  of  Commons.  Hely  Hutchinson,  Scott,
Conolly,  William  Ponsonbv,  Bowes  Daly,  and  Sir
John  Parnell  spoke  for  the  Government.  Grattan,
notwithstanding  George  Robert’s  designs  on  him,

THE  CONVENTION.

389

and  though  he  was  supporting  Flood,  remained  true
to  his  general  principles.  He  approved  of  Reform,
and  he  said  so.  Curran,  who  had  just  entered  Par¬
liament,  and  sate  with  Flood  for  the  borough  of
Kilbeggan,1  made  his  maiden  speech  on  the  same  side.
He  said  little  ;  but  that  little  was  clear,  and  to  the
purpose.  Flood  declared  that  4  the  honour  of  the
peerage  might  be  obtained  by  any  ruffian  who
possessed  borough  interest.7  Bowes  Daly  told  the
Volunteers  in  rejoinder  that  they  were  rushing  on
destruction.  4  There  was  a  turbulent  demagogue
among  them  who  was  urging  them  to  their  disgrace.’
As  the  storm  raved  louder,  passion  grew  more  care¬
less  in  its  language,  and  at  last  Flood  exclaimed,
that  4  if  the  conduct  of  the  House  that  night  should
create  dissatisfaction  in  the  Volunteers,  that  body
and  the  Parliament  might  be  committed  against  each
other,  and  the  public  peace  be  disturbed.’

Here  at  last  was  a  threat,  and  nowFitzgibbon  rose
to  show  for  the  first  time  of  what  stuff  he  was  made.
Once  already  he  had  startled  the  propriety  of  the
House  by  moving,  when  they  were  flattering  the
Volunteers,  for  the  production  of  a  censure  which
had  been  passed  upon  that  body  but  a  few  months
before.  He  had  withdrawn  his  motion,  and  they  had
forgotten  him.  They  were  not  likely  to  forget  him
any  more.

He  was  a  small,  delicately -made  man,  with  a  hand¬
some  oval  face,  a  bold  grey  eye,  a  manner  so  haughty
that  patriot  members  complained  of  his  intolerable
insolence.  His  father’s  death  left  him  in  possession
of  the  estate  in  Limerick,  with  seven  thousand  a

CHAP.

i.

V _ _

1783.

November

29.

1  Nearly  all  the  patriots  in  the  roughs — so  opposite  was  fact  to

Irish  Parliament  sate  for  close  bo-  theory.

-

390

BOOK

VII.

1783.

November

29.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

year,  independent  of  his  practice  at  the  bar.  He
was  the  most  just,  as  well  as  the  most  determined,  of
landlords;  and  he  was  loved  and  trusted  by  his
tenants  as  profoundly  as  he  was  afterwards  hated  by
demagogues  and  agitators.  His  speech  in  this  memo¬
rable  debate  was  a  declaration  of  purpose,  an  intima¬
tion  clearly  expressed  to  friend  and  foe  of  the  part
which  he  meant  to  play  in  the  politics  of  Ireland.  His
father  had  trained  him  in  an  honourable  contempt  for
the  devices  by  which  the  Castle  authority  had  been
sustained.1  He  had  supported  the  popular  cause
against  England  when  he  considered  Ireland  was  ask¬
ing  her  due,  careless  what  Viceroys  thought  of  him.
He  had  fought  on  the  other  side  against  extravagant
demands,  indifferent  to  the  clamours  of  the  patriots.
He  had  sought  for  no  preferment.  Preferment  was
now  seeking  him.  He  was  already  named  for  Attorney-
General  on  the  approaching  promotion  of  Yelverton  to
the  place  of  Chief  Baron,  but  he  maintained  his  per¬
sonal  independence,  and  neither  spoke  nor  voted  but
according  to  his  own  conviction.  He  rose  at  the  close
of  the  debate,  and  began  by  sketching  the  origin  of
the  Reform  movement,  tracing  it  to  a  democratic
society  in  England,  and  thence  to  corresponding  asso¬
ciations  at  Belfast.  He  alluded  to  the  first  resolu¬
tions  at  Dungannon,  and  pointed  to  the  Rotunda
convention  as  the  result  of  having  submitted  to  the
Volunteers’  dictation.  Then,  coming  to  the  point,
he  said —

4  I  do  not  oppose  the  introduction  of  this  Bill
because  it  is  replete  with  absurdities.  I  oppose  it

1  Old  Fitzgibbon  once  said  of  Now-a-days  the  wages  of  sin  is
the  Pension  List,  ‘  I  have  read  Ireland.’
that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.

i.

THE  CONVENTION.

391

because  it  comes  to  us  under  the  mandate  of  a
military  congress.  Gentlemen  say  it  is  dangerous  to
commit  the  Parliament  and  the  Volunteers.  I  know
it  is  dangerous.  I  know  the  man  that  does  it  should
answer  for  the  crime  with  his  head.  But  I  know  the
force  of  the  law  is  sufficient  to  crus  h  them  to  atoms ;
and  for  one,  I  say,  I  do  not  think  life  worth  having
at  the  will  of  an  armed  demagogue.  If  ever  there
was  an  occasion  that  called  on  every  man  possess¬
ing  one  sentiment  of  liberty  to  exert  it  in  defence  of
the  Constitution,  it  is  this,  it  is  the  present,  which
calls  on  us  to  spurn  this  Bill  away.  There  is  a  cir¬
cumstance  of  idle  babble  gone  forth  which  only
could  have  issued  from  the  cells  of  Bedlam — that  if
this  Bill  is  rejected  some  wretched  fool  will  refuse  to
pay  taxes.  I  have  also  heard  that  a  House  of  Par¬
liament  is  to  be  built  at  Dungannon,  and  that  we  are
to  have  annual  sessions  of  conventions  to  regulate
the  business  of  the  nation.  Gentlemen  may  call  this
liberty  if  they  please.  I  call  it  the  worst  kind  of
tyranny.  To  put  an  end  to  it  at  once,  I  am  for  reject¬
ing  the  motion  for  leave  to  introduce  a  Bill.’

Yelverton  had  spoken  with  dignity.  Fitzgibbon
spoke  in  a  tone  peculiar,  and  perhaps  unexampled,  in
the  country  to  which  he  belonged.  There  had  grown
out  of  the  Irish  race  by  some  freak  of  nature  a  man
who  had  no  personal  object  of  his  own  which  he
wished  to  serve,  who  detested  anarchy,  who  despised
as  well  as  detested  the  cant  which  passed  under  the
name  of  patriotism,  who  combined  with  high  intel¬
lectual  power  the  most  dauntless  personal  courage.

Well  Fitzgibbon  knew  that  Irish  sedition  would
never  forgive  his  words.  Amidst  yells  and  sarcasms
from  House  and  gallery  the  division  was  taken,  and

CHAP.

"  1783r

November

29.

392

THE  ENGLISH  IN  ICELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1783.

November.

leave  to  introduce  the  Bill  was  refused  by  a  majority
of  two  to  one.1

Following  up  his  success,  as  a  further  lesson  to  the
Praetorians  at  the  Rotunda,  Yelverton  then  moved
4  that  it  is  now  necessary  to  declare  that  this  House
will  maintain  its  rights  and  privileges  against  all
encroachments.’  This,  too,  was  carried  by  an  equally
large  majority,  and  at  once  the  danger  was  over.  As
invariably  happens  in  Ireland,  the  spectre  of  rebel¬
lion  has  but  to  be  boldly  confronted  to  fade  and  dis¬
appear.  General  Burgoyne  had  taken  precautions
to  preserve  the  peace  of  the  city.  The  Volunteers
did  not  care  to  measure  strength  with  him.

The  Convention  had  remained  in  session  till  the
result  of  the  first  division  was  known.  It  was  a
Saturday  night.  Lord  Charlemont,  who  was  in  the
chair,  moved  that  they  should  adjourn  till  Monday.
On  Monday  morning  the  delegates  reassembled,  and
a  Captain  Moore  rose  to  complain  of  the  insults
which  had  been  passed  upon  them  by  Fitzgibbon.
Lord  Charlemont  at  once  flattered  the  assembly  and
stopped  the  discussion  by  telling  Moore  he  was  out
of  order  in  alluding  to  what  had  passed  in  another
place.  At  the  Bishop  of  Derm’s  request,  Flood  then
described  the  reception  and  the  fate  of  their  Bill  in
the  House  of  Commons.  Earnestly  deprecating  vio¬
lence,  he  proposed  that  there  should  be  an  address
from  the  Irish  nation  to  the  King,  which  he  offered
himself  to  present;  and  then  mildly  and  innocently
the  great  Convention,  ushered  into  existence  amidst
the  thunders  of  cannon  to  command  the  destinies  of
Ireland,  adjourned  sine  die  and  closed  its  vainglorious
career.

1  157  to  77.

THE  CONVENTION.

393

The  Bishop  of  Derry  only  was  unable  to  sit  down
under  his  defeat.  Delivered  from  irresolute  compa¬
nions,  and  now  unchallenged  chief  of  the  Volunteers,

4  the  Bishop,’  it  was  said,  4  rose  like  a  phoenix  out  of
the  ashes  of  the  Convention.’  This  absurd  being  still
clung  to  the  dream  of  a  separate  Ireland  of  which  he
was  to  be  King,  and  his  admirers  in  the  North  fooled
him  to  the  top  of  his  bent.  On  his  return  to  Ulster
‘the  Bill  of  Bights  Battalion  ’  presented  him  with  an
address  under  arms.  They  said  they  had  seen  with
indignation  the  treatment  of  their  delegates.  4  They
hoped  still,  under  the  auspices  of  his  lordship,  to  cleanse
the  Augean  stable,  those  noisome  stalls  of  venality  and
corruption  in  Parliament.’  The  Bishop  replied  that
4  the  spirit  of  freedom,  like  a  Promethean  tire,  was  now
animating  the  lifeless  mass  of  Irishmen.’  He  appealed
to  the  Catholics.  He  appealed  to  the  Americanised
Presbyterians.  4  These  respectable  citizens,’  he  said,

‘  were  far  more  numerous  than  their  oppressors.’  4  They
had  crouched  hitherto  under  the  iron  rod  from  a  dread
of  wounding  their  country  through  the  side  of  their
tyrants.’  4  Gentlemen  of  the  Bill  of  Bights  Batta¬
lion,’  he  concluded,  4 1  summon  you  to  consistency.
Tyranny  is  not  Government,  and  allegiance  is  due  only
to  protection.’

The  Battalion  swore  they  would  support  their  Con¬
stitution,  or  be  buried  under  its  ruins.  Last,  strangest,
and  most  grotesque  feature  in  the  history  of  the  Irish
Volunteers  !  The  emancipators  of  their  country  chose
for  their  favourite  leader  a  British  Earl  and  a  Bishop
of  the  Irish  Established  Church.

CHAP.

i.

1783.

November.

394

BOOK

VII.

N— - y -

1783.

December.

\

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  y.

The  shadowy  giant  of  the  Convention  having  faded
into  vapour,  the  Parliament,  relieved  of  its  presence,
proceeded  with  its  ordinary  work.  In  December
Mr.  Molyneux  moved  once  more  the  threatened  Ab¬
sentee  Tax  of  four  shillings  in  the  pound  on  all
rents  remitted  out  of  the  kingdom  to  non-resident
landowners.  A  free  Irish  Legislature,  alive  to  the
real  causes  of  Ireland’s  misfortunes,  would  have  wel¬
comed  a  measure  which  had  been  almost  carried  in
the  days  of  its  bondage.  In  the  pursuit  of  imaginary
triumphs  her  politicians  had  lost  the  power  of  recog¬
nizing  their  real  foe.  Northington  had  doubtless
been  at  work  under  the  surface.  There  was  a  cry
that  such  a  tax  would  lower  the  value  of  lands — that
it  would  divide  the  countries  now  so  happily  united.
Sir  John  Blaquiere  reminded  the  House  of  the  cir¬
cumstances  under  which  an  Absentee  Tax  had  been
proposed  when  he  was  himself  Secretary.  c  Every
voice  had  been  at  first  in  its  favour.  He  went  him¬
self  to  England  to  solicit  it  as  a  boon  from  Lord
North’s  Cabinet.  He  urged  his  suit  indecently,  he
said,  and  with  unbecoming  importunity,  and  had
wrung  from  his  chiefs  a  reluctant  consent.  He  re¬
turned  full  of  joy  to  propose  it  as  a  Government
measure,  and  the  gentlemen  who  had  been  so  eager
turned  their  backs  on  him.  He  had  divided  in  a
minority  of  14.’

It  appeared  that  the  Constitution  of  ’82  had  recon¬
ciled  the  patriots  to  this  their  deepest  grievance.

THE  CONVENTION.

395

The  minority  of  14  became  now  a  minority  of  162.
The  House  divided  against  Molyneux,  and  in  1783
the  Absentee  Tax  was  rejected  by  184  votes  to  22.

The  autumn  session  wound  up  with  the  passing  of
the  Supply  Bills.  The  Coalition  Ministry  in  Eng¬
land  was  dissolved,  and  Pitt  came  to  the  helm  to  com¬
pose  the  crisis  which  had  been  provoked  by  the  Ame¬
rican  disaster.  Northington,  who  had  made  himself
popular  in  Ireland,  was  invited  to  remain,  but  de¬
clined,  and  the  young  Duke  of  Rutland,  then  only
29  years  old,  who  died  too  soon  to  display  qualities
in  a  larger  sphere  which  might  have  given  him  a
place  in  the  history  of  the  empire,  came  over  to  serve
his  political  apprenticeship  as  Lord-Lieutenant  of
Ireland.  The  excitement  of  ’82  was  over.  The
Convention  had  alarmed  the  timidity  and  disgusted
the  intelligence  of  the  higher  classes,  and  with  the
Duke,  ‘the  enemies  of  Irish  liberty,’  as  they  are
termed  in  patriotic  histories,  came  back  into  power.
Yelverton1  was  made  Chief  Baron  and  Lord  Avon-
more.  Scott  became  Chief  Justice  and  Earl  of
Clonmel.  Fitzgibbon  as  Attorney-General  was  the
ruling  spirit  in  the  practical  Administration.  The
revenue  was  still  short  of  the  expenditure.  Three
hundred  thousand  pounds  had  been  borrowed  to  meet
the  now  constant  deficit.  A  bad  harvest  and  the
Volunteer  insanity  had  injured  trade,  and  the  arti¬
sans  of  Dublin  were  out  of  work,  starving  and  muti¬
nous.  The  exasperation  against  British  soldiers  had
been  aggravated  by  the  failure  of  the  Convention.
General  Luttrell  had  to  inform  the  House  of  Com¬
mons  that  6  there  was  now  practised  in  Ireland,  in  the
18th  century,  a  cruelty  that  would  have  astonished
the  barbarians  of  the  14th — the  practice  of  houghing

CHAP.

1783/

December.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

men  for  no  reason  but  that  they  were  soldiers,  by
ruffians  whose  qualities  were  a  strong  arm,  a  sharp
knife,  and  a  hard  heart.’  The  soldiers  had  the  pas¬
sions  of  men.  It  was  not  yet  understood  that  Ireland
was  to  be  ruled  by  conciliation,  and  that  their  busi¬
ness  was  to  submit.  In  some  instances  they  had  done
justice  to  themselves.  So  many  men  of  the  49th  had
been  hamstrung  that  the  regiment  had  been  ordered
out  of  Dublin,  for  fear  they  might  inflict  some  frightful
retribution  on  the  mob  who  were  in  league  to  protect
their  assailants.

The  Duke  loitered  in  London  after  his  appoint¬
ment.  The  Christmas  recess  was  prolonged,  and  mem¬
bers  anxious  to  be  busy  complained  of  4  the  suspen¬
sion  of  Irish  business  on  account  of  a  squabble  of
gentlemen  in  England  for  places.’  The  Viceroy  came
at  last  at  the  end  of  February.  Complimentary  ad¬
dresses  were  presented  by  both  Houses,  not  indeed
without  signs  of  opposition.  The  Duke  of  Leinster
had  told  Lord  Mornington  that  he  would  give  no
support  to  Mr.  Pitt’s  Administration,  but  the  opposi¬
tion  was  merely  the  revival  of  the  traditional  system.
The  Viceroy  hoped  to  have  conciliated  sufficient  sup¬
port  by  announcing  that  English  politics  were  not  to
affect  the  conduct  of  Irish  Government.  But  this
was  not  what  had  been  meant  at  all.  He  had  to
report  4  that  Government  influence  would  be  reduced
to  nothing  unless  security  could  be  given  by  very  high
terms  indeed  that  particular  persons  should  be  benefited
without  being  liable  to  disappointment  in  case  of  new
changes  of  Administration .’ 1  Mr.  Orde,2  who  came  as
Secretary,  wrote  that  4  he  was  almost  distracted  with

1  ‘  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  S.  P.  0.

Sydney,  February  27.  Secret/  2  Created  afterwards  Lord  Bolton.

THE  CONVENTION.

397

the  infinite  numbers  and  variety  of  applicants  for
favour,  who  had  all  long  stories  to  tell.  The  patron¬
age  of  Ireland  would  not  suffice  for  one  day’s  short
allowance,  if  all  who  crowded  into  the  ship  were  to
be  fed.’1  The  hungry  applicants  were  rationed  so  far
as  the  Government  resources  extended.  Those  who
were  left  out  were  soothed  by  promises.  The  crew
at  last  fell  into  their  places,  and  the  vessel  was  once
more  under  way.  The  Duke  was  able  to  mention  as
4  one  great  cause  of  confidence  the  effect  of  what
was  passing  out  of  doors  upon  the  minds  of  almost
every  person  of  property  and  understanding  who
considered  the  stake  they  had  to  venture,  and  who
could  not  look  to  any  so  sure  protection  as  that  of
his  majesty’s  Government.’  2

The  first  business  which  came  before  Parliament
was  the  4  houghing.’  Luttrell,  himself  a  soldier,  told
the  story.  The  perpetrators  of  these  atrocious  acts
were  protected  by  the  public  opinion  of  their  class,
and  had  not  been  brought  to  justice.  He  introduced
and  carried  a  bill,  to  oblige  the  barony  where  such
a  crime  had  been  committed,  to  provide  a  pension  of
20 L  a  year  for  the  maintenance  of  the  disabled  sol¬
dier,  so  long  as  the  criminal  remained  undetected.
A  second  clause  provided  that,  in  case  of  conviction,
these  wretches  should  be  executed  within  two  days
of  their  sentence,  and  should  be  fed  in  the  interval
with  bread  and  water.3

The  phenomenon  was  repeating  itself  which  has
appeared  with  invariable  sequence  in  Irish  history.
The  hatred  against  England  was  increasing  with

CHAP.

i.

"17847

March.

1  1  Mr.  Orde  to  - ,  March  3,  Sydney,  February  27, 1784.’  S.P.O.

17847  S.  P.  0.  3  23,  24  George  III.  cap.  56.

2  1  The  Duke  of  Hutland  to  Lord

398

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1784.

March.

each  concession  to  popular  demands,  and  fresh
severity  was  required  to  prevent  the  mischievous
consequences  of  those  healing  measures,  which  had
been  represented  as  the  certain  grounds  of  future
peace  and  good  will.

The  Reform  question,  though  its  back  was  broken,
was  not  dead.  The  Bishop  of  Derry  was  still  haran¬
guing  the  Ulster  mobs.  Flood  had  carried  over  and
presented  the  address  to  the  King.  He  had  received
no  answer,  and  was  about  to  try  his  bill  a  second
time  in  Parliament.  It  had  been  rejected  in  No¬
vember,  on  the  ground  that  it  was  forced  on  the
House  by  intimidation.  The  Convention  being  dis¬
solved,  it  could  be  now  received  and  debated  on  its
merits.  Flood  himself  was  frightened  at  the  spirit
which  was  abroad,  and  was  only  anxious  to  be  de¬
cently  quit  of  his  responsibilities.  Leave  was  given
this  time  for  the  introduction  of  the  bill,  the  Duke
calculating  on  being  able  to  defeat  it  by  a  heavier  ma¬
jority  on  a  second  reading  than  he  could  have  com¬
manded  for  a  refusal  of  admission.  Thus  he  hoped
that  by  moderation  4  a  question  so  unpleasant  and
distressing  in  the  present  circumstances  of  the  king¬
dom  would  be  more  effectually  quashed  ;  and  without
unnecessary  irritation  to  the  feelings  and  prejudices
of  certain  persons  who  stood  forward  in  support  of
the  measure.7 1

The  debate,  when  the  second  reading  came  on,  was
long  and  tedious.  The  fire  had  been  expended  in
November.  There  was  now  only  the  smouldering
of  damp  and  ashes.  Sir  Boyle  Roche  said  that  the
extension  of  the  suffrage  to  Protestant  leaseholders

1  ‘  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  March  17.  Secret/

THE  CONVENTION.

399

would  lead  to  tlie  expulsion  of  the  Catholic  tenantry
to  make  room  for  them.  Grattan  spoke  again  for  the
principle  of  reform,  and  defended  the  Volunteers.
The  discussion  dragged  on  till  four  in  the  morning,
but  with  the  languor  attaching  to  a  cause  which  was
consciously  lost.  The  division,  when  it  came,1  was
decisive  of  the  prospects  of  the  question,  so  long  as
the  present  Parliament  continued,  or  was  protected
from  intimidation.

Far  away,  notwithstanding,  was  the  halcyon  period
which  Rutland  anticipated.  Submission  to  the  Dun¬
gannon  resolutions  in  ’82  had  been  a  fatal  encourage¬
ment  to  perseverance  in  sedition.

Maddened  at  the  defeat  of  the  bill,  which  they  had
been  taught  to  regard  as  the  door  that  opened  into
Paradise,  the  Dublin  populace  howled  and  stormed.
The  Bishop  of  Derry  set  himself  to  raise  new  corps
of  Volunteers  in  the  North.  The  Viceroy,  at  Fitz-
gibbon’s  advice,  sent  down  officers  in  disguise  to
watch  him,  with  a  warrant  in  their  pockets  should
an  arrest  be  necessary.2 *  But  there  was  a  more
immediate  and  more  serious  danger.  The  Reform
Bill  gone,  the  patriots  struck  upon  a  course  more
certain  4  to  set  Dublin  in  a  flame,  and  introduced  re¬
solutions  for  the  protection  of  Irish  manufactures.
Free  trade  they  now  called  a  mockery.  The  people
were  still  starving  in  the  streets ;  the  country  was  as
poor  as  before.  Perfidious  England,  when  it  gave
free  trade  to  Ireland,  knew  well  that  it  was  giving

CHAP.

i.

"l784~

March.

1  159  to  85.

2  This  singular  prelate  ran  a  near
chance  of  ending  his  career  on  the

gallows.  1 1  shall  be  much  con¬
cerned,’  the  Duke  wrote,  i  to  find

myself  obliged  to  proceed  to  extre¬

mities,  and  take  a  step  which  may
occasion  any  ferment ;  but  I  think
it  essential  that  an  example  should
be  made  among  the  abettors  of  se¬
dition,  if  such  there  be.’ — ‘  To  Lord
Sydney,  March  17.  Secret.’

400

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

TtsT

April.

her  a  useless  bauble.  It  was  like  opening  the  veins
of  a  wretch  expiring  with  hunger.  There  was  not
on  the  face  of  the  earth  a  race  of  men  so  abject  as
the  Irish;  not  the  Esquimaux  in  North  America,  not
the  Hottentots  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  ;  and  the
cause  was  the  injustice  of  the  laws.  Irish  manufac¬
tures  required  protection,  and  must  have  it.*

Such  were  the  arguments — echoes  of  the  cries
out  of  doors — addressed  to  the  Parliament.  The  Par¬
liament  for  the  present  was  not  convinced,  and  the
resolutions  were  heavily  defeated.  The  vote  filled
the  measure  of  popular  indignation.  Handbills  were
sent  out  to  rally  the  friends  of  Irish  liberty.  The
Mayor  of  Dublin  was  called  on  to  take  measures
to  preserve  peace.  The  Mayor  of  Dublin,  true  to
the  traditions  of  his  office,  refused.  The  mob  ga¬
thered  at  the  doors  of  the  Parliament  House.  They
thronged  the  passages.  They  filled  the  bar  and  gal¬
lery,  and  from  the  gallery  they  marked  unpopular
members,  and  threatened  them  with  death:  The  pa¬
triot  newspapers  preached  assassination.  The  leading
articles  4  were  essays  in  praise  of  murder,  investigat¬
ing  the  different  means  by  which  it  might  be  perpe¬
trated,  preferring  the  poignard  as  the  most  certain
and  least  dangerous  to  the  assassin.7 1  Fitzgibbon  said
he  had  a  man  arrested  who  had  conspired  with  others
‘  to  kill  seven  members  of  the  House  of  Commons,
he  himself  having  the  honour  to  be  one.7  The
murderers  were  to  receive  a  hundred  pounds  apiece ;
and  it  had  been  agreed  that  if  either  of  the  seven
who  had  been  named  escaped,  4  any  other  of  the
majority  who  had  voted  against  the  protecting  duties

1  Speech  of  General  Luttrell,  April  I2;  1784. — Irish  Debates.

THE  CONVENTION.

401

might  be  taken  instead.”1  Even  Grattan  admitted
that  the  Press  teemed  daily  with  such  atrocious  mat¬
ter  as  would  not  be  suffered  in  any  other  country.7

Again  the  Mayor  was  called  on  to  arrest  the  pub¬
lishers  and  printers  of  these  papers.  He  complied
so  languidly,  and  handled  the  offenders  so  gently,
that  the  Serjeant-at-Arms  was  sent  with  a  guard
of  soldiers  to  take  them  out  of  his  hands.  The
soldiers  went  to  work  more  roughly  than  the  city
officials,  and  the  air  rung  with  shrieks  of  indignant
patriots  for  the  wrongs  of  their  suffering  comrades.

In  the  midst  of  these  scenes  the  unfortunate  Con¬
stitution  was  overtaken  by  a  tragic  calamity.  The
reader  will  remember  the  battle  over  the  Writs  of
Error  and  the  Irish  appeals,  and  the  earnestness
with  which  Ireland  had  insisted  on  her  right  to  give
final  judgment  in  her  own  causes.  The  value  of  the
privilege  was  to  be  illustrated  in  the  very  first  appeal
which  was  brought  before  the  Irish  House  of  Lords.
A  large  property  was  at  stake.  The  suit  lay  between
a  member  of  the  Loftus  family  and  a  Mr.  Rochford.
Judgment  had  been  given  in  the  Court  of  King’s
Bench  for  Mr.  Loftus;  but  the  Judges  were  divided,
and  the  case  came  on  for  hearing  before  the  Peers.
Opinion  was  so  nicely  balanced  that  votes  were  of
consequence.  Lord  Strangford,  a  clergyman  and  Dean
of  Derry,  who  for  forty  years  had  been  a  pensioner
on  the  Irish  Establishment,  conceived  that  a  court  of
justice  was  like  the  Legislature,  and  that  a  vote  in
one  as  well  as  the  other  was  convertible  into  money.
He  applied  to  Mr.  Rochford  in  general  terms  for  as¬
sistance  in  his  distressed  circumstances.  Mr.  Rochford

CHAP.

i.

17847

April.

VOL.  II.

1  Irish  Debates.  Ibid.
D  ID

402

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

"1784

April.

excusing  himself,  Lord  Strangford  wrote  again  to
him,  saying  that  he  was  anxious  to  make  himself
acquainted  with  the  merits  of  the  pending  cause,
but  was  unable  through  poverty  to  attend  at  the
House.  Alluding  to  his  first  request  for  help,  he
said  4  that  probably  since  that  time  Mr.  Rochford’s
rents  had  been  more  punctually  paid;’  and  4  he  was
encouraged  by  that  consideration  to  renew  a  request
which  might  be  productive  of  too  many  advantages
to  enumerate.’  4  Two  hundred  pounds  would  fix  him
in  a  most  enviable  situation.  One  hundred  pounds
would  enable  him,  by  daily  appearance,  to  express
his  gratitude  where  he  flattered  himself  to  see  success
crown  the  undertaking.’1

Rochford  forwarded  this  remarkable  production  to
the  Chancellor.  It  was  produced  and  read  in  the
House  of  Lords,  and  their  Lordships  may  have
doubted  whether  they  were  wholly  worthy  of  the
boon  which  Grattan  had  procured  for  them.  4  A
general  alarm  was  felt  for  the  safety  of  property.’  2
Strangford  was  ordered  to  attend  at  the  bar  of  the
House,  where  the  Viceroy  hoped  4  he  would  be  pro¬
ceeded  against  with  the  rigour  which  so  notorious  an
act  of  corruption  and  dishonour  deserved.’  Not  ap¬
pearing,  he  was  taken  into  custody  by  the  Black  Rod.
He  admitted  his  letter,  though  protesting  that  he  had
meant  no  harm.  The  Lords  thought  otherwise,  and
an  Act  was  passed  disabling  the  miserable  old  man
from  voting  or  sitting  as  a  Peer  of  Parliament  thence¬
forward.

It  was  a  bad  case,  and  Strangford  had  sinned  in;
being  found  out.  Yet  he  was  but  tainted  a  shade

1  1  Lord  Strangford  to  Mr.  Roch-  2  ‘  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord
ford,  January  10,  1784’  S.  P.  0.  Sydney,  April  12,  1784’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

403

more  deeply  than  his  judges,  and  in  the  same  series
of  letters  which  tell  the  story  of  his  delinquency
the  Duke  said  that  throughout  the  session  the  Go¬
vernment  had  been  encountered  by  a  petty  embar¬
rassing  opposition  in  the  House  of  Lords  ;  that  the
meaning  of  it  4  was  to  enhance  their  importance  and
make  the  Peers’  pretensions  the  first  object  in  the
distribution  of  emoluments  and  honours.’  4  The  Peers,’
he  wrote  in  a  ‘most  secret’  dispatch  of  the  19th  of
April,  4  under  the  new  Constitution  have  more  power
than  before.  Greater  attention,  therefore,  and  more
expensive  influence  will  be  required  if  we  mean  to
direct  its  progress  in  the  right  way.’  4  A  share  in  the
lucrative  favours  of  Government  must  be  set  aside
for  the  purpose  of  gaining  attachments  in  that  House,
as  the  invention  of  mere  external  allurements  will
no  longer  maintain  the  influence  which  they  may  for
the  moment  acquire.’

4 1  must  observe  also,’  the  Duke  continued  in  the
same  letter,  4  upon  the  scantiness  of  the  provision
which  is  at  the  disposal  of  Government  for  the  sup¬
port  of  an  increased  and  increasing  number  of  claim¬
ants.  I  must  therefore  represent  the  necessity  of
taking  some  measure  as  early  as  possible  for  the  en¬
largement  of  our  means.  It  will  be  absolutely
incumbent  on  me  to  endeavour  to  establish  in  the
House  of  Lords  the  strongest  and  most  immediate
connection  with  a  certain  number  of  powerful  mem¬
bers  who  may  be  at  all  times  looked  to,  and  may  be
depended  upon  for  the  fidelity  and  firmness  with
which  they  will  execute  their  trust.’1

Entering  into  further  details,  he  said  that  the

1  1  To  Lord  Sydney,  April  19,  1784.’  S.  P.  0.

d  d  2

CHAP.

I.

—  -

1784.

April.

404

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

B^K  Duke  of  Leinster,  though  still  in  opposition  to  Pitt,
*1784^  was  willing  to  come  to  terms.  Lord  Mornington1
April’  4  was  disposed  to  take  a  leading  part  in  favour  of
administration/  Lord  Hillsborough  promised  well.
Lord  Shannon  made  4  fair  professions/  which  were
not  clogged  so  far  4  with  unreasonable  demands  in
favour  of  his  friends  and  extensive  Parliamentary
connections/  Lord  Clifden  was  willing  to  support
Government,  4  but  not  without  a  steady  view  to  his
object — an  official  establishment  for  his  second  son/
His  brother,  the  Archbishop  of  Cashel,  acted  on  the
same  principles,  and  4  did  not  lose  sight  of  the
Primacy  or  the  See  of  Dublin.’  To  meet  so  many
pretensions,  the  Duke  wished  to  create  some  new
offices  which  might  be  objects  of  ambition  to  the
great  Peerp — a  Presidency  of  the  Council ;  a  Privy
Seal,  with  rank ;  a  Speakership  of  the  House  of  Lords,
distinct  from  the  office  of  Chancellor — if  salaries  could
be  found  for  them  without  adding  new  burdens  to  the
Establishment.

Passing  from  Peers  to  Commoners,  the  Duke  said
that  4  the  Provost,  who  had  always  some  object  in
view,  and  whose  objects  were  not  generally  marked
with  the  character  of  moderation  and  humility,’  desired
that  Mr.  Rigby  should  be  induced  to  retire,  and  that
he  might  have  the  Mastership  of  the  Rolls.  John
Ponsonby  would  give  his  services,  4  provided  his
terms  were  acceded  to/  4  He  demanded  the  office
of  Secretary  of  State  for  life  for  his  son,’  4  a  thing
not  to  be  acquiesced  in  ;  ’  but  as  his  influence  was
great,  the  Duke  was  disposed  to  let  his  son  have  the
Post  Office,  to  give  a  Peerage  to  his  son-in-law,  Mr.

1  Afterwards  Marquis  Wellesle}r.

THE  CONVENTION.

405

O’ Callaghan,1  and  4  to  make  some  inferior  arrange¬
ments  to  gratify  his  numerous  dependents.’  Mr.
Loftus,  too,  might  be  counted  on.  4  His  views  ex¬
tended  to  a  Peerage,’  and  he  had  received  a  promise
of  it  on  condition  of  his  surrendering  his  pension.
This  pension,  having  lost  his  cause  with  Mr.  Roch-
ford,  4  he  was  unwilling  to  relinquish,’  and  it  would
be  necessary  to  allow  him  to  keep  it.2

CHAP.

I.

1784.

April.

1  Created  Lord  Lismore.

2  ‘  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord

Sydney,  March  26.  Most  secret.’
S.  P.  0.

406

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1784.

SECTION  VI.

To  lift  the  curtain  which  hides  the  working  of  the
Irish  Government  is  to  see  the  condemnation  of  it
written  as  by  a  handwriting  on  the  wall.  Well
might  Irishmen  demand  Reform.  Never  did  system
saturated  with  corruption  need  it  more.  But  it  did
not  occur  to  them  that  if  Reform  was  to  be  effectual,
each  one  of  them  must  begin  with  a  reform  of  his
own  heart.  The  Parliament  was  corrupt  because
Lords  and  Commons  were  only  influenced  by  base
motives.  If  England  had  refused  to  bribe  them,
the  same  men  would  have  followed  their  interest
in  other  ways,  to  their  own  and  their  country’s  still
more  fatal  injury.  So  long  as  they  remained  un¬
worthy  of  freedom,  the  only  reform  which  would  have
benefited  them  would  have  been  the  suspension  of
their  powers  of  self-government.  And  yet  the  blame
did  not  rest  wholly  with  the  Irish.  The  least  heeded
yet  not  the  least  mischievous  effect  of  misgovernment
is  the  character  which  it  generates  alike  in  the  rulers
and  the  ruled.  Centuries  of  injustice  and  neglect
had  divided  the  Irish  nation  into  a  proletariat,  to
whom  law  was  synonymous  with  tyranny,  and  into
an  aristocracy  and  gentry  who,  deprived  of  the
natural  inducements  to  honourable  energy,  lived
only  for  idle  amusement,  and  used  political  power
as  a  means  of  recruiting  their  exchequer.  After
the  Revolution  of  1688  Ireland  was  as  a  garden  with
the  soil  newly  turned,  in  which  England  might
have  planted  what  herbs  she  pleased.  She  had  let

THE  CONVENTION.

407

the  opportunity  pass.  The  native  weeds  had  been
allowed  once  more  to  grow,  and  in  this  condition
Irish  politicians,  who  saw  their  misery  but  were  too
vain  to  understand  its  causes,  had  been  enabled  by
circumstances  to  snatch  an  instalment  of  Home  Rule.
In  this  condition  there  were  but  two  alternatives
before  the  English  Cabinet — either  to  buy  the  sup¬
port  of  the  aristocracy,  who  threatened  otherwise  to
make  government  impossible,  or  else  to  fall  back
upon  the  people,  to  level  the  old  barriers,  lay  open  the
imposthume,  and  appeal  to  a  genuine  representation
freely  chosen  by  the  popular  voice.  Let  those  san¬
guine  persons  who  believe  most  firmly  in  the  regene¬
rative  virtues  of  ballot-boxes  and  polling-booths
reflect  calmly  on  the  condition  of  the  country,  and
affirm  afterwards,  if  they  can,  that  the  second  ex¬
periment  ought  to  have  been  ventured.  A  Protestant
minority  owned  the  soil.  The  Catholics,  from  whom
it  had  been  taken  by  force,  still  believed  themselves
to  be  its  rightful  possessors.  The  Protestants  were
split  into  Churchmen  and  Dissenters.  The  Church¬
men  had  the  pride  and  passion  of  a  long-privileged
class.  The  Dissenters  were  republicans,  inflamed  by
injury  and  kindled  into  fervour  and  enthusiasm  by
the  successful  revolt  of  America.  The  inflammable
temperament  of  the  people  led  them  always  to  choose
their  leaders  among  demagogues  and  incendiaries.
Over  every  province  were  scattered  armed  regiments
owning  no  authority,  and  possessed  with  the  conviction
that  the  sole  obstacle  to  Irish  happiness  was  the  con¬
nection  with  England  ;  while  the  entire  population,
whom  it  was  sought  to  enfranchise,  was  intoxicated
with  that  most  dangerous  of  illusions,  that  the  misery
of  the  country  was  due  entirely  to  political  causes,

CHAP.

i.

1784.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

"m

and  was  deliberately  caused  by  the  persevering  malice
of  their  rulers.

To  have  let  loose  the  torrent  must  have  precipi¬
tated  a  furious  revolution.  To  maintain  order  and
authority  by  existing  methods  was  to  lend  the  coun¬
tenance  of  the  Crown  to  corruption  of  which  the
reality  was  probably  worse  than  even  the  imagination
of  the  patriots  could  conceive;  and  that  the  choice
now  lay  between  two  courses  alike  if  not  equally  de¬
testable  was  a  disgrace  to  the  superior  country,  whose
neglect  was  the  cause  of  the  condition  into  which  the
Irish  colony  had  fallen.  England,  of  course,  selected
to  drag  on  through  the  slough  till  circumstances
might  open  some  third  way  of  escape.  Corruption,
however,  was  employed  thenceforward,  not  to  bolster
up  iniquitous  laws,  or  resist  measures  which  pro¬
mised  real  advantage,  but  to  bribe  the  Irish  gentry
to  save  their  country  from  being  dissolved  in
anarchy.  Wrought  as  they  had  been  by  the  Conven¬
tion  into  wild  expectation,  the  mob,  in  Dublin  espe¬
cially,  were  savage  in  their  disappointment.  The
presence  of  a  British  garrison  alone  prevented  in¬
surrection.  Parliament  was  prorogued  prematurely
to  leave  the  executive  free,  and  the  executive  needed
all  its  courage  for  the  work  which  it  had  to  do.  The
distress  in  the  city  was  real  and  frightful.  Fifty
thousand  artizans  were  out  of  work  and  starving,  and
were  taught  to  believe  that  the  cause  was  the  refusal
of  the  protection  duties.  The  Act  of  Parliament  and
the  threat  of  military  law  stopped  the  houghing  of  the
soldiers,  but  other  forms  of  outrage  took  its  place,
copied  from  a  Transatlantic  pattern.  A  tarring
and  feathering  committee  was  established  in  Dublin,
obnoxious  citizens  were  dragged  from  their  beds,

THE  CONVENTION.

409

stripped  naked,  smeared  with  pitch,  and  rolled  in
goose-down,  and  so  turned  into  the  streets.  The
Press,  which  had  been  checked  for  the  moment  by
the  prosecutions,  became  as  violent  as  before,  and  the
Government  discovered  as  a  fresh  and  still  more
alarming  symptom  ;  that  most  of  the  abominable  let¬
ters  and  paragraphs  were  written  by  Popish  priests.’
The  Catholic  Bishops  were  ‘  most  earnest  to  express
and  manifest  their  reprobation  of  such  excesses,’  and
offered  assistance  in  detecting  and  convicting  the
writers.1  Their  service  was  accepted  gladly,  but  little
came  of  it.  The  Corporation  was  governed  by  Napper
Tandy,  who  continued  at  the  head  of  the  Volunteer
artillery,  and  had  possession  of  their  guns.  The
magistrates  were  cowardly,  or  themselves  sympathised
with  the  agitators.  .Reilly,  the  High  Sheriff  of  Dub¬
lin,  called  a  meeting  of  citizens  on  the  7th  of  June,
where  resolutions  were  passed  that  the  constitution
of  Parliament  was  unbearable,  that  the  people  must
have  a  share  in  the  representation,  and  that  the  Ca¬
tholics  must  have  the  franchise  ;  that  a  venal  and
corrupt  House  of  Commons  had  treated  the  demands
of  Ireland  with  indignity  and  contempt;  that  under
the  Constitution  of  ’82  any  administration  could  have
a  majority,  and  that  there  was  danger  of  absolute
monarchy.  A  committee  was  chosen  to  consider  the
steps  which  ought  to  be  taken.  The  committee
reported,  in  the  name  of  an  injured  and  insulted  king¬
dom,  that  their  liberties  were  insecure,  that  their
chartered  rights  had  been  infringed,  and  the  freedom
of  the  Press  violated ;  that  the  Commons  were  c  a
hired  instrument  to  pillage  an  already  impoverished

CHAP.

I.

mT

May.

1  1  Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.  Evan  Nepean,  April  30.  Most  private.’  S.  P.  0.

410

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

TTsT

June.

and  distressed  people ;’  in  fact,  that  there  must  be  a
new  Convention.  In  the  ensuing  October  a  congress
of  300  representatives,  freely  chosen  by  the  Irish
nation,  must  meet  in  Dublin.  6  The  majesty  of  the
people  would  then  resume  its  proper  influence,  and
Divine  Providence,  knowing  the  justice  of  their  cause,
would  assist  them  in  obtaining  their  rights.’

F inally,  the  Corporation  drew  a  petition  to  the  King,
complaining  that  the  Deform  Bill  had  been  denied  a
hearing,  that  protection  had  been  refused  to  their
infant  manufactures,  that  their  newspapers  had  been
confiscated  and  the  publishers  punished.  They  ap¬
pealed  for  help  to  his  majesty,  and  entreated  him
especially  to  abolish  the  remnant  of  the  penal  laws
which  oppressed  their  Catholic  fellow -subjects.

The  High  Sheriff  carried  the  petition  to  the
Viceroy,  with  a  request  that  it  might  be  transmitted
to  St.  James’s.  4  Gentlemen,’  replied  the  Duke  of
Rutland,  ‘  while  I  comply  with  your  request  in  trans¬
mitting  this  paper  to  his  majesty,  I  shall  not  fail  to
convey  my  entire  disapprobation  of  it,  as  casting  un¬
just  reflexions  on  the  laws  and  Parliament  of  Ireland,
and  as  tending  to  weaken  the  authority  of  both.’

Belfast  trod  in  the  steps  of  Dublin,  and  prepared
a  similar  petition,  which  was  sent  immediately  to
the  King  by  a  deputation  from  the  town.  Pitt
answered  more  courteously  and  with  exact  truth,
that  c  he  had  been  and  was  a  zealous  friend  to  Re¬
form  in  Parliament,  but  on  grounds  different  from
theirs  ;  their  plan  was  calculated  to  produce  greater
evils  than  those  which  the  friends  of  Reform  desired
to  remedy.’

Petitions  having  failed,  other  methods  were  re¬
sorted  to  which  had  succeeded  too  often.  Another  non-

THE  CONVENTION.

411

importation  agreement  was  drawn  and  sent  round,
and  largely  signed — signed  even  by  the  Duke  of
Leinster.  The  tarring  and  feathering  committee,
growing  bolder  with  impunity,  c  established  an  absolute
dominion  over  men’s  fears,  so  that  Government  in
vain  endeavoured  to  prevail  on  those  who  had  suffered
to  make  any  depositions  against  their  tormentors.’ 1
Dublin  was  patrolled  nightly  by  cavalry  and  infantry,
but  the  magistrates  would  lend  no  help  ;  and  if
the  soldiers  were  attacked  and  defended  themselves,
there  was  a  clamour  that  innocent  citizens  were  in
danger  of  their  lives  from  British  savages.2  Every
day  there  was  risk  of  collision  between  the  regular
troops  and  the  Volunteers  of  the  city.  Every  day
the  Press  informed  the  people  that  the  rights  of
Ireland  were  bought  and  sold,  and  the  principles  of
liberty  betrayed  by  venality  and  corruption.

The  summer  did  not  pass  without  actual  bloodshed.
At  the  end  of  August  a  conviction  was  at  last
obtained  for  tarring  and  feathering.  A  man  named
Garrat  Dignam  was  tried,  found  guilty,  and  sen¬
tenced  to  be  flogged  through  the  streets.  The  city
magistrates,  against  their  will,  were  forced  to  be
present;  the  offender,  with  a  strong  guard  of  soldiers
about  him,  was  duly  fastened  to  the  cart’s  tail,  and  the
lashing  commenced.  The  crowd  was  enormous.  At
each  cut  furious  yells  ran  along  the  line.  Before
the  punishment  was  half  over  stones  were  thrown  at
the  guard.  A  shot  came  from  a  window,  by  which  a
soldier  was  wounded.  His  comrades,  without  waiting
for  orders,  levelled  their  muskets  and  fired  into  the
howling  mass.  They  had  marked  and  succeeded  in

1  *  Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.  Evan  Nepean,  August  21.  Most  private.

3  Ibid.

CHAP.

I.

"ImT

August.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

killing  a  conspicuous  rioter,  himself  a  member  of  the
tarring  and  feathering  committee,  who  was  flourishing
a  sword.  Three  or  four  more  were  wounded.  The
crowd  flew  down  the  side  lanes  and  disappeared,  and
the  rest  of  the  whipping  was  duly  completed.

4 I  am  determined,’  wrote  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  in
reporting  what  had  passed,  4  that  the  execution  of
the  law  shall  not  be  wantonly  resisted,  as  far  as  my
power  can  have  influence.’1

When  Ireland  was  disturbed  England’s  enemies  on
the  Continent  were  on  the  alert.  Irish  oflicers  in  the
French  service  scenting  odours  of  rebellion  were  re¬
ported  as  coming  over  in  disguise.  The  patriots  had
traitors  in  their  camp,  who  reported  to  the  Duke  that
the  agitators  were  now  meditating  an  open  revolt
while  the  Volunteer  corps  remained  inarms.  Napper
Tandy  and  his  friends  were  in  the  habit  of  holding
secret  meetings  where  French  emissaries  were  present,
especially  one  who  had  come  to  Ireland  with  an  intro¬
duction  which  had  been  given  to  him  by  Lord  Car¬
marthen,  at  the  request  of  the  French  Ambassador  in
London.  At  one  of  these  meetings  there  was  a  sin¬
gular  scene.  Ten  years  later  the  Irish  patriots  were
red  republicans,  allies  of  Carnot  and  Hoche,  anxious
only  to  establish  in  Ireland  the  principles  of  Tom
Paine.  On  this  occasion  Napper  and  his  party  4  drank
the  health  of  Louis  XVI.  on  their  knees.’  4  Their
acknowledged  object  was  separation  from  England
and  the  establishment  in  Ireland  of  the  Roman  Ca¬
tholic  religion.’  2

The  state  of  the  city  had  begun  to  alarm  quiet

1  ( To  Lord  Sydney,  August  25,  Sydney,  August  26,  1784.  Most

1784.’  S.  P.  0.  secret.’  S.  P.  0.

2  1  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord

THE  CONVENTION.

413

citizens  even  of  patriotic  sympathies.  They  desired  to  chap.

mark  their  sense  of  1  the  late  seditious  proceedings  ’  - — li _ _

with  proper  indignation,  and  two  parishes  released  somber
themselves  from  the  non -importation  agreement,  the
Duke  of  Leinster  heading  the  list  of  signatures.1  But
other  measures  were  now  needed.  If  rebellion  was
meditated,  the  Government  required  fuller  knowledge ;
and  4  a  new  plan  of  management  ’  had  to  be  adopted
4  to  obtain  exact  information  of  the  conduct  and  mo¬
tives  of  the  most  suspected  persons.’  4  Useful  and
confidential  agents,’  whose  silence  and  fidelity  could
be  relied  on,  4  who  would  write  the  daily  history  of
a  man’s  motions,’  without  betraying  himself,  were  not
to  be  found  in  Dublin.

The  Irish  Secretary  applied  to  the  English  Cabinet
to  furnish  him  from  their  own  staff  of  informers.  Two
valuable  persons  answering  to  Mr.  Orde’s  description
were  sent,  and  the  name  of  one  of  them  will  be  an
unpleasant  surprise  to  those  already  interested  in  the
history  of  the  time.

They  were  both  Irishmen — one  was  a  skilled  de¬
tective  named  Parker,  an  accomplished  orator  who
could  outmouth  the  noisiest  patriot,  and  had  already
some  knowledge  of  the  leading  agitators.  Orde
welcomed  this  man  with  a  twinge  of  misgiving.  4  I
hope  he  is  discreet,’  he  wrote,  4  for  he  must  to  a  cer¬
tain  extent  be  possessed  of  the  power  of  hurting  us  by
garrulity  or  treachery.’ 2  The  other  was  no  less  a  person
than  the  celebrated  Father  O’Learjq  whose  memory
is  worshipped  by  Irish  Catholic  politicians  with  a
devotion  which  approaches  idolatry.  O’Leary,  as  he
was  known  to  the  world,  was  the  most  fascinating

1  ‘Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  August  26.’  S.P.O.

2  1  Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.  Evan  Nepean,  September  8,  1784.’  S.  P.  0.

414

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  preacher,  the  most  distinguished  controversialist  of
v- — his  time — a  priest  who  had  caught  the  language  of
September  toleration,  who  had  mastered  all  the  chords  of  Liberal
philosophy,  and  played  on  them  like  a  master  ;  whose
mission  had  been  to  plead  against  prejudice,  to  repre¬
sent  his  country  as  the  bleeding  lamb,  maligned,
traduced,  oppressed,  but  ever  praying  for  her  ene¬
mies;  as  eager  only  to  persuade  England  to  offer
its  hand  to  the  Catholic  Church,  and  receive  in  re¬
turn  the  affectionate  homage  of  undying  gratitude.
O’Leary  had  won  his  way  to  the  heart  of  Burke  by  his
plausible  eloquence.  Pitt  seemed  to  smile  on  him  :
it  is  easy  now  to  conjecture  why.  When  he  ap¬
peared  in  the  Convention  at  the  Rotunda  the  whole
assembly  rose  to  receive  him.  Had  such  a  man
been  sent  over  on  an  open  errand  of  conciliation  his
antecedents  would  have  made  the  choice  intelli¬
gible.  But  he  was  despatched  as  a  paid  and  secret
instrument  of  treachery,  in  reply  to  a  request  for  a
trained  informer.  What  the  Government  really
thought  of  Father  O’Leary  may  be  gathered  from
Orde’s  language  when  told  to  expect  him.  4  He  could
get  to  the  bottom  of  all  secrets  in  which  the  Catholics
were  concerned,’  and  Catholics  were  known  to  be  the
4  chief  promoters 7  of  the  agitation  in  Dublin.  But  he
too  was  to  be  dealt  with  cautiously,  for  he  was  a  priest.

4  They  are  all  of  them,’  Orde  said,  ‘designing  knaves’ —

4  the  only  good  to  be  derived  from  them  is  perhaps  to
deceive  them  into  an  idea  that  they  are  believed.’ 1

Parker  and  O’Leary  reached  Dublin  at  the  end  of
September,  and  were  both  at  once  set  to  work.

4  Your  experts  have  arrived  safe,’  wrote  the  Secre-

1  1  Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.  Evan  Nepean,  October  17.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

415

tary  reporting  their  appearance.  4  At  this  moment  chap.
we  are  about  to  make  trial  of  O’Leary’s  sermons  and  i —

Parker’s  rhapsodies.  They  may  be  both  in  their  dif-  Saptemb*er
ferent  callings  of  very  great  use.  The  former,  if  we
can  depend  on  him,  has  it  in  his  power  to  discover  to  us
the  real  designs  of  the  Catholics,  from  which  quarter,
after  all,  the  real  mischief  is  to  spring.  The  other  can
scrape  an  acquaintance  with  the  great  leaders  of  sedi¬
tion,  particularly  Napper  Tandy,  and  perhaps  dive  to
the  bottom  of  his  secrets.’ 1

1  1  Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.  Evan  Nepean,  September  23,  1784.  Private.’

S.  P.  0.

416

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  VII.

if

book  Anxiety  was  now  concentrated  on  the  intended
Congress.  It  was  not  to  consist,  as  before,  of  delegates
September,  from  the  Volunteers,  but  of  professed  representatives
of  the  Irish  nation.  If  such  a  Congress  was  elected
and  was  allowed  to  meet,  an  armed  collision  between

the  people  and  the  troops  was  anticipated  as  certain  to
ensue.  The  Irish  noblemen  and  gentlemen,  though  in
the  utmost  alarm,  were  too  cowardly  to  appear  in  open
opposition,  and  left  the  danger  and  the  responsibility
to  the  Government.1  The  Government,  seeing  that
there  was  a  real  crisis,  and  that  hesitation  would  be
fatal,  screwed  its  courage  to  the  sticking-point.  Lord
Northington  would  have  interfered  with  the  Con¬
vention  had  he  dared.  The  Duke  of  Rutland  was

braver  than  Northington,  and  determined  that  this
new  Congress  should  neither  meet  nor,  if  possible,
be  elected.  Napper  Tandy  had  issued  circulars  to
the  sheriffs  of  every  county  in  Ireland  requiring
them  to  summon  the  King’s  lieges  and  invite  them
to  choose  representatives.  The  Duke  sent  official
intimation  to  the  sheriffs  that  such  a  proceeding
would  be  contrary  to  the  law  and  would  not  be  per¬
mitted.  Most  of  them  had  the  wisdom  to  accept  the
warning.  The  impetuous  High  Sheriff  of  Dublin,

1  1  Itis  impossible  to  conceive
any  difficulty  equal  to  that  of  pre¬
vailing  on  the  principal  persons
here  to  take  an  active  part  to  assist
the  Government.  They  are  not
insensible  to  the  danger  of  indiffer¬

ence,  but  they  hope  to  lie  concealed
under  the  wing  of  the  administra¬
tion  which  is  to  expose  itself  to  the
whole  attack. — Mr.  Orde  to  Mr.
Evan  Nepean,  September  23, 1784.’
S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

417

Mr.  Stephen  Reilly,  dared  to  disobey.  His  office  chap.

gave  him  authority  to  call  out  the  strength  of  the  > _ ^ —

county.  He  used  it  as  a  pretext  to  call  a  meeting  of
the  freeholders,  for  a  purpose  certainly  not  contem¬
plated  when  the  Sheriffs  had  their  powers  assigned  to
them.  The  county  members,  General  Luttrell  and
Luke  Gardiner,  attended  to  enter  protests  against  the
illegality  of  the  Sheriff’s  action.  They  were  outvoted.

A  resolution  was  passed  to  meet  again  and  choose
members  for  the  Congress  ;  another  followed,  that
the  Dublin  citizens  would  support  the  Congress  with
their  lives  and  fortunes.

4  The  leading  persons  ’  in  the  country  were  hanging
back,  but  there  was  fortunately  one  member  of  the
Administration  who  did  not  hang  back — who  under¬
stood  the  country,  and  knew  that  Irish  sedition  was
formidable  only  to  those  who  were  afraid  of  it.  In
this  same  lawless  summer,  when  Fitzgibbon  was
recruiting  at  Mount  Shannon  after  the  work  of  the
session,  a  desperate  ruffian  was  holding  possession  by
force  of  a  farm  in  the  neighbourhood,  from  which
he  had  been  legally  ejected.

The  Sheriff  of  Limerick  came  to  consult  Fitzgibbon
on  the  propriety  of  calling  in  the  troops  to  enforce
the  law.  Fitzgibbon  said  it  would  not  be  necessary.

He  mounted  his  horse,  and  took  but  a  single  servant
with  him.  Usually  when  he  went  abroad  he  car¬
ried  arms  :  this  time  he  left  his  pistols  behind.

He  rode  to  the  farmhouse,  called  the  man  to  the  door,
and  expostulated  with  him  on  his  folly.  He  told  him
that  if  he  did  not  surrender  his  holding  in  half  an
hour,  he  would  assemble  the  gentlemen  of  the  county,
and  not  only  dispossess  him,  but  lay  him  in  Limerick
Gaol.  The  effect  was  instantaneous.  The  man  was

VOL.  II.

E  E

418  THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  cowed  and  submitted.  Precisely  in  the  same  spirit  Fitz-
gibbon  encountered  the  danger  which  was  threatened

October  Dublin.  He  addressed  a  letter  to  Reilly,  informing
him  that  in  summoning  the  freeholders  he  had  been
guilty  of  a  serious  breach  of  duty.  If  he  called  them
together  again  and  proceeded  to  an  election,  he  would
himself,  as  Attorney- General,  immediately  prosecute
him.  Reilly  laughed  at  the  threat,  called  his  meet¬
ing,  and  was  amusing  his  audience  with  reading  Fitz¬
gibbon’ s  admonitions,  when  Fitzgibbon  himself  walked
into  the  room,  and  then  and  there,  in  the  very  lion’s
den,  he  repeated  to  these  fiery  patriots  that  he  would
call  the  Sheriff  to  account  if  he  took  the  chair  and
went  further  with  the  business  in  which  he  was
engaged.

Irishmen  admire  personal  courage  even  more  than
they  love  agitation.  Stephen  Reilly  was  overawed.
The  meeting  dispersed,  and  the  county  of  Dublin
was  without  its  representatives.  When  the  25th  of
October  came,  the  day  appointed  for  the  Congress
to  assemble,  a  contemptible  handful  of  gentlemen
alone  presented  themselves.  They  met  at  a  house
in  William  Street,  where  they  debated  with  closed
doors.  The  Bishop  of  Derry  had  taken  warning  and
staid  at  home.  Flood  attended,  but  was  found  un¬
satisfactory  on  Catholic  emancipation.  The  abortive
effort  to  supplant  the  Parliament  was  extinguished
in  ridicule,  and  the  Congress  went  the  way  of  the
Convention.

From  this  moment  till  a  new  madness  possessed
the  Legislature,  the  insubordination  of  Dublin  was
subdued.  The  punishment  of  one  criminal  and  the
fire  of  the  soldiers  made  an  end  of  the  tarring  and
feathering.  Fitzgibbon,  who  had  done  the  work,
to  establish  the  principle,  and  to  prevent  for  ever  the

i

THE  CONVENTION*

419

upgrowth  of  rival  representative  assemblies,  pro-  chap.
ceeded  against  Reilly  by  attachment  as  an  officer  of  v — ^ —
the  State  who  had  abused  his  commission.  Challenged
on  the  point  of  law  the  Attorney-General  was  sup¬
ported  by  the  Judges.  Reilly  was  sentenced  to  fine
and  imprisonment.  He  was  pardoned  on  making  his
submission,  but  authority  had  successfully  asserted
itself.1

The  Duke  was  able  to  report  more  cheerfully  of
his  prospects.  He  could  speak  of  4  the  late  ferment  ’
as  something  that  was  past.  The  gentry  had  recovered
their  courage.  The  agitation  was  now  limited  to  4  a
Republican  Section  at  Belfast  and  to  particular  classes
among  the  Catholics  who  were  worked  on  by  priests
and  French  emissaries. ’  Confined  to  these  it  had  lost
power  to  hurt.  4  Rather/  he  said,  4  the  improper  con¬
duct  of  a  few  Catholics,  and  the  publications  of  a
Catholic  newspaper,  the  avowed  disloyalty  of  some
and  the  disloyalty  of  others,  were  likely  so  to  cement
together  the  men  of  property  that  Government  would
be  stronger  than  ever.’ 2

1  In  the  following  February
Flood  attacked  Fitzgibbon  in  Par¬
liament  for  the  attachment  of  Reilly*
Fitzgibbon  replied,  that  in  sum¬
moning  the  freeholders  under  cover
of  the  posse  coniitatus  to  elect  re¬
presentatives,  the  Sheriffhad  broken
the  law.  The  Sheriff’s  power  was
an  emanation  of  Royal  authority ,,
and  was  therefore  punishable  in  a
summary  manner  by  the  King’s
Bench,  where  the  King  was  sup¬
posed  personally  to  reside.

Curran  said  this  was  the  intro¬
duction  of  arbitrary  power.  He
asked  why  the  Attorney-General
had  not  indicted  Reilly  before  a
jury.  Fitzgibbon  said  the  case

would  have  come  before  a  jury  of
the  Sheriff’s  own  choosing.

Flood  again  argued  that  attach¬
ments  were  an  emanation  from  the
Star  Chamber,  and  were  not  part  of
the  law  of  the  land.  The  Attorney-
General  insisted  1  that  the  election
of  representatives  for  a  county,
under  the  nature  of  delegates,
without  the  King’s  writ,  was  a
violation  of  the  Constitution.’  The
House  of  Commons  supported  Fitz-
gibbon’s  view  by  a  majority  of  more
than  two  to  one.— /m/i  Debates ,
February,  1785.

3  ‘  Edward  Cooke  to  Mr.  Evan
Nepean,  October  30,  Private,’
S,  P.  0.

E  E  2

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  The  Constitution  of  ’82,  after  a  near  escape  from
— '  destruction  in  the  violent  rolls  which  had  followed
October.  ^ie  launch,  might  now  be  considered  fairly  afloat.
The  composition  of  the  House  of  Commons  remained
absurd.  The  means  by  which  it  was  kept  in  working
condition  were  disgraceful  to  itself  and  to  England,
and  the  demand  at  the  sword’s  point  for  revolutionary
changes  having  been  successfully  resisted,  Mr.  Pitt
allowed  himself  to  think  that  some  degree  of  Reform
might  now  be  ventured.  The  question  would  pro¬
bably  be  revived  in  another  form  when  Parliament
reopened.  He  recommended  the  Duke  of  Rutland
to  establish  a  Protestant  militia,  which  would  of  course
be  accompanied  by  the  suppression  of  the  Volunteers.
He  contemplated  bringing  an  alteration  of  the  Repre¬
sentation  at  an  early  period  before  the  Parliament  of
Great  Britain.  If  the  discussion  could  be  postponed
in  Dublin  till  the  subject  had  been  settled  in  Eng¬
land,  he  implied,  without  positively  stating,  that  the
Government  would  consent  to  some  necessary  changes
in  Ireland  also.  ‘  The  delay,’  said  the  Cabinet  letter,

1  will  enable  your  Grace  to  discover  more  clearly
what  plan  of  reform,  if  the  event  should  at  last  take
that  turn,  would  be  agreeable  to  the  greatest  number,
and  meet  least  objection  from  those  who  have  hitherto
supported  the  connection  between  Great  Britain  and
Ireland.’  1

1  Draft  of  a  Cabinet  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  January  11,
1785.

THE  CONVENTION.

421

SECTION'  VIII.

Me,  Pitt’s  anxiety  to  restore  Ireland  to  health  and  chap.
vigour  was  not  confined  to  Parliamentary  Reform,  v — —
He  desired  to  repair  the  injuries  which  had  so  long
paralysed  her  manufacturing  industry ;  and  although
he  would  not  indulge  her  inclination  to  rush  into  pro¬
tective  duties  which  would  have  enriched  a  few  traders
at  the  expense  of  the  Irish  consumers,  he  was  willing
to  risk  unpopularity  at  home  by  giving  Ireland  a
genuine  participation  in  the  commercial  prosperity  of
England,  and  so  to  arrange  the  trade  of  the  two
countries  that  English  capital  and  English  skill
should  be  employed  indiscriminately  in  both.  The
haste  with  which  the  Constitution  of  ’82  had  been
hurried  through  had  left  the  entire  question  un¬
touched.  Ireland  had  free  trade,  but  who  was  to
protect  her  trade,  who  was  to  represent  her  mer¬
chants  abroad,  under  what  system  of  duties  were
her  exchanges  with  foreign  countries  to  be  regulated,
and  her  manufactures  or  raw  products  allowed  privi¬
lege  in  the  markets,  or  passage  through  the  ports,  of
the  sister  country?  All  these  matters,  vital  as  they
were  to  Ireland’s  interests,  remained  open,  and  the
settlement  of  them  had  hitherto  been  made  impossible
by  the  bondage  of  the  Irish  Parliament  to  the  preten¬
sions  to  which  they  had  committed  themselves,  They
had  asserted  their  right  of  legislating  for  Ireland,
externally  as  well  as  internally.  There  was  now  no
escape  but  through  a  commercial  treaty.

In  the  summer  of  1784,  Mr.  Joshua  Prim,  a  Dublin

422

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

" - , - '

1785.

January.

merchant,  privately  laid  a  scheme  before  Pitt,  which
in  its  commercial  aspect  was  supremely  favourable  to
Ireland — so  favourable  that  his  chief  uncertainty  was
whether  the  English  Parliament  could  be  induced  to
listen  to  it.  Divided  into  eleven  propositions,  it  was
based  on  the  principle  of  the  equalisation  of  duties  in
both  countries.  The  Irish  linen  manufacturers  were
to  retain  the  protection  which  they  enjoyed  at  present
in  the  English  markets.  Retaining  the  privilege  of
fixing,  their  own  scale  of  duties  on  their  own  products,
they  were  enabled  by  a  special  article  to  control  the
duties  imposed  on  such  articles  in  England.  Intelli¬
gent  men  of  business  both  in  England  and  Ireland  were
agreed  that  the  effect  of  the  arrangement  would  be  to
make  the  Irish  harbours  the  depots  of  a  large  part  of
English  commerce,  and  must  operate  as  a  proportionate
encouragement  to  Irish  domestic  manufacture.1

In  adopting  Mr.  Prim’s  proposals,  Pitt’s  inten¬
tion  was  to  present  Ireland  with  a  genial  offering  of
national  good  will,  to  abolish  the  memory  of  ancient
grievances,  and  to  open  a  road  to  sound  reconciliation.
The  Irish  Parliament  met  on  the  20th  of  January.
The  speech  from  the  throne  recommended  the  com¬
mercial  relations  of  the  two  countries  to  the  conside¬
ration  of  the  House  of  Commons.  It  treated  the
interests  of  England  and  Ireland  as  inseparable.  Con¬
fident  in  her  own  sincerity,  Great  Britain  hoped  that
Ireland  would  meet  her  in  a  conciliatory  spirit.

The  beginning  was  unpropitious.  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald,  now  twenty-one  years  old,  made  his  first
appearance  in  Irish  politics  by  opposing  the  address
on  the  ground  of  the  Reilly  prosecution.  It  came

1  See  the  articles  in  Plowden,  yol.  iii.  p.  105,  note.

THE  CONVENTION.

423

to  nothing,  however ;  and  on  the  7th  of  February  Mr.
Orde,  on  behalf  of  Government,  produced  the  eleven
resolutions  which  were  to  form  the  basis  of  the  new
treaty.  He  went  through  the  substantial  part  of  his
statement  apparently  with  general  approval.  The  Irish
members  were  not  generally  skilled  in  commercial
details,  but  each  of  the  first  ten  articles  seemed  either  to
be  innocent  or  to  contain  specific  concessions  to  Irish
interests.  He  arrived  at  the  eleventh,  the  last.  In
return  for  a  free,  full,  and  perfect  partnership  with
England,  for  free  commerce  with  the  English  colonies,
to  whose  foundation  she  had  contributed  nothing,  for
exclusion  of  the  linen  of  Russia  and  Germany  from
the  English  markets  in  favour  of  the  Ulster  looms,
for  the  protection  of  the  navy  abroad  and  at  home,
and  the  assistance  of  the  English  Consular  depart¬
ment  in  every  part  of  the  world,  the  Parliament
of  Great  Britain  expected  Ireland  to  make  some  con¬
cession.  The  condition  required  was  so  mild  that
it  would  be  inoperative  until  the  Irish  trade  had
become  vigorous,  and  in  times  of  depression  would
cease  to  bind.  It  was  simply  this,  that  for  the  pro¬
tection  of  trade,  whenever  the  gross  hereditary  revenue
of  Ireland  should  exceed  650,000/.,  the  excess  should
be  applied  to  the  support  of  the  Imperial  Fleet.

The  Secretary  had  no  sooner  sate  down  than  Mr.
Brownlow,  the  member  for  Armagh,  who  had  been
struggling  to  restrain  his  emotions,  rose  to  deliver
himself.

‘  I  was  hardly  able/  he  said,  ‘  to  contain  my  indig¬
nation  while  the  honourable  gentleman  was  speaking.
I  am  astonished  at  his  hardiness  in  proposing  a
resolution  tending  to  make  Ireland  a  tributary  nation
to  Great  Britain.  The  same  terms  were  held  out  to

CHAP.

i.

— * — — '

1785.

February.

424

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  America.  Ireland  has  equal  spirit  to  reject  them.

- — r-j— '  It  is  happy  for  Mr.  Orde  that  he  is  in  a  country
February,  remarkable  for  humanity.  Had  he  proposed  such  a
measure  in  a  Polish  Diet,  he  would  not  have  lived  to
carry  hack  an  answer  to  his  master.  The  words  of
Virgil  are  often  quoted —

u  Timeo  Danaos  et  dona  ferentes.”

I  for  my  part  have  no  fear.  If  the  gifts  of  Britain
are  to  be  accompanied  with  the  slavery  of  Ireland,  I
will  never  be  a  slave  to  pay  tribute.  I  will  hurl
back  her  gifts  with  scorn.’ 1

The  note  had  been  touched  which  always  drove
Ireland  mad.  Brownlow’s  extravagant  language
found  no  imitators.  He  himself,  indeed,  apologised
for  it.  Grattan  spoke  approvingly  of  the  essential
part  of  the  propositions :  but  the  eleventh  article  he,
too,  as  well  as  every  patriot  in  the  House  and  out  of
it,  refused  to  hear  of.

Orde  remonstrated  with  Grattan  in  private.  John
Foster,  the  most  accomplished  master  of  finance  in
the  House,  4  tried  to  convince  him  of  the  impolicy  of
opposition  at  so  critical  a  time.’  Their  arguments
produced  nothing  but  a  letter  in  which  the  great
leader  declared  his  determination  to  resist  on  the
point  to  the  death.

1  You  know  Mr.  Grattan’s  character,’  the  Duke
wrote :  4  experience  has  shown  to  what  effect  he  can
exercise  his  abilities  when  a  strong  ground  of  popu¬
larity  is  given  him  to  stand  upon.’

The  national  pride  was  touched,  and  Grattan  would
have  forfeited  confidence  for  ever  had  he  hesitated.

1  Irish  Debates ,  February  7,  1785.  1  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord
Sydney.  Most  secret.’  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION.

425

He  took  his  ground  with  skill,  and  rested  his  oppo¬
sition  on  economic  grounds.  He  told  Orde  that  c  till
the  Government  brought  its  expenditure  within  the
revenue,  he  would  not  consent  to  the  appropriation  of
a  farthing  of  it.  The  system  of, carrying  on  the
administration  bv  loans  was  ruinous/  c  He  foresaw

j

the  violent  resentment  of  an  exasperated  people,  to
•  whom  Government,  if  it  persevered,  would  become  to
the  last  degree  obnoxious.’

The  Irish  Council,  who  knew  the  country,  felt  the
hopelessness  of  resistance.  The  revenue  leaking  at  a
thousand  pores  through  the  inveteracy  of  the  smug¬
gling  trade  could  never  rise  till  the  legitimate  com¬
merce  was  expanded.  England  was  holding  out
what,  under  the  existing  circumstances  of  the  world,
might  have  proved  to  Ireland  a  very  horn  of  plenty.
Ireland  would  not  have  it.  The  Council  warned
Rutland  that  he  would  proceed  at  his  peril.  They  re¬
commended  an  alteration  limiting  the  appropriation
to  years  in  which  the  revenue  should  not  be  exceeded,
and  the  introduction  of  an  additional  resolution  that
the  interests  of  Ireland  required  that  the  accumulation
of  debt  should  be  prevented  and  the  revenue  be  made
equal  with  the  expenditure.

The  Viceroy  consented  against  his  judgment.1
Grattan  gave  his  support  with  the  new  condition
attached,  and  thus  modified  the  resolutions  were
accepted  by  Ireland  and  transmitted.

Doubtless  it  was  well  to  equalise  income  with  out¬
goings.  But  the  Parliament  might  have  remedied
what  was  amiss  by  a  yet  further  resolution  of  self-

CHAP.

I.

1785.

February.

1  1  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  February  12.  Most  secret.’

S.  P.  0.

426

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

' - , —

1785.

February.

denial,  a  resolution  to  demand  no  more  wages  in
future  for  abstaining  from  mutiny.  The  Cabinet  well
understood  the  meaning  of  the  proceeding.  They  did
not  blame  the  Duke,  but  they  insisted  naturally  enough
that  it  was  useless  to  propose  the  treaty  to  the  Par¬
liament  of  Great  Britain,  unless  Ireland,  if  she  was  to
be  admitted  to  share  the  commercial  advantages  of
England,  acknowledged  her  obligation  to  bear  a  pro¬
portional  part  of  the  expense.1

The  British  Parliament  showed  rapidly  its  own
opinion  of  the  matter.  Pitt  introduced  the  resolu¬
tions,  modified  as  they  were,  in  a  speech  in  which  he
recommended  Ireland  to  England’s  penitent  gene¬
rosity.  He  dwelt  long  on  the  tyranny  by  which  for
so  many  years  the  commerce  of  Ireland  had  been
oppressed,  and  he  invited  the  House  warmly,  and  as
an  act  of  justice,  to  atone  for  it  by  now  extending  to
her,  without  reserve,  full  rights  of  partnership  with
England  and  Scotland.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  opposition  rose  from  the
quarter  where  Grattan’s  first  efforts  to  liberate  Irish
trade  had  met  the  warmest  support.  The  Irish  had
shrieked  at  the  propositions  as  a  snare  to  rob  them  of
their  liberties.  Fox  thought  they  conceded  far  too
much  to  Ireland.  They  appeared  to  him  to  constitute
Ireland  grand  arbitress  of  the  commercial  interests
of  the  empire.  The  great  towns  struck  in  with
petitions  and  remonstrances,  to  which  Ireland’s  re¬
fusal  to  bind  herself  to  contribute  to  the  general
expenses  gave  irresistible  point.  The  propositions  in
their  original  form  were  abandoned;  and  an  effort  made

1  1  Lord  Sydney  to  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  February  24,  February
28,  and  March  3, 1785/  S.  P.  0.

THE  CONVENTION,

427

in  good  faith  to  bring  together  the  two  countries,
indissolubly  united  by  nature,  and  for  that  reason,
perhaps,  so  difficult  to  persuade  into  unity,  was  broken
down  by  Ireland’s  passion  for  visionary  and  impossible
independence.

Still  Pitt  persevered.  He  took  back  his  scheme,
and  set  himself  to  remodel  it  in  a  form  under  which
it  might  have  better  fortune.

CHAP.

'TtsT"

February.

428

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  IX.

BOOK

TIL

1785.

February.

Meanwhile  Ireland  having  again  gone  wild,  was
finding  food  for  fresh  suspicion.  While  it  was  fright¬
ened  by  Conventions  and  Congresses,  the  Parliament
had  been  reasonable.  No  sooner  was  the  danger
ended  by  Fitzgibbon’s  courage  than,  instead  of  the
halcyon  days  to  which  Rutland  had  looked  forward,
squalls  came  sweeping  up  from  all  sides  of  the  hori¬
zon.  Mr.  Brownlow’s  speech  had  set  the  Irish  blood
boiling,  and  the  passions  which  had  been  transferred
to  the  Rotunda  had  migrated  back  to  College  Green.

To  supersede  the  Volunteers  by  a  force  responsible
to  the  executive  was  indispensable  to  the  return  of
order  and  the  revival  of  industry.  Most  of  the  ori¬
ginal  members  had  gone  back  to  their  occupations,
and  the  regiments  had  been  replenished  from  discon¬
tented  artisans  and  aspiring  and  dangerous  Catholics.
The  commercial  propositions  were  to  have  smoothed
the  way  towards  the  substitution  for  this  question¬
able  body  of  an  organised  militia.  The  way  was  now
rougher  than  before,  yet  it  was  absolutely  necessary
to  make  the  attempt.  The  eleventh  article  had  cre¬
ated  a  suspicion  that  there  was  a  Saxon  plot  on  foot
to  undo  the  work  of  ’82.  The  introduction  of  a
Militia  Bill  turned  the  suspicion  into  certainty.
Feared  and  condemned  when  the  mad  bishop  was
their  hero,  the  Volunteers  were  again  regarded  as
the  saviours  of  Ireland.  Eulogies  were  poured  on
them  from  all  sides  of  the  House.  They  were  the
sacred  army  of  Ireland’s  Constitution.  They  had

THE  CONVENTION.

429

watched  over  its  birth.  They  had  guarded  its  in¬
fancy.  They,  and  only  they,  could  be  trusted  to  pro¬
tect  its  maturing  years  against  the  treachery  which
threatened  it.

Truth  was  too  cold  an  element  to  suit  the  Irish
House  of  Commons.  To  speak  truth  there  was
to  be  a  traitor.  It  was,  perhaps,  a  greater  effort  of
courage  in  Fitzgibbon  to  resist  the  patriot  members
when  they  had  the  Volunteer  frenzy  on  them,  than
to  face  Mr.  Reilly’s  meeting  or  Napper  Tandy’s
Congress.  He  rose  when  the  tempest  was  loudest,
and  spoke  with  a  clear,  cold  voice  which  compelled
silence,  cutting  out  his  words  as  in  a  mould

4  Gentlemen  have  run  into  an  odd  strain  of  invec¬
tive  against  Government,  and  eulogium  on  the  Vo¬
lunteers,  because  it  is  proposed  to  establish  a  militia.
It  is  a  new  idea  that  a  militia  is  an  unconstitutional
force.  In  England  it  is  held  the  only  constitutional
army  that  can  be  embodied.  It  is  impossible  that  the
Volunteers — be  their  intentions  ever  so  good  or  their
loyalty  ever  so  firm — can  be  of  effectual  service  but
under  the  command  of  the  executive  magistrate.
When  gentlemen  say  the  contrary,  they  talk  a  lan¬
guage  that  was  never  before  heard  from  persons  of
understanding.  ...  If  the  same  men  had  continued
Volunteers,  if  they  had  not  suffered  their  glory  to  be
sullied,  their  names  to  be  blasphemed  by  admitting
into  their  ranks  the  armed  beggary  of  the  soil,  they
would  have  still  remained  the  ornament  of  their  coun¬
try.  But  of  the  original  Volunteers  the  great  majo¬
rity  have  hung  up  their  arms,  and  are  retired  to
cultivate  the  arts  of  peace.  Their  station  has  been
assumed  by  men  who  disgrace  the  name,  and  there
is  scarce  a  dishonourable  action  which  such  men

CHAP.

i.

1785.

February.

430

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  have  not  committed.  I  have  seen  resolutions  inviting
the  French  into  the  country.  In  the  April  of  last
February  year  Sons  of  the  Shamrock  voted  every  French¬
man  of  character  honorary  member  of  their  corps.
I  have  seen  publications  inviting  Catholics,  contrary
to  the  law  of  the  land,  to  arm  themselves  to  reform
the  Constitution  in  Church  and  State.  I  have  seen
encomiums  on  Louis  the  Sixteenth,  the  friend  of
mankind  and  the  assertor  of  American  liberty.  I  have
seen  invitations  to  the  dregs  of  the  people  to  go  to
drill  and  form  into  corps.  I  have  seen  a  summons
from  a  major,  ordering  his  corps  to  attend,  with
rounds  of  ball-cartridge,  as  there  might  be  occasion
for  actual  service.  Will  any  man  tell  me  we  should
be  overawed  by  people  like  these  ?  Are  the  Com¬
mons  of  Ireland  to  be  told  they  shall  not  have  a
militia  till  the  dregs  of  the  people  who  blast  and
disgrace  the  name  of  Volunteers  shall  choose  to  per¬
mit  them  ?  Let  no  one  threaten  the  Commons  of
Ireland  with  the  displeasure  of  any  body  of  men  out
of  doors.  No  body  of  men  out  of  doors  shall  intimi¬
date  them.  I  desire  again  to  distinguish  between  the
gentlemen  of  Ireland,  the  original  Volunteers,  and
the  dregs  of  the  people  who,  led  on  by  vile  incen¬
diaries,  dishonour  the  Volunteers’  name;  and  I  say,
if  I  had  no  other  reason  than  to  show  those  sons  of
sedition  that  Government  had  a  power  to  blast  them
to  atoms,  I  would  vote  for  the  establishment  of  a
militia.’ 1

Fierce  as  some  band  of  devotees  whose  idol  has
suffered  insult,  the  patriots  in  the  House  stormed
against  the  blasphemer  of  the  Volunteers.  Their

1  Irish  Debates,  February  14,  1785.

THE  CONVENTION.

431

shouts  reached  the  streets,  and  were  caught  and  chap.
echoed  by  the  again  delirious  mob.  For  three  days  » — i — *
Dublin  was  in  inarticulate  frenzy.  On  the  18th  it  February,
found  words,  and  Mr.  Bro willow  renewed  his  motion
that  the  Volunteers  had  deserved  well  of  their  country.

Luke  Gardiner  proposed  as  an  amendment,  that  the
House  approves  the  conduct  of  those  who  since  the
war  had  gone  back  to  their  occupations.  This  was  to
repeat  Fitzgibbon’ s  insults.  Mr.  Todd  Jones,  an  emi¬
nent  disciple  of  Flood,  cried  out  that  he  would  hear
no  aspersions  on  the  members  of  that  noble  body.

They  were  accused  of  meddling  in  politics.  He  hoped
they  would  continue  to  meddle  till  they  had  saved
their  country  from  a  baneful  aristocracy.  4  The  Vo¬
lunteers,’  he  said,  4  must  aid  the  populace/

Cries  of 4  Order’  rose  from  the  Government  benches.

4  Is  a  man  to  speak  in  this  House,’  enquired  Mr.

Sergeant  Fitzgerald,  4  of  aiding  the  populace  against
the  Constitution  ?  ’

Todd  Jones  refused  to  retract  his  words.  4  By
populace  he  meant  the  magnanimous  people  of  Ire¬
land.’  He  was  forced  at  last  to  make  a  faint  apology.

Flood  followed,  however,  in  the  same  wild  strain.

He  said  that  to  spe%ak  against  the  Volunteers  was
blasphemy  ;  that  the  gathering  of  the  Volunteers
was  the  most  glorious  page  in  Irish  history.  He
moved  to  add  to  the  amendment  of  Luke  Gardiner
that  it  was  not  4  to  compromise  the  undoubted  right
of  the  freemen  of  Ireland  to  the  possession  and  use
of  arms.’

Fitzgibbon,  and  only  Fitzgibbon,  could  bring  the
Irish  House  of  Commons  to  its -senses.  He  liked  to
remind  them  of  their  inconsistencies.  He  moved
that  the  Clerk  of  the  House  should  read  from  the

432

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1785.

February.

journals  the  reception  of  the  bill  sent  from  the  Volun¬
teer  Convention.  He  then  proceeded : —

4  Not  a  man  in  this  House  has  opposed  the  resolu¬
tions  of  thanks  to  the  Volunteers  for  their  conduct
during  the  war.  But  there  is  scarce  an  injurious  ex¬
pression  which  has  not  been  heaped  on  the  ministry
because  an  amendment  is  moved  conveying  approba¬
tion  of  such  as  retired  on  the  return  of  peace.  From
the  first  I  have  ever  reprobated  the  idea  of  appealing  to
the  Volunteers,  though  I  was  confident  Ireland  was
in  no  danger  while  they  followed  the  counsel  of  the
man  whom  I  am  proud  to  call  my  most  worthy  and
honourable  friend  (Mr.  Grattan).  Sir,  I  say,  while
the  Volunteers  continued  under  his  influence,  I  feared
no  evil  from  them;  but  I  apprehended  what  has  since
come  to  pass,  that  when  they  should  forsake  him,
designing  incendiaries  would  make  them  the  tools  of
faction  and  instruments  of  their  vile  ambition.  The
press  has  teemed  with  writings  subversive  of  the
Constitution  in  Church  and  State.  Every  man  that
has  shown  an  attachment  to  the  religion  or  Govern¬
ment  of  his  country  has  been  libelled  and  calumniated,
and  the  dregs  of  the  people  whose  birthright  I  shall
show  that  it  is  not,  have  been  invited  to  carry  arms.
Sir,  I  say  they  should  be  compelled  to  lay  them  down.
As  long  as  such  a  body  of  men  exists  with  arms  in
their  hands,  ready,  at  the  instigation  of  any  wicked
man  who,  by  declamation  and  affected  popularity,
may  gain  an  ascendancy  over  them,  to  destroy  the
Constitution  in  Church  and  State,  I  say  Govern¬
ment  is  not  safe.  It  has  been  said  every  Protestant
has  a  right  to  keep  arms.  It  is  not  denied.  But
they  have  no  right  to  flock  to  a  standard  except
at  the  King’s  command  and  by  his  authority.

1 _

THE  CONVENTION.

433

c  I  defy  any  man  to  refute  me.  This  is  the  law.
If  there  were  any  doubt  of  it,  I  would  bring  in  a  bill
to  declare  it.  The  gentleman  (Mr.  Flood)  says  we
mean  to  divide  the  Volunteers.  Does  he  mean  to
admit  Catholics  ?  I  am  not  a  bigot,  but  I  say  the
Irish  Protestant  who  would  admit  Catholics  to  the
use  of  arms,  if  he  does  not  do  it  out  of  folly,  is  a
most  dangerous  enemy  to  the  country.  The  gentle¬
man  has  intimated  that  there  is  a  general  disposition
to  resist  the  laws  gone  forth  among  the  people,  and
therefore  we  should  not  coerce  them.  This  is  rea¬
soning  worthy  of  the  cause.  But  it  is  not  founded
in  fact.  If  it  was,  it  would  be  the  very  reason  for
coercion.

‘  Sir,  there  can  never  be  a  good  government  while
a  body  of  men  independent  of  the  State  remains  in
arms.  I  would  therefore  wish  to  see  them  retire  to
cultivate  the  blessings  of  peace.  Any  man  who  does
not  array  under  lawful  authority  ought  not  to  be
trusted.’

The  Patriots  hooted,  but  the  Attorney-General’s
courage  was  contagious.  Members  who  had  held
high  Volunteer  commands  agreed  with  him  that  an
armed  force  which  refused  obedience  to  the  execu¬
tive  was  virtually  a  rebel  force.  Mr.  Green,  the  mem¬
ber  for  Dungarvan,  said  that  a  few  evenings  past  he
had  seen  a  sergeant  drilling  a  company  of  ragged,
dangerous-looking  ruffians,  in  Marlborough  Street.
He  asked  him  what  he  was  about  with  such  men ;
the  sergeant  said  rough  times  were  coming  ;  he  was
drilling  them,  to  have  them  ready,  and,  damn  him,
he  would  have  them  as  complete  a  corps  as  was  in
Ireland.  In  another  street  Mr.  Green  had  seen  a
second  sergeant  with  eighty  recruits  of  similar  aspect.

VOL.  II.  F  F

CHAP.

I.

1785.

February.

434

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  He  enquired  to  whom  this  corps  belonged.  ‘  Belong? 7

_ A- .  said  the  man.  c  They  belong  to  nobody  ;  they  are

ill-di  my  corps,  and  by  God  I’ll  have  them  the  best  in
Ireland,  for  there  is  to  be  a  rebellion.7

4  Were  such  men  V olunteers  ? 7  Green  asked.  4  They
were  a  desperate  banditti,  and  ought  to  be  disarmed.7

Mr.  Brownlow’s  resolution  was  lost  by  175  votes
to  64.  Luke  Gardiner’s  amendment,  commending
the  Volunteers  who  had  returned  to  private  life  to
cultivate  the  blessings  of  peace,  was  carried  by  a  yet
larger  majority.  But  the  House  was  still  half-hearted.
The  Government  was  obliged  to  withdraw  the  Militia
Bill,  and  to  abandon  for  the  present  the  hope  of  deal¬
ing  effectually  with  a  dangerous  body,  who  might
at  any  moment  set  the  country  in  a  flame.1

1  Lord  Charlemont  was  still  the
nominal  Commander-in-Chief  of
the  Volunteers,  whom  he  dreaded,
yet  was  reluctant  to  break  with,
lie  had  issued  orders  for  a  summer
review,  and  the  Newry  regiment
presented  him,  in  answer,  with  an
address,  intended  as  a  reply  to  Fitz-
gibbon  and  Luke  Gardiner.  It
was  hushed  up  as  too  strong  for
publication : —

‘  My  Lord, — Your  Lordship’s  or¬
ders  for  a  summer  review,  and  our
alacrity  in  obeying  them,  are  the
best  answer  to  the  late  indirect
attack  on  the  perpetuity  of  the
Volunteer  establishment.  We  shall
endeavour  to  protect  as  well  as
cultivate  the  blessings  of  peace,  by
holding  ourselves  well  prepared  for
war ;  and  conscious  that  those  bless¬
ings  are  precarious  when  held  at
the  discretion  of  others,  we  shall
retain  our  arms,  not  only  as  proof
of  present  possession,  but  as  a  seal
of  future  security.

1  Peace,  my  Lord,  is  not  the

gloomy  stillness  of  men  brooding
over  the  wrongs  they  have  suf¬
fered.  It  is  the  stable  tranquillity
of  undaunted  freedom,  fixing  a  firm
footing  on  the  rights  of  human
nature,  and  leaning  on  the  arms  by
which  those  rights  are  to  be  de¬
fended.

1  We  will  not  lay  down  our  arms.
They  are  the  pledges  of  peace,  which
is  the  object  and  end  of  our  insti¬
tution.  They  are  dear  to  us  on
many  accounts — dear  for  what  they
have  gained,  dear  for  what  they
will  still  gain,  and  doubly  dear,  by
cementing  a  union  between  us
faithful  Volunteers  and  you  our
honoured  commander.

1  We  shall  grasp  hard,  my  Lord,
what  we  thus  hold  dear.  Should  a
time  ever  arrive  when  foreign  ty¬
ranny  shall  give  place  to  domestic
usurpation,  when  law  shall  be  put
as  it  were  on  the  rack  to  give  evi¬
dence  against  the  principles  of  the
constitution,  when  juries  shall  be
superseded  by  judges,  and  the

THE  CONVENTION.

435

The  battle  upon  the  Volunteers  was  thus  practically  chap.
a  victory  of  the  Patriots.  To  fill  the  time,  till  the  - — ^ — -
commercial  question  should  come  on  again,  there
were  partial  skirmishes  on  Parliamentary  Reform.

An  independent  member  introduced  a  Bill  to  prevent
the  purchase  of  seats — one  of  those  Bills  so  good  in
themselves  which  answer  the  purpose  of  no  one.

Mr.  Bro wnlow  was  able  to  show  that  the  saleable
boroughs  were  the  hope  of  the  Radical  party.  4  The
most  advanced  Reformers,  men  of  independent  spirit,
unconnected  with  and  uninfluenced  by  the  persons  by
whom  they  were  returned,  thus  found  seats  in  Par¬
liament.  If  the  patrons  were  forbidden  to  sell,  they
would  return  their  own  creatures  or  would  give  the
nomination  to  the  ministers,  and  the  public  would
pay  the  price  of  the  seat  to  the  person  who  misrepre¬
sented  them.’

A  more  comprehensive  measure  would  alone
answer  the  ends  of  anarchy.  On  the  28th  of  April
Mr.  Flood  re-introduced  the  Bill  of  the  last  session.

4  Great  Britain,’  he  said,  4  had  been  destroyed  by
the  corruption  of  her  Parliament.  Ireland’s  case
was  -worse.  He  had  wept  for  years  over  it.  Even
in  the  counties  the  elections  were  a  farce ;  the  returns

summary  j  uriscliction  of  particular
Courts  be  made  an  omnipotent  and
omnipresent  instrument  of  minis¬
terial  vengeance,  when  every  ob¬
struction  shall  be  thrown  into  the
channels  of  public  information  and
private  correspondence,  when  the
business  of  finance  shall  be  the  sole
business  of  the  State,  when  exten¬
sion  of  trade  shall  be  transformed
into  a  severe  system  of  taxation,
and  when  Ireland  shall  be  kept  as
a  barrack  for  the  empire  —  even
then,  my  Lord,  we  shall  not  deem

ourselves  totally  stripped  and  de¬
spoiled  while  our  arms  are  remain¬
ing.  But  if  our  enemies  should
ever  express  a  desire  to  wrench  out
of  our  hands  this  last  hope,  this
solitary  distinction  left  between  a
freeman  and  a  slave,  what  then,
dear  General,  can  we  do  but  answer
in  laconic  and  soldierly  language,
in  a  single  word,  in  a  single  syllable,
“Try?”’

Enclosed  by  the  Duke  of  Hut-
land  to  Lord  Sydney,  May  20,
1785.  S.  P.  0.

2

436

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

LOOK

VII.

1785.

May.

were  controlled  by  manufactured  votes.  A  landowner
in  Tyrone  said  to  his  neighbour  in  Armagh,  u  I  will
make  forty  or  fifty  freeholders  in  your  county,  if
you  will  make  as  many  in  mine.  They  shall  go  to
you  if  yours  come  to  me.”  In  the  towns,  when  a  form
of  franchise  remained,  men  were  made  honorary
members  of  the  corporations  to  swamp  the  votes  of
the  genuine  electors.  Was  it  not  childish,  was  it
not  an  insult  to  the  understanding  to  call  a  House  of
Commons  so  chosen  representative?’

The  true  answer  was  that  a  House  of  Commons
which  should  be  really  representative  would  throw  the
country  into  convulsions,  and  was  incompatible  with
the  maintenance  of  English  authority.  It  was  better,
therefore,  to  leave  unchanged  a  system  which,  if  ab¬
surd  in  theory,  at  least  made  government  possible.

The  bare  truth  would  have  been  unpalatable.  Un¬
derstood  by  every  one  it  could  not  be  nakedly  avowed.
Fitzgibbon’s  heavy  artillery  was  not  needed  when
the  object  was  to  play  with  fictions.

The  speaker  for  the  Castle  was  Sir  Hercules  Lan-
grishe,  the  witty  favourite  of  the  Duke  of  Rutland.

'  If,’  he  said,  ‘  there  could  be  such  a  mass  of  oddity
in  the  human  mind  as  that  the  people  were  in  love
beforehand  with  everything  which  calls  itself  Reform,
I  could  furnish  a  seraglio  for  their  raptures.  I  have
in  my  pocket  seventeen  different  plans  for  Reform  in
Parliament,  and  I  could  collect  as  many  more.  The
honourable  gentleman  says  the  people  demand  Reform.
The  mob  may  demand  it,  but  not  the  people.  Peace
and  industry  are  ever  silent ;  discontent  and  disorder
are  ever  clamorous,  and  ten  men  and  ten  women
that  are  clamorous  make  more  noise  than  ten  thou¬
sand  who  are  satisfied  and  silent.  When  a  man  talks

THE  CONVENTION.

487

of  the  voice  of  the  people,  he  means  the  voice  of  those
who  echo  his  own.  Personal  equality  of  representa¬
tion,  the  only  equality  that  I  can  conceive,  would  be
a  pure  democracy,  and  in  a  country  like  ours,  where
the  democracy  does  not  profess  the  religion  of  the
State,  a  democracy  subversive  of  the  laws  and  the
constitution/

The  Bill  was  again  thrown  out  on  the  second  read¬
ing  by  112  to  60.

CHAP.

i.

Tt85T

May.

438

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  X.

book  Had  Ireland  accepted  the  eleven  propositions  in  the
- — t— '  spirit  in  which  they  were  offered,  Mr.  Pitt  might
August,  have  induced  the  British  Parliament,  perhaps  with  a
bad  grace,  to  swallow  them.  Mr.  Brownlow’s  burst
of  rhetoric  and  Grattan’s  support  of  him  furnished
the  Opposition  with  effective  weapons,  and  it  fared
with  the  offers  made  to  Ireland  as  with  the  books  of
the  Sibyl.

Re-digested  and  extended  to  twenty,  the  articles
now  proposed  for  a  treaty  of  commerce  between  the
two  kingdoms  withdrew  privileges  which  the  Irish
might  have  retained,  and  interposed  stipulations
which  encroached  further  on  Irish  independence  than
the  obligation  in  the  eleventh  resolution,  which  had
been  the  occasion  of  the  storm.  In  deference  to  the
wishes  of  Liverpool  and  London,  it  was  now  pro¬
vided  that,  whatever  Navigation  laws  were  adopted
by  the  British  Parliament,  the  Irish  Legislature  must
bind  itself  to  re-enact.  Under  the  terms  first  offered
Irish  trade  was  unrestricted  by  local  limitation,  and
the  East  and  West  Indies  would  have  been  alike  open
to  them.  Though  they  might  still  trade  freely  for
themselves  with  the  Dutch,  Spanish,  and  French
Colonies  in  the  West  Indies,  they  were  allowed  to
re-import  into  England  only  the  produce  of  the
English  West  Indian  Colonies,  and  4  they  were  de¬
barred  from  countries  east  of  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope !  so  long  as  the  Charter  of  the  East  India  Com¬
pany  continued.

439

THE  CONVENTION.

The  new  resolutions  were  carried  through  the  Eng-  chap.

lish  House  of  Commons  on  the  20th  of  May,  and  « - ; — *

through  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  19th  of  July.

On  the  12  th  of  August  Mr.  Orde  came  once  more
before  the  Irish  Parliament  with  his  altered  wares.

The  changes  made  were  of  course  notorious.  They
had  been  debated  up  and  down  the  country,  and  had
been  received  with  rage  and  disappointment.  The
Table  of  the  House  of  Commons  was  covered  with
denunciatory  petitions.  The  petitioners  prided  them¬
selves  on  their  discernment.  It  was  now  proved
that,  as  they  suspected,  England  had  been  laying  a
snare  all  along  to  deceive  them.  ‘  A  serpent  was  in
the  bowl  which  had  been  offered  to  their  lips,7  and
simple,  confiding  Ireland  had  been  all  but  bitten
by  it.

The  Government  had  anticipated  an  outcry,  but  had
not  been  prepared  for  such  utterly  wild  extravagance.
Characteristically  the  indignation  turned  less  on  the
substantial  advantages  which  had  been  withdrawn  than
on  the  imaginary  menace  to  their  independence,  which
was  now  as  they  conceived  more  nakedly  revealed.

The  serpent  which  they  detected  was  hidden  in  the
clause  which  bound  them  to  re-enact  England’s
Navigation  laws.  Grattan  said  that  such  a  demand
was  a  revocation  of  the  Constitution.  Sir  Lawrence
Parsons  said  that  the  resolutions  meant  at  best  that
England  had  a  right  to  extend  the  commerce  of
Ireland — an  assertion  of  superiority  which  no  Irish¬
man  should  allow.  There  had  been  hints  in  the
English  papers  of  a  possible  Legislative  Union.
i  Good  God,  sir,7  exclaimed  Dennis  Brown,  ‘  what
union  could  we  have  with  Great  Britain  but  a  union
of  debt  and  taxation?7

440

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

August.

Then  Flood  came  riding  triumphant  on  the  crest
of  the  popular  wave.  He  described  the  whole
affair  as  the  most  infamous  attack  on  Irish  inde¬
pendence.  ‘  The  Irish  Parliament/  he  said,  amidst
salvoes  of  applause,  c  will  not  become  the  register  of
the  English  Parliament.  Freedom  of  the  Constitu¬
tion  is  necessary  to  freedom  of  trade.  Liberty  is  the
nurse  of  commerce ;  I  will  not  give  up  an  atom  of  it.
I  say  you  have  not  a  right  to  give  it  up  ;  but  if  a
Parliament  could  be  so  base,  so  profligate,  as  to
attempt  it  (u  Hear,  hear,”  from  Fitzgibbon),  I  ask
you  may  it  not  be  attempted  ?  Was  not  every  Euro¬
pean  country  free  once  as  yours  ?  Why  are  they  now
slaves  but  by  the  corruption  of  their  Senates  ?  Could
you  be  so  corrupt,  I  assure  you  the  people  will  not.
They  must  not.  They  shall  not.  I  will  raise  my  voice.
I  will  be  heard  in  the  extremity  of  the  land.  I  say
if  you  give  leave  to  bring  in  a  Bill  you  are  no  longer
a  Parliament.  I  will  no  longer  consider  you  so.
Meet  it  boldly,  and  not  like  dastards  fearful  to  guard
your  rights,  though  you  talk  bravely  to  your  wives
and  children,  trembling  at  a  foreign  nation.’

The  unfortunate  Secretary  protested  mildly  that
the  House  was  out  of  its  wits.  England  had  no
treacherous  intentions.  She  wished  only  to  attach
Ireland  closer  to  herself,  and  to  prevent  a  rivalry  in
trade  which  could  only  injure  them  both.  The  reso¬
lutions  as  they  stood  removed  the  prohibitions  which
English  jealousy  had  created  to  keep  her  trade  to
herself.  They  could  not  fail  to  be  infinitely  beneficial
to  Ireland,  so  beneficial  that  there  had  been  the
greatest  difficulty  in  inducing  England  to  consent  to
them.

Orde’s  words  were  blown  to  atoms  as  they  left  his
lips.  All  night  long  the  howling  gusts  continued.

THE  CONVENTION.

441

Grattan  said  that  if  ever  the  question  was  presented  to  chap.
them,  whether  the  Empire  or  the  Constitution  was  to  - — l—
be  sacrificed,  he  as  an  Irishman  would  say — Perish  the
Empire.  Curran  spoke  at  six  in  the  morning,  c  hoping
his  exhausted  condition  was  not  a  symbol  of  the  con¬
dition  to  which  his  country  would  be  reduced  if  the
Bill  became  law.’  At  nine  in  the  morning  1  the  House
divided.  Leave  was  given  to  introduce  Mr.  Orde’s
Bill,  but  only  by  a  narrow  majority  of  19.

Two  days  were  allowed,  in  the  feeble  hope  that  the
delirium  would  abate.  On  the  15th  the  Bill  was
produced,  and  a  second  battle  began  over  it.

Flood  moved,  i  That  we  hold  ourselves  bound  not
to  enter  into  any  engagements  to  give  up  the  sole
and  exclusive  right  of  Parliament  to  legislate  for
Ireland  in  all  cases,  externally,  commercially,  or
internally.’  On  the  top  rank  of  fame  once  more,
and  first  favourite  of  the  populace,  he  treated  the
division  of  Saturday  as  equivalent  to  victory.  He
spoke  in  contemptuous  pity  of  the  supporters  of
Government  who  dared  not  show  their  true  con¬
victions.  He  described  them  as  hiding  their  heads  in
shame,  but  undertook  to  spare  them  the  disgrace  of
further  injuring  their  country’s  cause.

Other  orators  followed  in  the  stream  of  the  popular
frenzy.  Then  Fitzgibbon  came  to  the  front  and
took  up  Flood’s  challenge.

c  The  honourable  member,’  said  he,  c  wishes  to  pass
the  resolution  as  a  vindication  of  gentlemen  on  this
side  of  the  House  who  now  hide  their  heads.  For
my  part  I  never  hid  myself  from  any  public  question,
nor  ever  will.  The  man  who  in  office  or  out  of  office
can  stoop  to  hide  from  a  public  question  is  in  my

1  Saturday,  August  13.

442

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

17857

August.

opinion  a  despicable  man.  I  will  never  skulk  from
any  measure.  If  I  approve  it,  I  will  support  it  like  a
man.  If  not,  I  will  oppose  it  like  a  man.  I  repeat
before  the  House,  I  repeat  in  the  face  of  the  nation,
that  the  Bill  brought  in  this  night  is  highly  advan¬
tageous  to  its  commerce,  and  in  no  way  incompatible
with  its  free  constitution.  Gentlemen  may  triumph  in
their  opposition  to  this  Bill.  I  will  defend  it  line  by
line  and  word  by  word.  I  will  meet  their  whole
array  upon  it.  The  clamour  that  has  been  raised  is
as  unfounded  and  as  little  to  be  regarded  as  any  that
ever  disturbed  the  deliberations  of  a  wise  assembly.
In  every  session  since  1779,  when  you  obtained  the
colony  trade,  you  recite  the  conditions  on  which  you
possess  it — you  recite  the  British  tax  and  you  enact
it.  What  is  the  difference  here?  You  are  permitted
to  trade  to  every  possession  which  Great  Britain  has,
provided  you  adopt  the  laws  by  which  she  regulates
her  trade,  provided  you  trade  as  British  subjects
trade.  Every  advantage  which  British  subjects  enjoy
is  offered  to  your  acceptance.  I  call  on  every  man
living  to  tell  me  where  there  is  an  iota  of  difference.
Therefore  let  no  man  talk  to  me  of  hiding  my  head.
I  support  the  Bill  as  highly  advantageous  to  this
country.  The  honourable  gentleman  says  it  is  necessary
to  answer  the  resolutions  of  England  by  his  resolution
which  he  has  read.  Let  me  tell  gentlemen  it  is  not
very  prudent  upon  every  occasion  to  come  forward  in
terms  of  indignation  against  the  sister  kingdom,  because
we  cannot  exist  one  moment  without  her  protection.
Let  me  tell  them  here  that  it  will  not  be  perfectly
prudent  to  rouse  Great  Britain.  She  is  not  easily
roused,  but  if  roused  she  is  not  easily  appeased ;  and
in  this,  perhaps,  lies  the  difference  between  the  two

I

THE  CONVENTION.

443

kingdoms.  Ireland  is  easily  roused,  but  then  she  is  chap.
easily  appeased.  > _ ^ _

4  You  say  you  may  go  on  as  you  are.  You  have
already  a  free  trade,  and  that  is  all  you  want.  Y  ou
have  indeed  a  right  to  trade,  but  without  the  assist¬
ance  and  protection  of  Great  Britain  you  have  not
the  means  of  trading  with  any  nation  on  earth.

There  is  not  a  single  article  in  which  you  can  trade
without  the  assistance  of  England,  and  I  desire  by
this  Bill  to  secure  her  protection  and  assistance.

When  the  people  of  this  country  are  restored  to
their  sober  senses  they  will  see  it.  The  Bill  for  ever
guarantees  your  linen  trade,  to  promote  which  Eng¬
land  taxes  her  own  consumption  450,000/.  yearly.

On  the  German  and  Russian  linens  she  lays  a  heavy
duty,  and  is  content  to  pay  an  advanced  price  for
the  Irish.  Yet  still  the  Russian  and  German  manu¬
facturers  can  in  some  decree  meet  Ireland  in  the
English  market.  If  the  duty  was  taken  off  they
would  beat  her  out  of  it  altogether,  and  therefore  I
say  she  is  a  besotted  nation  if  she  seeks  to  quarrel
with  England.’

Clamours  rose  on  all  sides.  Eager  members  started
to  their  feet,  declaring  that  Ireland  was  insulted.

No  one  in  that  House  should  say  that  Ireland  could
not  exist  without  England.

Fitzgibbon  continued : —

4 1  am  obliged  for  the  opportunity  of  reflection,
and  I  hope  gentlemen  who  have  been  so  hot  on  this
occasion  will  reflect  that  the  best  manner  in  which  I
can  show  my  sense  of  the  obligation  conferred  on  me
is  to  repeat  the  words  at  which  they  have  taken
offence.  I  say  if  Ireland  seeks  to  quarrel  with  Eng¬
land  she  is  a  besotted  nation.  I  say  she  has  not  the

444

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1785.

August.

means  of  trading  with  any  nation  on  earth  without
the  assistance  of  Great  Britain,  and  I  wish  every  man
and  every  child  through  Ireland  to  hear  me  when  I
say  it.  I  say  Ireland  cannot  exist  one  hour  without
the  support  of  Great  Britain.  When  the  people  re¬
cover  their  senses,  and  awaken  from  the  delusion  and
frenzy  into  which  they  have  been  misled,  if  the  benefits
of  this  Bill  are  then  within  their  reach,  they  will  grasp
at  them.  In  my  min'd  we  have  taken  a  millstone  from
Mr.  Pitt’s  neck  and  hung  it  about  our  own.

4 1  love  the  Irish  nation  too  well  to  insult  her.
Her  solid  interests  are  too  near  my  heart,  and  there¬
fore  I  will  not  flatter  her.  When  she  forgets  her
real  situation  I  will  remind  her  of  it.  I  never  will
insult  her,  but  I  will  speak  to  her  freely  of  her  faults,
because  I  have  no  interest  in  flattering  her ;  and  with¬
out  regard  to  the  gentleman’s  heat,  or  to  his  inter¬
ruption,  to  which  I  can  listen  with  great  coolness,  I
shall  on  all  occasions  freely  deliver  my  opinions  to
this  assembly.’ 1

Truer  words  had  never  been  spoken  in  the  Irish  or
any  other  Parliament,  and  in  proportion  to  the  truth
of  the  language  was  Ireland’s  hatred  of  it.  Curran
insulted  Fitzgibbon  so  grossly  on  his  sitting  down,
that,  according  to  the  rules  of  the  time,  a  duel  had
to  follow.2  In  the  division  the  Government  majo¬
rity  was  reduced  even  lower  than  before,  and  the

1  Irish  Debates,  August  15, 1785.

2  The  particulars  of  Curran’s  ex¬
pressions  are  not  preserved  in  the
Debates.  They  were  too  discredit¬
able,  both  to  him  and  to  the  House
which  endured  them.  In  the  field,
Curran  fired  first,  and  missed.  Fitz¬
gibbon  was  said  to  have  aimed  at

him  steadily ;  perhaps  to  make  sure
of  doing  him  no  serious  harm.  He
also  missed,  and  then  left  the
ground.  i  It  was  not  your  fault,
Mr.  Attorney,  if  you  missed  me,’
Curran  called  after  him.  ‘You
were  deliberate  enough.’

THE  CONVENTION.

445

Secretary  announced  that  the  Bill  would  not  be  pressed
further,

Ireland  was  of  course  in  ecstasies.  Out  of  every
county  came  addresses  of  congratulation  from  the
grand  juries.  Dublin  was  illuminated.  Non-import¬
ation  agreements — the  now  invariable  resource  when
England  was  to  be  punished — were  adopted  univer¬
sally.  The  populace  was  so  excited  with  alternate
exultation  and  rage,  that  the  peace  of  the  city  was
only  preserved  by  patrols  of  soldiers.  The  repres¬
sion  of  the  national  sentiment  by  these  rude  means
was  a  fresh  injury.  The  Duke  of  Rutland,  on  appear¬
ing  in  the  theatre,  was  received  with  the  Aolunteers7
March.  He  was  mobbed  on  leaving  it,  and  narrowly
escaped  personal  injury.

CHAP.

I.

1785.

August.

446

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1785.

CHAPTER  II.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

SECTION  I.

The  Irish  Parliament  was  lashing  itself  into  madness
over  ideal  grievances.  The  peasantry  caught  the
contagion,  and  burst  into  similar  fury  over  grievances
which  unhappily  were  only  too  real.

To  escape  the  return  of  periodic  rebellions,  British
authority  had  established  in  Ireland  two  institutions
whose  function  was  to  control  anarchy  and  to  reclaim
ignorance.  It  had  established  a  ruling  class  and  a
teaching  class,  a  landed  gentry  and  a  Protestant  clergy
of  the  Anglican  Communion.

The  landlords  had  been  endowed  with  the  soil  which
had  been  taken  forcibly  from  the  natural  owners.
The  clergy  had  passed  into  possession  of  the  ancient
estates  of  the  Church  of  Ireland,  and  of  the  tithes,
which,  inasmuch  as  nine -tenths  of  the  cultivators  of
the  soil  were  either  Catholics  or  Presbyterians,  were
wrung  from  the  earnings  of  the  poor  of  an  alien  faith,
who  were  burdened  besides  with  the  maintenance  of
their  own  priests  and  ministers.  The  least  that
could  have  been  expected  from  persons  so  favourably
conditioned  would  have  been  an  endeavour  to  fulfil
the  ends  of  their  existence.  The  great  persons  of
the  Protestant  laity  and  spiritualty  had  contended,
with  individual  exceptions,  in  a  dishonourable  rivalry

WHITE  BOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

447

of  neglect.  The  risings  of  the  Whiteboys,  the  Oak
Boys,  and  the  Hearts  of  Steel  might  have  recalled
the  gentry  to  the  memory  of  their  obligations.  They
had  used  the  resources  of  the  Government  to  drive
these  poor  wretches  into  exile  or  submission;  and
while  they  were  themselves  agitating  for  what  they
called  the  liberties  of  their  country,  their  own  hand
had  grown  daily  more  heavy  over  the  victims  of  their
oppression.  Half-drowned  already  in  extravagance,
they  had  burdened  more  deeply  their  embarrassed
estates  in  the  Yolunteer  insanity.  Their  resource
was  to  squeeze  once  more  their  miserable  tenantry.
In  1785  they  had  raised  the  rents  of  the  potato
gardens  in  the  south  and  west  to  live  and  six  pounds
an  acre.  Their  functions  as  magistrates  were  a  jest.
Duels  were  fought  daily  either  by  themselves  or  their
sons  under  their  eyes.  Men  and  boys  fought  and
killed  each  other,  and  there  was  no  punishment.
Young  girls,  children  of  the  few  industrious  men
of  business  who  had  saved  money,  were  still  carried
off  and  ravished  and  forced  into  marriage.  The
magistrates  looked  on  with  folded  hands,  and  gentle¬
men  of  conscience  and  honour  were  at  length  driven
to  form  organizations  of  their  own,  independent  of
the  law,  to  protect  their  families  from  these  infernal
outrages.1  Their  houses  swarmed  with  younger
brothers  or  cousins  too  proud  to  work,  who  called
themselves  gentlemen,  and  were  entitled  therefore  to

1  ‘  Ireland/  says  Arthur  Young,
in  1770,  1  is  the  only  country  in
Europe  where  associations  among
men  of  fortune  are  necessary  for  ap¬
prehending  ravishers.  It  is  scarcely
credible  how  many  young  women,
even  of  late  years,  have  been  carried

off  and  ravished,  in  order,  as  they
have  generally  fortunes,  to  gain  the
appearance  of  a  voluntary  marriage.
These  actions  are  not  committed  by
the  class  I  am  describing,  but  they
are  by  them  acquitted.’ — Tour  in
Ireland ,  vol.  ii.

CHAP.

II.

1785.

448

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1785.

shoot  or  be  shot,1  who  spent  their  time  loafing  in  the
stables  or  kennels,  breaking  horses,  or  gambling  on
the  racecourses,  or  lounging  in  the  tawdry  profusion
of  the  family  mansion  or  castle.  Supported  by  these
modern  Kerne ,  the  landlord  of  an  estate  inhabited  by
Catholics  was  a  despot  who  knew  no  law  but  his  own
will.2 *  Resistance  he  punished  with  a  cane  or  a
horsewhip.  4  The  justices  of  the  peace,’  says  Arthur
Young,  4  are  the  very  worst  class  in  the  kingdom.’
Lawless  themselves,  they  had  an  affinity  for  their  own
kind.  Offenders  of  all  kinds  found  in  them  their
natural  protectors,  and  like  the  chiefs  whom  they
succeeded  they  sheltered  themselves  from  the  ven¬
geance  of  their  peasant  tenants  by  the  arm  of  their
r uffi an  d  ep endent s .

Had  Grattan  been  a  true  friend  of  Ireland,  instead
of  clamouring  for  an  absurd  independence,  he  would
have  set  himself  to  recall  the  gentry  of  Ireland  to  a
recollection  of  the  word  4 * * * * *  duty.’  He  would  have
appealed  to  the  loyal  and  the  worthy.  He  would
have  called  on  England  to  send  back  the  absentees,
and  England  could  not  have  refused.  Here  w^as
work  for  a  very  Hercules ;  a  labour  worthy  of  a  place
beside  the  memorable  twelve.  To  have  achieved  it

1  1  A  tradesman  lias  not  a  right
to  the  point  of  honour.  You  may-
refuse  his  challenge.’ —  Tour  in
Ireland ,  vol.  ii.

2  Sir  Jonah  Barrington  tells  an

anecdote  of  an  event  in  his  own

family,  which  he  cannot  he  supposed

to  have  invented.  ‘His  grandmo¬

ther,  an  O’Brien,  had  an  “  antipathy  ”

to  a  neighbour,  a  Mr.  Dennis  Bod¬

kin.  One  day,  at  the  midday  dinner,

she  launched  into  abuse  of  Dennis,

concluding  that  11  she  wished  the

fellow’s  ears  were  cut  off.”  At

supper  that  evening  the  old  butler,
Ned  Began,  laid  a  snuffbox  on  the
table  before  his  mistress.  She
opened  it,  and  there  dropped  out  a
pair  of  bloody  ears.  On  a  cry  of
horror  rising,  Began  said  coolly,
“  Sure,  my  lady,  you  wished  Den¬
nis  Bodkin’s  ears  were  cut  off,  so  I
told  old  Gahagan,  the  gamekeeper,
and  he  took  a  few  boys  with  him,
and  brought  them  back,  and  I  hope
you  are  phased,  my  lady.”  ’ — Me¬
moirs  of  My  Own  Time ,  vol.  i.
p.  40.

1,

WIIITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

would  have  been  to  have  achieved  an  enterprise  fit  to
be  written  in  letters  of  gold  in  the  annals  of  the  three
kingdoms.  But  far  from  Grattan  was  a  desire  to
heal  the  real  sores  of  the  country  for  which  he  was  so
zealous.  These  wild  disordered  elements  suited  better
for  the  campaign  in  which  he  engaged  of  renovating
an  Irish  nationality.  He  let  the  landlords  alone.
He  set  himself  to  assail  the  second  institution  which
England  had  planted  at  an  enormous  expense,  and
like  an  unthrifty  husbandman  had  left  to  its  fortunes.

The  sarcasm  of  Dean  Swift  on  the  constitution  of
the  Episcopal  Bench  of  Ireland  was,  perhaps,  sharp¬
ened  by  his  own  exclusion  from  it,  and  by  the
political  opinions  of  the  rivals  who  were  promoted
over  his  head.  Proper  persons,  he  says,  were  ap¬
pointed  by  the  Government,  but  on  crossing  Houn¬
slow  Heath,  on  their  way  to  Dublin,  they  were  uni¬
formly  murdered  by  highwaymen,  who  stole  their
letters  patent,  went  over  and  were  consecrated  in
their  places.  Even  Swift  would  have  allowed  that
King  and  Berkeley  and  Synge  had  done  honour  to
the  communion  to  which  they  belonged.  But  as  the
serious  spirit  of  the  seventeenth  century  died  away
the  Church  of  Ireland  lost  the  energy  which  once
undoubtedly  belonged  to  it.  For  an  Archbishop
Boulter  there  was  an  Archbishop  Stone,  and  Stone
was  unfortunately  only  the  most  developed  type  of
the  prelates  who  surrounded  and  succeeded  him.
The  Irish  sees  were  wealthy.  The  rise  in  the  price
of  land  had  quadrupled,  in  many  instances  far  more
than  quadrupled,  the  value  of  the  old  estates  of  the
Church.  They  became  thus  objects  of  ambition  to
the  relatives  of  English  politicians,  and  were  made
the  reward  of  political  support.  The  Bishop  of  Derry

VOL.  II.  g  G

449

CHAP.

H.

1785.

450

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  was  a  specimen,  if  a  violent  one,  of  the  class  of  persons
to  whom  it  pleased  the  rulers  of  England  to  entrust
178°*  the  spiritual  charge  of  the  most  critical  department
of  the  empire.  The  rich  livings  were  given  away  on
the  same  principle  either  by  the  Crown  or  by  private
patrons.  Indefinite  pluralities  were  permitted  to
those  who  were  so  happy  as  to  possess  influence  at
Court,  and  the  absenteeism  of  landlords  was  imitated
by  wealthy  Irish  incumbents  who  preferred  a  wider
field  of  usefulness  in  preaching  to  the  fashionable
congregations  of  London  and  Bath.  4  The  Church  of
Ireland,’  said  Curran,  in  the  House  of  Commons,1
4  has  been  in  the  hands  of  strangers  advanced  to  the
mitre,  not  for  their  virtues  or  their  knowledge,  but
quartered  on  this  country  through  their  own  servility
or  the  caprice  of  their  benefactors,  and  inclined
naturally  to  oppress  us,  to  hate  us,  and  to  defame  us.’
The  practical  work  of  the  Protestant  religion  so  far
as  it  was  done  at  all  was  left  to  native  clergy  of  Irish
birth,  the  smaller  incumbents  whose  benefices  were
too  trifling  to  be  a  temptation,  or  by  curates  who
discharged  the  indispensable  duties  for  a  pittance  of
40/.  or  50/.  a  year ;  and  although  of  poor  rectors  and
poor  curates  there  was  generally  an  honourable  report,
it  was  an  expectation  more  sanguine  than  practical
that  by  such  means  Catholic  Ireland  could  be
evangelised.

The  first  conspicuous  and  monstrous  failure  was  in
the  Charter  Schools,  founded  by  men  of  piety  and
intelligence.  The  Charter  Schools  were  the  best-
conceived  educational  institutions  which  existed  in  the
world.  They  were  recommended  annually  to  Par-

1  February  19, 1787.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.  451

liament  in  the  speech  from  the  throne,  and  Parliament  chap.
had  responded  liberally  by  raising  its  grants  from
2,000/.  to  20,000/.  a  year.  Yet,  after  the  first  few
years,  the  number  of  the  boarding-schools  was  not  in¬
creased.  The  affiliated  day-schools  disappeared.

The  stagnation  was  assigned  to  the  opposition  of  the
priests.  An  examination  of  the  state  of  the  schools
in  1787  showed  that  little  inducement  remained  to
tempt  the  peasantry  to  resist  the  priests’  warnings
against  them.

The  principle  of  the  institution  was  industrial  edu¬
cation,  with  the  Church  Catechism  as  its  base.  A
farm  was  attached  to  each  establishment  for  practical
instruction  in  agriculture.  Trades  of  all  kinds  were,
in  theory,  carried  on  within  the  walls.  The  children
were  to  weave  their  own  clothes.  The  flax,  out  of
which  they  made  their  shirts  and  shifts,  was  to  be
sown  by  themselves.  The  sheep  which  furnished  the
wool  for  their  coats  and  petticoats  were  to  be  fed  and
sheared  by  their  own  hands.  They  were  taught  to
raise  their  own  food  and  prepare  and  dress  it.  They
were  furnished  with  knowledge  and  skill  to  enable
them  to  lead  useful  lives.  When  their  school  teaching
was  finished  they  were  apprenticed  at  the  cost  of  the
society,  and  when  they  had  served  their  time  they
received  further  assistance  to  start  them  in  life.

Ingenuity  could  have  devised  no  better  gift  to
impoverished  Ireland  than  a  school  of  this  kind
in  every  barony.  Such  was  the  intention  of  the
founders,  and  care  and  honesty  might  with  ease
have  made  the  intention  into  act.  For  care  and
honesty  there  was  only  neglect  and  jobbing,  and
therefore  it  was  not  carried  into  act.  Institutions  are
nothing  without  efficient  men  to  work  them.  The  wreck

G  G  2

452

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  of  trade  and  the  disorganisation  of  labour  destroyed
VII  ^  ^  m

—t-Ls  the  apprentice  system.  The  master  and  mistress
1785*  plundered  the  funds,  starved  the  children,  and  made
the  industrial  system  an  excuse  for  using  the  pupils
as  slaves  to  fill  their  own  pockets.  In  a  country
where,  from  highest  to  lowest,  forgetfulness  of  duty
was  the  rule  of  life,  the  managers  of  schools  were  not
likely  to  be  an  exception.  They  only  did  what  they
saw  all  others  doing.  They  took  their  level  of  obli¬
gation  from  the  scale  generally  acted  on.  The  Eng¬
lish  ministers  appropriated  the  Irish  offices  of  state
to  their  English  political  supporters.  The  Viceroy
appropriated  the  Irish  revenues  to  bribe  the  patriots.
Members  of  Parliament  jobbed  the  taxes.  Country
gentlemen  jobbed  the  county  cesses,  and  all  alike
combined  to  plunder  the  poor.  In  such  an  atmos¬
phere  a  generous  conception  like  that  of  the  Charter
Schools  could  only  wither  like  the  rest.

But  the  responsibility  and  therefore  the  blame
rested  with  the  bishops.  They  were  the  trustees.
Their  business  it  was  to  visit,  to  correct,  to  report
if  necessary  to  Parliament,  to  remove  incompetent
officers.  They  held  that  they  discharged  their  obli¬
gations  sufficiently  by  mouthing  sonorous  platitudes
in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  by  preaching  occasional
sermons,  while  they  divided  their  time  between
their  Irish  palaces,  or  their  London  houses,  varied
with  crusades  in  the  House  of  Lords  against  a  relaxa¬
tion  of  Dissenters’  disabilities.

The  bishops,  like  the  Olympian  gods,  were  set  too
high  above  the  storms  of  inferior  life  to  be  assailed
easily,  either  in  their  dignity  or  their  income.  The
rank  and  file  of  the  clergy  were  more  accessible,  and
were  more  immediately  objects  of  provocation.  The

WIIITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

bishops  drew  their  incomes  from  land,  with  which  they
were  only  connected  through  their  agents.  The  rectors
and  vicars  depended  upon  tithes,  and  on  tithes  which
were  raised  in  the  north  from  Presbyterians,  and  in
the  rest  of  the  island  from  Catholics.  The  thin  at¬
tendance  at  the  churches  contrasted  painfully  with
the  crowds  which  thronged  the  chapels.  In  some
districts  the  congregations  had  dwindled  to  nothing.
They  could  not  be  expected  to  reside  when  there  was
no  work  for  them  to  do.  As  the  absentee  landlord
had  his  middleman,  the  absentee  incumbent  had  his
tithe  farmer  and  tithe  proctor,  perhaps  of  all  the
carrion  birds  who  were  preying  on  the  carcase  of
the  Irish  peasantry  the  vilest  and  most  accursed.  In
his  origin  the  tithe  proctor  was  a  parish  officer,  ap¬
pointed  and  paid  by  the  people,  at  a  time  when  they
were  on  a  less  painful  footing  with  the  Protestant
clergyman,  to  compound  with  him  for  his  general
dues.  As  the  century  waned  and  life  grew  more
extravagant,  the  tithe  proctor,  like  his  neighbours,
became  more  grasping  and  avaricious.  He  exacted
from  the  peasants  the  full  pound  of  flesh.  Plis  trade
was  dangerous,  and  therefore  he  required  to  be  highly
paid.  He  handed  to  his  employer  perhaps  half  what
he  collected.  He  fleeced  the  flock  and  he  fleeced  their
shepherd.  4  The  use  of  the  tithe  farmer/  said  Grat¬
tan,  4  is  to  get  from  the  parishioners  what  the  clergy¬
man  would  be  ashamed  to  demand,  and  to  enable  the
clergyman  to  absent  himself  from  duty.  His  liveli¬
hood  is  extortion.  He  is  a  wolf  left  by  the  shepherd
to  take  care  of  the  flock  in  his  absence.7

There  were  gradations  of  them,  as  with  the  mid¬
dlemen,  one  below  the  other.  A  tithe  farmer  in
active  practice  of  his  profession  held  of  another

453

CHAP.

II.

~17857

454

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  who  held  of  a  proctor,  who  held  of  a  clergyman
who  did  not  reside.  He  pursued  his  calling  in  a

-i  nc>K  m  ^

parish  where  there  was  neither  dean,  rector,  vicar,
nor  schoolmaster;  often  he  was  an  officer  of  the
revenue  besides,  and  would  arrange  his  demands  for
his  own  advantage,  overcharging  the  tithes  and
pocketing  the  surplus,  and  compensating  the  tithe-
payer  by  undercharging  his  taxes.  Like  the  Roman
usurers  in  the  early  days  of  the  Republic,  he  took  his
payments  in  the  form  of  interest-bearing  bonds,  and
when  the  bonds  fell  due  the  peasants  became  his
slaves  and  ploughed  his  soil  and  carried  his  crops
for  him  with  their  own  carts  and  horses,  to  escape
execution.

The  burden  was  the  more  cruel  because  the  poor
were  his  only  victims.  The  wealthy  Protestant
grass  farmers  ought  to  have  been  the  first  to  bear
the  expense  of  the  Protestant  Church.  They  paid
nothing  at  all.  The  cost  of  the  Establishment  fell  in
the  south  exclusively  on  the  poorest  of  the  Catholic
tenantry.  The  Munster  cottier  paid  71.  a  year  for
his  cabin  and  an  acre  of  potato  ground.  The  landlord
took  his  rent  from  him  in  labour,  at  5 d.  or  6d.  a
day;  the  tithe  farmer  took  from  12s.  to  20s.  from
him  besides,  and  took  in  addition  from  the  very  peat
which  he  dug  from  the  bog  a  tithe  called  in  mockery
4  smoke  money.’

These  abominable  extortions  furnished  a  tempting
opportunity  to  the  apostles  of  anarchy.  Patient
themselves  and  naturally  silent  under  suffering,  the
Irish  peasants  were  ready  instruments  in  the  hands
of  scoundrels  who  played  upon  their  real  wrongs,
to  excite  them  to  political  insubordination.  The
Dublin  and  Belfast  incendiaries  were  enraged  at  the

455

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

threat  of  the  suppression  of  the  Volunteers,  and  created  chap.
a  division  by  kindling  an  agrarian  insurrection  in  . — — -
Munster.  After  fifteen  years  of  quiet  the  Whiteboys  178G'
reappeared  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1786.

The  movement  began  in  Kerry.  The  inhabitants
of  a  couple  of  parishes  met  in  a  Catholic  chapel,
and  took  an  oath  to  pay  no  more  than  a  specified
sum  to  the  clergyman  or  his  agent.  They  went,
on  successive  Sundays,  from  chapel  to  chapel,  swear¬
ing  in  the  people  everywhere,  and  binding  them  to
obey  at  all  times  and  occasions  a  phantom  leader,

Captain  Right.  The  oath  was  generally  taken  with
willingness ;  anyone  who  dared  to  refuse  was  dragged
from  his  bed  at  midnight ;  his  ears  were  sawn  off,  and
he  was  flung  into  a  pit  lined  with  thorns,  or  set  naked
on  horseback  on  a  thorn  saddle.1 2  By  these  means
Captain  Right  soon  had  all  Munster  at  his  obedience.

His  army  was  scattered  everywhere,  appearing  in
daylight  as  harmless  peasants,  in  the  night  as  so
many  fiends.  His  first  order  was  to  disarm  the  Pro¬
testants  in  the  province.  Midnight  gangs  appeared
at  every  Protestant  door,  and  with  as  much  violence
as  might  be  necessary  ‘  thoroughly  carried  the  order
into  execution.7  2  The  next  step  was  to  establish  a
system  of  finance.  Regular  contributions  were  levied
to  support  Captain  Right’s  government.  The  White -
boy  authority  being  thus  well  established,  the  war
with  the  tithe  proctors  commenced.  The  sentence
on  them  was  as  the  measure  of  their  guilt.  If  they
had  been  definitely  cruel  they  were  condemned  to
die,  and  the  sentence  was  promptly  executed.  If

1  1  Speech  of  Mr.  Fitz gibbon.’ —  University,  January  18,  1785.’ —

Irish  Debates ,  January  31,  1787.  Ibid.

2  1  Speech  of  Mr.  Brown,  of  the

456

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  their  offences  had  been  only  moderate  they  were
» — '  4 carded ,’  that  is  to  say  they  were  stripped  naked
and  tied  with  their  faces  downwards,  while  a  strong
tom-cat  was  dragged  up  and  down  their  backs  by  the
tail.

The  tithe  proctor  knew  the  danger  of  his  profession
when  he  entered  it,  and  charged  for  the  risk  in  his
bill.  But  the  vengeance  did  not  rest  in  punishing  the
instrument  of  tyranny,  and  fell  in  its  blind  fury
upon  others  who  were  wholly  innocent.  The  curate
had  not  injured  the  people  whom  the  pluralist  or
absentee  rector  had  hired  at  a  servant’s  stipend.
Of  him  the  most  eloquent  declaimers  on  the  wrongs
of  Ireland  could  find  nothing  to  say  but  what  was
good.  He  had  prayers  in  his  church  twice  a  day.1
He  baptised  the  children,  married  the  adults,  visited
the  sick,  and  buried  the  dead.  He  was  a  scholar  and
a  gentleman,  saved  perhaps  by  poverty  from  follow¬
ing  the  general  road  of  worthlessness.  Except  for
the  poorer  clergy  the  Church  of  Ireland  must  have
perished  of  corruption  before  the  century  closed.  So
far  as  their  means  extended  they  had  been  dis¬
tinguished  for  kindness  and  liberality.  But  they
were  the  symbols  of  a  tyrannical  system ;  they  were
defenceless,  they  were  at  hand,  and  they  were  Pro¬
testant  ministers,  and  this  was  enough  for  their
condemnation.  The  landlords  with  peculiar  base¬
ness  refused  to  exert  themselves  in  their  defence.

4  Men  of  the  purest  and  most  inoffensive  man¬
ners  were  torn  from  their  beds  at  midnight.
Their  wives  and  children  were  driven  naked  out  of
doors,  themselves  rolled  on  dunghills,  and  hardly

1  So  Grattan  seems  to  say — c  See  morning  prayer.  He  leaves  com-
tlie  curate.  He  rises  at  six  to  pany  at  six  for  evening  prayer.’

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

suffered  to  escape  with  life.’ 1  Lord  Luttrell  said  in
Parliament  that  a  friend  of  his  riding  one  morning
out  of  Carlingford  overtook  a  clergyman  who  seemed
in  pain,  with  his  head  bound  in  a  napkin.  He  asked
if  anything  was  the  matter.  4  Did  you  not  see,  sir,’
said  the  poor  wretch,  c  as  you  rode  through  the  town
two  ears  and  a  cheek  nailed  to  a  post?  They  were
mine?  2

Throughout  the  south  the  churches  were  deserted.
The  clergy  were  flying  from  their  glebe-houses  to  the
cities,  forced  to  leave  their  duties  by  Captain  Right
and  his  followers.  Could  an  example  have  been  made
of  the  non-resident  rectors,  who  were  gathering  ad¬
miring  circles  round  them  at  the  Bath  tea-tables,  the
atrocity  would  have  been  relieved  by  the  sense  that
justice  was  being  done,  however  rudely.  Irony  could
not  have  selected  less  appropriate  victims  than  the
curates  and  their  families.

1  1  Speech  of  Mr.  Secretary  Orde/  2  1  Speech  of  Lord  Luttrell.’ —

March  29,  1786. — Irish  Dehates.  Ibid.

458

.  THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

SECTION  II.

BOOK

VH.

1786.

The  Constitution  of  ’82  had  been  the  opening  of  the
box  of  Pandora.  Everyone  who  was  starving  ex¬
pected  to  be  filled,  everyone  who  had  been  wronged
to  have  his  wrongs  redressed,  everyone  who  was
robbing  his  neighbour  to  keep  his  spoils  and  escape
punishment.  Jack  Cade’s  promises  were  moderate
compared  to  what  Irishmen  of  every  degree  were
looking  for  as  the  fruit  of  that  glorious  victory.  The
descendants  of  the  Irish  chiefs,  among  the  rest,  had
dreamt  of  a  good  day  coming  to  them,  and  as  the
good  day  was  slow  in  appearing  they  took  the  matter
into  their  own  hands.

In  the  winter  of  1785-6  Mr.  Roderick  O’Connor,
calling  himself  the  representative  of  the  old  Kings  of
Connaught,  entered  forcibly  on  the  lands  of  his  an¬
cestors  in  Roscommon.  He  established  himself  in  a
fastness  in  the  midst  of  bog  and  mountain.  He  had  a
cannon  at  his  door  and  a  thousand  men  scattered
within  sound  of  it  ready  to  assemble  at  its  call.  The
peasants  gathered  about  him  with  idolatrous  devotion.
Notices  were  served  on  the  intruding  landowners
to  be  gone  at  their  peril.  Coupled  with  the  reap¬
pearance  of  the  Whiteboys,  Mr.  O’Connor’s  pro¬
ceeding  was  a  startling  surprise,  and  Parliament  met
in  January  somewhat  sobered  after  the  orgies  of  the
past  session.

The  English  Cabinet  had  decided  to  make  no  im¬
mediate  offer  of  another  commercial  treaty,  but  to
leave  the  Irish  time  to  recover  their  senses.  The

-  -  —

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

459

question  of  pressing  importance  was  now  the  peace  of
the  country.  In  the  absence  of  a  police,  and  with  a  "
local  magistracy  incapable  or  unwilling  to  act,  the
repression  of  crime  was  cast  exclusively  on  the  Eng¬
lish  army,  which  was  thus  in  perpetual  collision  with
the  people.  The  Volunteers  had  degenerated  into
an  armed  mob.  In  the  disturbed  districts  their
arms  had  passed  surreptitiously  into  the  hands  of  the
Whiteboys.  The  southern  province  was  covered  with
incendiaries,  equipped  with  muskets,  pikes,  and  pis¬
tols,  while  the  Protestants  had  been  carefully  stripped
of  every  weapon  which  they  possessed.  If  authority
was  to  reassert  itself,  the  choice  lay  only  between  a
militia  and  an  organized  constabulary.

The  attempt  to  establish  a  militia  had  failed.  The
Cabinet,  still  dreaming  of  conciliation,  were  unwil¬
ling  to  renew  a  proposal  which  involved  the  disarming
of  the  Volunteers.  They  had  discovered  on  second
thoughts  that  a  militia  must  necessarily  be  Protes¬
tant,  that  the  Catholics  would  be  alarmed  and
offended,  and  that  it  was  c  extremely  unadvisable  to
irritate  and  mortify  them;’  while  to  suppress  the
Volunteers  by  force  was  serious  and  hazardous,  and
it  seemed  more  prudent  to  leave  them  to  decline  by
themselves.1  The  choice  fell,  therefore,  on  a  consta¬
bulary,  if  the  consent  of  Parliament  could  be  ob¬
tained  for  it,  and  the  Viceroy  was  instructed  to  feel
his  way  with  tentative  and  partial  advances.

To  conciliate  Irish  disaffection  was  as  hopeful  a
project  as  to  conciliate  the  plague.  To  save  imme¬
diate  trouble  the  Cabinet  persuaded  themselves  that

CHAP.

H.

7 78gT

1  1  Cabinet  despatch  to  the  Duke  of  Hutland,  January  7, 1786.  Most
secret.’

460

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1786.

January.

although  conciliation  had  failed  a  thousand  times  it
might  succeed  on  the  thousand  and  first.  Rutland
agreed  that  if  they  desired  4  to  avoid  measures  calcu¬
lated  to  stir  political  passions  ’  they  must  leave  the
Volunteers  alone  ;  the  ugly  feature  in  the  leaving
them  alone,  however,  being  that  when  a  corps  dis¬
solved  the  arms  were  not  given  up,  c  but  remained  in
the  hands  of  the  rabble  of  the  country.’ 1

Parliament  opened  calmly,  as  if  alive  to  the  seri¬
ousness  of  the  situation,  and  addressed  itself  to  the
duties  which  were  waiting  for  it.  Flood  was  in  Eng¬
land.  Many  of  the  Opposition  members  had  re¬
mained  in  the  country,  expecting  that  the  session
would  be  unpropitious  to  them.  Party  politics
being  for  the  moment  at  rest,  the  attention  of  the
House  of  Commons  was  drawn  naturally  to  the  va¬
rious  forms  in  which  anarchy  was  showing  itself.
Roderick  O’Connor  must  be  taken  in  hand,  or  the
example  would  spread.  Mr.  Ogle,  of  Wexford,  en¬
quired  why  the  Gazette  was  full  every  day  of  accounts
of  ravished  women  ?  The  Grand  Jury  of  Dublin
petitioned  againft  the  multitudes  of  whiskey  shops,
c  hellish  dens  ’  where  the  artisans  were  driven  to  mad¬
ness.

Lord  Luttrell  said  it  was  an  insult  to  the  under¬
standing  to  talk  of  industry  to  a  nation  which  had
been  drunk  for  a  hundred  years.  Monk  Mason  en¬
quired  how  gentlemen  intended  to  stop  drinking,  when
twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  private  stills  were  at  full
work,  protected  and  encouraged  by  the  landlords  on
their  own  properties?  The  blame  was  thrown  of
course  on  the  Government.

Fitzgibbon,  speaking  the  truth  always,  however

1  1  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  January  29.  Secret.7

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.  461

unpalatable  it  might  be,  told  the  House  4  that  the  csap.
disorders  of  Ireland  were  traceable,  not  to  Govern-
ment,  but  to  the  supineness  of  the  country  gentle-  February,
men.  Government  ought  never  to  interfere  save
when  the  ordinary  means  of  keeping  the  peace  had
been  tried  and  found  ineffectual.  The  Irish  gentry,
when  any  act  of  violence  occurred,  folded  their  hands
and  applied  to  the  Castle  for  a  guard  of  soldiers.’

These  preliminary  debates  were  comparatively
rational.  The  Duke  congratulated  himself  on  the
recovered  sanity  of  a  now  thoughtful  and  prudent
Legislature.  4  Scarce  a  troubled  wave,’  he  said,  4  ap¬
peared  on  the  political  surface.’ 1  The  Duke  was
prematurely  sanguine.  The  state  of  the  South  re¬
quired  remedies  more  active  than  words.  The  Ca¬
tholic  bands  having  disarmed  the  Protestants,  were
grown  so  daring  as  to  attack  the  soldiers.  A  party
of  the  20th  Infantry,  who  were  conducting  a  convoy
of  stores  into  Cork,  were  surprised  on  the  road  by  a
party  of  Whiteboys.  They  drove  the  assailants
off  at  last,  but  only  after  a  sharp  skirmish.  The
obvious  and  immediately  necessary  remedy  was  to
hunt  down  and  disarm  these  dangerous  ruffians,  but
the  magic  shield  of  the  defenders  of  Irish  liberty  was
extended  even  over  the  Whiteboys.  4  The  Catholics
being  in  possession  of  arms,’  the  Duke  said,  4  was  a
principle  which  struck  at  the  vitals  of  the  State.  Yet
every  combination  of  men  with  arms  was  so  entangled
with  the  Volunteer  system  that  to  interfere  anywhere
directly  and  avowedly  raised  a  stir  in  the  entire
body.’

If  Ireland  was  not  to  relapse  into  the  anarchy  of
the  sixteenth  century,  a  police  of  some  kind  was

1  ( Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  February  27.  Secret.’

J

462

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1786.

February.

imperatively  necessary,  but  a  police  in  the  imagina¬
tion  of  the  patriots  was  only  a  militia  in  disguise.

Fitzgibbon  had  given  notice  of  his  intention  to
introduce  a  Bill  for  the  purpose.  The  patriots  deter¬
mined  to  oppose  it  ;  and  to  give  time  for  their  scat¬
tered  forces  to  rally,  Mr.  Forbes,1  in  Flood’s  absence,
brought  on  a  preliminary  skirmish  on  the  old  griev¬
ance  of  the  Pension  List.  A  scandal  the  Pension
List  had  always  been.  Under  the  new  Constitution
corruption  had  increased,  for  the  Lords  and  Commons
had  larger  powers  of  giving  trouble.  This  only  was
to  be  said  in  defence  of  so  large  a  misappropriation  of
the  Irish  revenue,  that  to  the  general  expenses  of  the
empire  Ireland  contributed  nothing.  She  had  refused
passionately  to  pay  what  she  called  tribute  to  the
navy  which  protected  her  commerce.  In  the  Pension
List  she  was  receiving,  as  a  bribe  to  herself,  a  portion
of  what  ought  to  have  been  employed  for  more  ho¬
nourable  purposes,  to  prevent  her  Constitution  from
becoming  such  a  nuisance  that  at  all  risks  it  must  have
been  broken  into  pieces.2  The  principle  was  less  at
fault  than  the  application.  If  some  pensions  might
be  applied  with  a  show  of  reason  to  silence  parties
in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons,  there  were  others
which  were  still  given  as  the  reward  of  services
which  would  not  bear  publicity.  The  entire  Irish  list
amounted  now  to  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  a  year,
and  as  Curran  said —

1  Member  for  Ilat oath,  in  Meath.

2  Arthur  Young  has  some  judi¬
cious  remarks  on  the  Pension  List.
Lord  Shelburne,  he  says,  once  sug¬
gested  to  him  that  Ireland  might
make  a  good  bargain  for  herself  if
she  would  consent  to  pay  7 00,000/.  a

year  into  the  Imperial  treasury,  as
a  final  composition  for  the  Pension
List  and  the  cost  of  her  military
establishment.  But  any  such  ar¬
rangement  would  have  made  her
tributary.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

463

This  polyglot  of  wealth,  this  museum  of  curiosi¬
ties,  the  Pension  List,  embraces  every  link  in  the
human  chain,  every  description  of  men,  women,  and
children,  from  the  exalted  excellence  of  a  Hawke  or
a  Rodney  to  the  debased  situation  of  the  lady  that
humbleth  herself  that  she  may  be  exalted.’

Such  a  blot  on  the  escutcheon  was  an  easy  target
for  patriotic  oratory.  Mr.  Forbes  complained  that
the  Irish  pensions  now  exceeded  the  English.  They
were  granted  to  overturn  the  independence  of  Parlia¬
ment.  Men  were  but  men,  and  while  ministers
bribed,  members  of  Parliament  would  be  bribed.
Grattan  wound  up  a  passionate  speech  by  saying
‘  that  if  he  should  affirm  that  the  Pension  List  was
not  a  grievance,  he  would  affirm  in  the  face  of  his
country  an  impudent,  insolent,  and  public  lie.’  It
occurred  neither  to  Forbes  nor  Grattan  that  the  real
mischief  lay  in  conferring  free  institutions  on  a  people
who  were  confessedly  liable  to  corrupt  influences,
and  that  if  the  members  of  the  Irish  Parliament  had
not  been  bribed  by  the  ministers,  they  would  have
sold  their  votes  to  parties  or  purposes  in  methods
more  injurious  to  the  State.

Scorning  alike  the  bait  which  governed  the  move¬
ments  of  Irish  politicians  and  the  politicians  themselves
who  railed  at  the  system  till  their  own  turn  came  to
be  fed,  Fitzgibbon  flung  the  baseness  which  made  cor¬
ruption  necessary  in  the  teeth  of  those  who  were
clamouring  at  it.  ‘  Let  me,’  he  said,  ‘  ask  gentlemen
who  exclaim  so  loudly  against  pensions,  is  there  no
man  among  them  who  has  ever  thought  his  own
services  deserving  a  pension  ?  No.  Not  one.'  Ws
there  no  man  who  would  accept  a  pension?  No.  Not

CHAP.

II.

1m

March.

464

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  one.  Was  there  a  man  of  the  110 1  who  would  ac-
> — cept  a  pension  ?  No.  Not  one.  When  that  Bill

-|  70/?  1  #  A

March,  which  threatened  us  with  wealth  and  commerce  was
introduced  was  there  a  man  of  the  said  110  that
offered  to  desert  for  a  pension  ?  No.  Not  one.  Is
there  now  a  person  among  them  that  would  come
over  and  vote  with  us  for  a  pension  ?  Not  one,  I
am  certain.  And  therefore  when  gentlemen  speak
against  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  bestowing  pen¬
sions  on  members  of  Parliament,  I  am  convinced  they
speak  the  genuine  sentiments  of  their  minds.’  2

The  Attorney-General’s  language,  however  sarcas¬
tically  true,  was  not  conciliatory.  Forbes  pressed  his
division,  and  though  he  was  beaten,  the  large  numbers
who  voted  on  both  sides3  showed  that  the  patriots  had
by  this  time  rallied  to  their  posts.

The  vital  question  of  the  Police  Bill  now  came
on  to  try  many  things  ;  among  them  to  try  Mr.
Grattan’s  title  to  the  name  of  a  statesman.  The  Bill
in  itself  was  a  small  matter.  If  successful,  the  design
was  to  extend  its  provisions,  but  for  the  present  it
applied  only  to  Dublin,  where  the  House  of  Cofnmons
had  been  half  a  dozen  times  invaded  by  the  mob;
where  a  tarring  and  feathering  committee  had  main¬
tained  a  reign  of  terror  of  six  months  ;  where  the
newspapers  openly  preached  assassination,  and  where
an  Act  of  Parliament  had  been  necessary  to  prevent
enthusiastic  patriots  from  slicing  the  tendons  of  Bri¬
tish  soldiers  straying  in  the  streets.  In  Dublin,  if
nowhere  else,  Parliament  might  be  expected  to  agree
to  the  necessity  of  a  more  efficient  protection  of  the

1  The  minority  which  voted
against  the  commercial  proposi¬
tions.

2  Irish  Debates ,  March  13,  1786.

3  134  to  78.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

%

465

peace.  The  mayor  and  aldermen  of  the  city  of  late
years  had  been  uniformly  found  wanting.  The  Attor¬
ney-General’s  Bill  superseded  their  authority ;  it  ap¬
pointed  instead  seven  paid  magistrates  to  take  the
control  of  the  local  watchmen,  and  provided  besides
forty  petty  constables,  mounted  or  on  foot  as  need
might  require,  with  power  to  enter  and  search  houses
where  there  was  reason  to  believe  arms  to  be  con-
cealed.

To  repress  savagery,  to  prevent  armed  ruffians
from  terrorising  over  quiet  citizens,  is  the  first  condi¬
tion  demanded  of  a  Government  which  deserves  the
name.  A  country  where  girls  might  be  ravished,
soldiers  hamstrung,  and  statesmen  who  objected  to
such  proceedings  held  up  as  marks  for  assassins’
poignards,  was  unfit  for  the  habitation  of  human
beings.  Mr.  Grattan,  beyond  all  men,  ought  to
have  welcomed  such  a  Bill,  being  himself  responsible
for  the  Constitution,  and  insisting,  as  he  had
always  insisted,  that  Ireland  had  only  to  be  made  free
to  show  herself  worthy  of  freedom.  Mr.  Grattan
estimated  his  duty  differently.  A  state  of  anarchy
had  forwarded  so  materially  Ireland’s  aspirations
after  emancipation,  that  he  regarded  measures  for  the
preservation  of  order  as  an  assault  upon  the  national
independence.  The  Bill  was  no  sooner  introduced
than  he  declaimed  against  the  two  score  constables
as  an  army  in  disguise,  and  the  measure  itself  as
a  covert  attack  on  the  Volunteers.  He  declared
peremptorily  that  he  would  obstruct  it  at  every  turn.

Fitzgibbon,  who  was  earnestly  anxious  to  get  his
Bill  through,  at  first  quietly  remonstrated.  After  the
riots  which  had  disgraced  Dublin,  he  said  that  he  had
not  anticipated  that  the  establishment  of  a  police  would

VOL.  II.  h  h

chap.

ii.

1786.

March.

466

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1786.

March.

be  objected  to.  A  prisoner  could  not  be  taken  through
the  streets  without  a  guard  of  soldiers.  The  House  of
Commons  had  been  taken  by  storm,  and  the  mayor,
though  he  had  notice  of  the  intended  riot,  had  de¬
clared  himself  unable  to  prevent  it.  There  was  not  a
drunken  weaver  in  the  city  who  had  not  arms  con¬
cealed  in  his  house.  In  the  South  the  muskets  of  the
Volunteers  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Catholic  rabble.
The  Bill,  so  far  from  being  dangerous  to  liberty,  was
necessary  for  the  protection  of  liberty,  and  he  ex¬
pressed  a  wish  and  hope  to  see  a  police  established
universally  throughout  the  island.1

The  opposition  to  the  first  reading,  though  loud
and  passionate,  was  not  pressed  to  a  division.  When
the  Bill  was  brought  on  a  second  time,  the  battle
began  in  earnest.

‘  We  are  to  have,  then,’  said  Grattan,  4  a  mercenary
army  paid  by  the  Ministers,  and  differing  only  from
the  military  because  they  will  come  to  those  meetings
from  which  the  soldiers  with  decency  would  retire.
You  knew  the  indignation  of  the  House  would  be
roused  had  you  avowed  the  principles  of  your  tumul¬
tuous  army,  your  mercenary  army,  your  ministerial
army,  which  you  have  tricked  into  your  Bill  in
disguise.  You  destroy  the  ancient  charter  of  our
city.  You  introduce  a  Bill  to  debauch  her  magis¬
trates  and  dragoon  her  subjects.’

‘  The  clause,’  said  another  speaker,  4  which  em¬
powers  the  police  to  enter  private  houses  to  search  for
arms  abolishes  Magna  Charta.  If  a  man  break  into
my  house  under  this  clause,  and  invade  my  privacy,  I
will  meet  him  with  Magna  Charta  in  one  hand  and  an

1  Irish  Dehates,  Marcli  22.

467

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

instrument  of  death  in  the  other.  I  declare  before
the  living  God  no  man  shall  enforce  that  clause  in  a
house  where  I  am  master.  One  of  us  shall  fall.’

The  city  came  to  the  aid  of  her  Parliamentary
chiefs.  Patriot  actors  thundered  from  a  hundred
platforms  on  the  insidious  design  of  introducing  ar¬
bitrary  power.  The  Corporation  petitioned  to  be
heard  in  opposition  at  the  bar.  A  Whiteboy  com¬
mittee  might  enter  the  curate’s  house,  and  the  friends
of  liberty  saw  nothing  but  a  brave  assertion  of  the
indefeasible  rights  of  man.  For  the  police  to  enter
the  houses  of  conspirators  and  assassins  was  an  out¬
rage  too  intolerable  to  be  endured.  A  motion  was
brought  in  to  admit  the  Corporation’s  petition.  Fitz-
gibbon  rose  to  speak  again,  and  this  time  not  in  a
gentle  mood.

4  If  an  argument  was  wanting,’  he  said,  4  to  prove  the
necessity  of  the  Bill,  it  is  the  frequency  of  these  tumul¬
tuous  assemblies  called  aggregate  meetings,  assembled
by  persons  inimical  to  it,  because  it  will  restrain
licentiousness  and  teach  these  worthy  constitutional
citizens  to  respect  the  laws  of  their  country.  They
tell  us  they  behold,  with  the  deepest  concern,  the
introduction  of  a  Police  Bill !  I  doubt  it  not.  If
passed  into  law,  it  will  give  additional  influence  to  the
Crown!  I  doubt  it  not.  They  think  that  it  will
prevent  an  opposition  to  the  law,  that  it  will  preserve
the  public  peace,  and  that  there  will  be  an  end  to
that  branch  of  the  police  the  tarring  and  feathering
committee.  There  will  be  an  end  to  that  worshipful
company  of  glass-blowers,  ruffians  hired  and  paid  by
those  worthy  constitutional  gentlemen,  to  drag  from
his  habitation  any  citizen  that  refuses  to  take  such
oaths  as  they  are  pleased  to  administer,  or  who  is

h  n  2

CHAP.

II.

~L786?

March.

468

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  suspected  of  a  due  regard  to  the  laws  of  his  country,
~tIL and  torment  them  with  whipping  and  other  marks  of
31rLth!  ignominy.  Therefore  I  doubt  not  the  plan  of  a
regular  police  lias  greatly  alarmed  the  worthy  gentle¬
men  who  promote  these  meetings,  as  it  will  end  that
kind  of  opposition  which  they  are  ready  always  to
give  to  the  law.  The  petitioners  desire  to  be  heard
by  themselves  or  their  counsel.  I  would  rather  hear
themselves  if  I  were  to  consider  only  my  private
amusement.  The  constitutional  doctrines  which  I
should  hear  would  amply  compensate  my  attention.
For  this  House  I  have  too  much  respect  to  consent
that  it  be  impeded  in  carrying  on  the  national
business.’ 1

Forbes  started  up  in  fury  to  enquire  if  the  Attorney-
General  meant  to  arrest  the  High  Sheriff  who  had
signed  the  petition?  Grattan  said  the  speech  to
which  he  had  listened  was  a  lampoon  on  the  city.
Mr.  Brownlow  was  frightened  at  the  disrespect
which  Fitzgibbon  was  showing  to  the  Corporation.
Fitzgibbon  knew  what  he  was  doing.  Irish  sedition
was  dangerous  only  to  those  who  were  afraid  of
it.  The  petition  was  refused  admission.  The  Bill
itself  was  passed.  Mr.  Orde,  who  took  part  in  the
debate,  thus  reported  the  result  :  —

4  W e  have  carried  our  Police  Bill  for  Dublin,  which
we  may  by  and  by  extend  to  the  country.  Mr.
Grattan  thought  fit  very  hastily  to  risk  the  trial  of
his  ascendency,  and  with  most  earnest  solicitude  at¬
tempted  to  create  alarm.  His  success  was  so  very
bad,  and  so  contrary  to  his  expectation,  that  he
appeared  much  mortified,  and  was  at  length  entirely

1  Irish  Delates ,  March  25,  178G.

WIIITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

469

silenced  by  the  Attorney-General,  who  rebuked  him
for  the  petulance  and  weakness  of  his  opposition  with
much  dignity.’ 1

The  defeat  disheartened  the  Opposition  for  the  re¬
mainder  of  the  session.  The  new  police  were  estab¬
lished  in  Dublin,  and  pending  further  measures  in  the
same  direction  the  Secretary  introduced  a  Bill  for  the
better  protection  of  the  clergy  in  the  South.  Nothing
effective,  however,  was  really  possible  without  more
vigorous  action  than  the  Administration  could  as  yet
venture  upon.  Mr.  Rowley,  M.P.  for  Meath,  a  Right
Honourable  and  a  person  of  some  distinction,  proposed
that  after  the  word  clergy  should  be  read  4  and  all
other  persons.’  Orde  enquired  if  this  was  meant  as
a  jest?  The  clergy  were  weak,  and  were  generally
strangers  to  the  country  in  which  they  were  resident.
The  landlords,  if  it  was  to  them  that  Mr.  Rowley
referred,  were  the  parties  themselves  most  to  blame.
The  resident  gentry,  to  their  disgrace  and  shame,
refused  to  give  the  clergy  any  help,  in  the  hope  that
tithes  might  be  abolished.  Mr.  Ogle  (himself  a  large
landowner),  replying  to  the  charge  against  the
clergy  of  extortion,  insisted  that  c  the  great  extor¬
tioners  were  the  landowners  themselves.’  4  There
was  hardly  an  estate  which  was  not  let  to  the  highest
penny  or  above  its  value.’  4  The  tenant  felt  the  op¬
pression,  and  not  knowing  where  to  turn  for  relief,
fell  on  the  clergy  as  the  weakest  and  least  protected.’

On  the  other  hand,  the  abuses  from  pluralist  and
absentee  rectors  were  really  flagrant  and  enormous.
To  pass  a  law  which  would  assist  the  tithe-proctors
was  to  perpetuate  a  frightful  evil  ;  and  even  Fitz-

CHAP.

II.

~1786.

April.

1  1  To  Evan  Nepean,  March  30,  1786.  Most  private.’

470

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  gibbon,  who  hated  injustice  as  heartily  as  Grattan,  was
y— 7IL  -  obliged  to  withhold  his  consent  from  the  Government
August,  proposal.  He  had  himself,  he  said,  known  a  hundred
and  twenty  processes  for  tithes  to  be  going  on  at  once
in  the  county  of  Limerick  against  poor  Catholic
peasants.  The  clergy,  he  said,  must  be  provided  for
by  some  less  oppressive  means.  The  tithes  must  be
commuted  into  a  charge  upon  the  lands,  and  pending
further  consideration  he  advised  that  the  present  Bill
should  be  withdrawn.

Fitzgibbon  was  right  in  principle.  The  Secretary
consented,  and  the  session  ended;  yet  the  effect  was
to  leave  the  clergy  exposed  for  another  season  to  the
Whiteboys’  devilry.  These  gentry  had  been  prudently
quiet  while  Parliament  was  sitting.  The  prorogation
was  a  signal  that  their  victims  were  again  in  their
hands,  and  the  failure  of  the  Protection  Act  was
taken  as  a  confession  that  justice  was  on  their  side.
Notices  were  posted  on  church  and  chapel  doors,
limiting  the  tithes  which  the  peasantry  were  allowed
to  pay,  and  under  pretence  of  impartiality  they  con¬
nected  with  tithes  the  dues  of  the  priests.1  Threaten¬
ing  letters  were  addressed  to  the  country  gentlemen,
written  evidently  by  men  of  education  and  ability.
The  war  was  carried  on  with  a  regularity  of  move¬
ment  and  purpose  which  showed  that  it  was  guided
by  organised  authority.  The  few  prisoners  occa¬
sionally  taken  refused,  as  usual,  to  betray  their
leaders.  They  pleaded  that  strangers  had  come  to
them  at  night,  and  had  sworn  them  to  their  work

1  1  The  manner  in  which  the  persuaded,  intended  to  conceal  their
insurgents  have  connected  in  the  real  drift. — The  Duke  of  Rutland
general  attack  the  Popish  priests  to  Lord  Sydney,  August  1786.’
with  the  Protestant  clergy  is,  I  am

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

with  the  most  horrible  threats  if  they  disobeyed  ;
while  4  too  many  of  the  gentry  and  wealthy  farmers,
looking  to  their  immediate  interest  in  the  reduction
of  tithes,  if  they  did  not  encourage  the  Whiteboys,
declined  to  take  part  against  them.’  4  It  was  strange,’
as  Lord  Sydney  observed,  4  that  they  should  not
understand  that  by  destroying  the  provision  for  the
Protestant  clergy  they  were  endangering  the  stability
of  the  Protestant  interest.’ 1

So  very  serious  was  the  aspect  of  Munster  by  the
middle  of  the  summer,  that  the  Viceroy  even  thought
of  re-assembling  Parliament.  His  special  fear  was
that  the  movement  against  tithes  should  extend  to
Ulster,  and  produce  the  union  between  Protestant
Dissenters  and  Catholics  which  the  madness  of
ecclesiastical  legislation  had  made  a  too  formidable
probability.2  The  Privy  Council  would  give  no  ad¬
vice.  The  Viceroy  had  no  force  to  rely  upon  but  the
British  regiments,  and  to  employ  British  soldiers  as
policemen  was  to  intensify  the  animosity  between
the  two  countries  and  to  raise  the  Whiteboys  into  a
patriot  army.  The  outrages  at  length  became  so
appalling  that  Lord  Luttrell  was  sent  down  with  a
detachment  of  troops  to  see  what  he  could  do.  His
difficulty  was  to  discover  his  enemy.  The  Whiteboys
were  everywhere  and  nowhere.  The  car  driver  on
the  road,  or  the  peasant  digging  potatoes  in  the  field
at  its  side,  the  shopman  behind  the  village  counter,  or
the  trusted  servant  in  the  mansion  or  parsonage,  were
the  same  men  who  at  night  were  carding  tithe -proc¬
tors  and  banishing  sleep  from  the  bedsides  of  the
clergy  and  their  families.  Prisoners  were  taken  only

1  1  Lord  Sydney  to  the  Duke  of  Rutland,  September  0,  178G.’

3  ‘  Rutland  to  Sydney,  August  178G.’

471

CHAP.

II.

17867

August.

472

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  to  be  dismissed  for  want  of  evidence.  4  The  gentle-
— *  men  and  farmers,’  reported  Luttrell,  4  everywhere
Aiunist.  sh°w  a  singular  sympathy  with  them.  Petty  juries
will  not  convict.  Grand  juries  are  strangely
apathetic,  and  willing  to  receive  the  Whiteboys’
petitions.’1

The  spell  was  broken  at  last,  by  the  same  means
which  had  ended  the  tarring  and  feathering  in  Dublin.

O  o

Lord  Tyrone  had  arrested  a  couple  of  Whiteboys
in  Waterford,  and  by  great  exertion  had  obtained  evi¬
dence  to  compel  their  conviction.  Their  offence  was
not  capital.  One  was  sentenced  to  be  imprisoned,  the
other  to  be  publicly  flogged.

In  a  wholesome  state  of  society  neglect  of  duty
would  be  punished  as  severely  as  crime.  The  com¬
missioned  officer  who  deserts  his  post  or  allows  those
under  him  to  fall  into  disorder  by  want  of  discipline
is  justly  cashiered.  The  absentee  landlords  and  clergy
who  drove  the  peasants  mad  by  extortion,  and  gave
them  guidance  in  return  neither  for  body  nor  soul,
deserved  probably,  in  nature’s  court  of  equity,  a
place  at  the  cart’s  tail  by  the  Whiteboy’s  side.
The  people  were  wronged.  The  law  gave  them  no
redress;  and  when  they  attempted  wild  justice  for
themselves,  they  were  handed  over  to  the  executioner.
An  unequal  balance  always  yields  an  unsound  re¬
sult;  and  if  justice  cannot  be  distributed  evenly — if
the  whip  or  gallows  are  reserved  for  the  poor  offender,
while  the  rich  is  left  to  his  fine  houses  and  three
courses  a  day — the  social  wound  remains  unhealed.
In  proportion  as  the  resentment  of  the  favoured
section  of  society  is  strong  against  the  rude  redressors

1  1  Report  of  General  Lord  Luttrell,  September  21,  178G.’  S.P.O.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

of  general  injuries,  so  among  their  fellow  sufferers  the
general  sympathy  will  be  on  their  side,  and  will  regard
them  as  soldiers  suffering  for  a  popular  cause.  No
State,  however,  can  permit  the  wild  justice  to  con¬
tinue  which  never  strikes  the  true  criminals.  Harmless
curates  and  their  wives  could  not  be  allowed  to  be
torn  from  their  beds,  sliced  with  knives,  or  torn  with
briars.  Whiteboyism  had  to  be  put  down.  The
convicted  Whiteboy  was  therefore  to  be  flogged.
But  who  was  to  inflict  the  flogging?  The  common
officers  refused,  though  with  loss  of  place  and  salary.
High  rewards  were  offered.  The  debtors’  prison  was
searched  for  some  one  who  would  do  the  work  in
return  for  liberty.  Not  a  man  could  be  found.  The
High  Sheriff  was  the  person  responsible  for  the  exe¬
cution  of  the  sentence.1  He  determined  that  the  law
should  not  become  a  jest ;  and,  since  none  else  would
do  it,  he  himself  with  his  own  hand  flogged  the  pri¬
soner  through  the  streets  of  Waterford.

The  effect  was  once  more  instantaneous.  The  reign
of  terror  was  over.  Timid  lords  and  gentlemen  took
courage  from  Musgrave’s  example.  Well-meaning
farmers  and  peasants,  seeing  that  they  might  count
upon  protection,  came  forward  with  information.
Lord  Kenmare,  though  himself  a  Catholic,  hunted
down  the  insurgents  of  Kerry,  1  dragging  them  from
the  very  altars  of  the  Popish  chapels  to  which  they
had  flown  for  concealment  and  protection.’ 2  A  com¬
pany  of  soldiers,  attacked  by  a  gang  of  Whiteboys,  in
Clare,  fired  into  them,  and  four  were  killed.  Others
were  betrayed  and  taken,  and  were  sent  in  shiploads

1  Sir  Diehard  Musgrave,  noto-  2  ‘  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord
rious  afterwards  as  the  historian  of  Sydney,  September  26,  1786.  Se-
the  Rebellion  of  1798.  cret/

473

CHAP.

II.

- Y - — **

1786.

September.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  to  Botany  Bay.  Luttrell,  whose  mission  threatened
— 1J^  at  first  to  be  a  hopeless  failure,  returned  to  Dublin  in

i  n  on

October.  October,  leaving  the  country  quieted,  the  clergy
breathing  freely  again  in  their  glebe  houses,  and  the
Whiteboys  prepared  to  wait  ‘  till  their  complaints
could  be  considered  by  Parliament.’  1

A  respite  had  been  gained,  but  a  respite  only.  Their
arms  were  still  in  their  hands,  and  commotions  would
infallibly  break  out  again  if  Parliament  failed  to  find
a  remedy.  The  Viceroy  declared  himself  ‘unable  to
offer  an  opinion  what  was  fittest  to  be  done  in  so  de¬
licate  and  complicated  a  question.’  He  rather  hinted
than  advised  the  commutation  system,  to  which  Fitz-
gibbon  had  pointed  as  the  fittest  solution.2

1  1  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord  Sydney,  October  29,  1786.  Secret/

475

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

SECTION  III.

The  disorders  were  suspended  in  Munster  only  to  chap.

break  out  in  other  places.  The  revolution  of  ’82  and  v _ ^ —

the  establishment  of  political  liberty  had  been  the  sig-  j.^^y
nal  for  the  bursting  loose  of  Irish  ideas.  An  armed
rising  in  Galway  in  January  was  with  difficulty  sup¬
pressed  by  Colonel  St.  George,  who  seized  the  ring¬
leader  at  the  head  of  his  gang.  The  Viceroy  found
that  ‘  Parliament  only  could  put  an  absolute  period  to
these  disgraceful  commotions,’ 1  and  relinquishing  re¬
luctantly  the  system  of  biennial  sessions  which  had
allowed  hitherto  a  twelvemonth’s  respite  from  agita¬
tion,  he  found  himself  obliged  to  recall  the  Legislature
to  its  functions  at  the  opening  of  the  new  year.  It
was  indispensable  to  show  the  Irish  people  that  free¬
dom  (whatever  its  theoretic  value  to  them)  did  not
mean  anarchy  and  midnight  assassination,  and  the
starvation  of  the  clergy  by  the  refusal  of  their  lawful
salaries.  Remedial  measures  might  be  eventually
necessary;  but  the  leading  gentry,  alive  to  the  disgrace
of  the  country,  agreed  that  effective  steps  must  be
first  adopted  to  restore  respect  for  the  law.  They
promised  privately  to  support  the  duke  in  carrying  a
Conspiracy  Act,  and  in  providing  more  effective
officers  to  maintain  peace  than  the  supine  and
cowardly  magistracy.2

On  the  last  of  January  Fitzgibbon  laid  before  the

1  1  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  2  ‘  The  Duke  of  Rutland  to  Lord
Lord  Sydney,  November  10,  1786.’  Sydney,  January  25,  1787.’

S.  P.  o.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

House  of  Commons  the  outlines  of  the  measure  which
he  intended  to  propose.  Combinations  to  commit
capital  crimes  had  been  hitherto  only  misdemeanours
until  purpose  became  act.  The  Attorney- General’s  Bill
made  conspiracy  into  felony.  It  contained  clauses
enabling  the  Executive  to  disregard  Constitutional
forms  in  dealing  with  what  was  virtually  rebellion.
The  Whiteboy  Association  had  commenced  in  a  Catho-
]ic  chapel.  Through  the  chapels  it  was  propagated.
The  chapel  altars  had  been  the  sanctuary  of  the  criminal
when  the  soldiers  were  on  his  track.  It  was  proposed  to
empower  the  magistrates  at  their  discretion  to  destroy
any  Catholic  c  meeting-house,’  in  which  tumultuous
assemblies  had  been  held  or  unlawful  oaths  had
been  administered,  and  to  forbid  the  re-erection  of
any  chapel  so  demolished  within  three  years.

Fitzgibbon  was  Irish  born — Irish  of  the  very  Irish.
He  knew  the  people.  He  knew  the  working  of  the
popular  creed.  He  knew  that  if  the  priests  were  not
to  command,  they  must  be  broken  in  and  forced  to
obey.  Though  he  was  stern  where  sternness  was  im¬
perative,  no  one  was  more  conscious  than  he  of  the
wrongs  under  which  the  country  suffered.  No  one
ever  described  those  wrongs  more  effectively,  or  laid
the  lash  more  heavily  on  the  right  shoulders.  In  the
speech  with  which  he  introduced  the  Bill,  he  said  : —

4 1  am  well  acquainted  with  the  Province  of  Mun¬
ster,  and  I  know  that  it  is  impossible  for  human

wretchedness  to  exceed  that  of  the  miserable  tenantry

*/

of  that  Province.  I  know  that  the  unhappy  tenantry
are  ground  to  powder  by  relentless  landlords.  I
know  that  far  from  being  able  to  give  the  clergy
their  just  dues,  they  have  not  food  and  raiment  for
themselves  ;  the  landlord  grasps  the  whole.  Sorry  I

WHITEBOYS.  HIGH  AND  LOW.
/

477

am  to  add  that,  not  satisfied  with  their  present  ex-  chap.
tortion,  some  landlords  have  been  so  base  as  to  insti-  _

1  707

gate  the  insurgents  to  rob  the  clergy  of  their  tithes,  Ju^ar^
not  in  order  to  alleviate  the  distresses  of  the  tenantry,
but  that  they  might  add  the  clergy’s  share  to  the
cruel  rackrents  already  paid.  Sir,  I  fear  it  will
require  the  utmost  ability  of  Parliament  to  come  to
the  root  of  these  evils.  The  poor  people  of  Munster
live  in  a  more  abject  state  of  poverty  than  human
nature  can  be  supposed  able  to  bear.  Their  miseries
are  intolerable ;  but  they  do  not  originate  with  the
clergy,  nor  can  the  Legislature  stand  by  and  see  them
take  the  redress  into  their  own  hands.  Nothing  can
be  done  for  their  benefit  while  the  country  remains
in  a  state  of  anarchy.’  1

The  introduction  of  Fitzgibbon’s  Bill  was  the
occasion  of  one  of  the  most  instructive  debates  which
was  ever  heard  in  the  Irish  House  of  Commons.  To
the  patriots,  who  believed  that  more  liberty  was  the
remedy  which  Ireland  required,  it  was  naturally
odious.  Henry  Flood  was  gone.  He  had  forsaken
his  ungrateful  country,  and  transferred  his  eloquence
to  a  sphere  where  it  was  less  appreciated  than  even
at  home.  He  was  now  a  Member  of  the  British  Par¬
liament.  But  his  place  was  adequately  filled,  so  far
as  opposition  was  needed  to  every  measure  that  could
strengthen  authority.  Mr.  Burgh  called  the  Bill  a
libel  on  the  House  and  country  and  on  human  nature,
infamous  in  principle  and  motive,  and  disgraceful  to
the  community  where  it  could  find  a  moment’s  tole¬
ration.  Grattan  outdid  himself  in  passion  and  bril¬
liancy  of  invective.  c  Ireland  needed  coercion,  it  was

1  Irish  Delates,  January  31,  1787.

478

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1787."

January.

true,  but  it  needed  the  coercion  of  tenderness,  the
coercion  of  justice,  the  coercion  which  should  appeal
to  the  generous,  warm,  and  noble  temperament  of  the
Irish  people.  The  Attorney-General’s  Bill  breathed
of  nothing  but  blood.  It  was  a  leaf  from  the  code  of
Draco.  The  clause  for  the  destruction  of  the  Catholic
chapels  was  a  gross  expression  of  insolent  and  gra¬
tuitous  intolerance.’

The  chapel  provision  evidently  found  no  favour.
Country  gentlemen  were  not  prepared  for  a  war  of
religion,  and  if  embodied  in  the  Act  it  would  be  as
inoperative  as  the  repealed  penal  laws.  Fitzgibbon
yielded  to  the  general  sentiment.  4  If  the  Popish
meeting-houses,’  he  said,  4  were  mere  places  of  combi¬
nation  to  rob  the  Protestant  clergy,  they  ought  to  be
prostrated.’  But  4  as  he  desired  his  Bill  to  be  passed
unanimously,  he  consented  to  withdraw  that  feature.’

On  the  rest  of  the  Bill  the  discussion  went  on
fiercely  as  before.  Some  members  wished  to  confine
it  to  Cork,  Limerick,  and  Tipperary.  But  it  was  not  a
measure  intended  only  to  affect  the  ignorant  peasantry
of  the  South.  It  was  directed  against  the  universal
lawlessness  of  all  ranks  and  creeds — against  the
Ulster  Protestant  peer  as  well  as  starving  Catholic
cottier.

Lashing  out  indiscriminately,  Fitzgibbon  called
attention  to  a  recent  characteristic  proceeding  of  the
same  nobleman  who  had  sent  so  many  Protestant
recruits  to  Washington’s  army.1  4  The  North,’  he
said,  4  has  not  been  free  from  disorder.  An  out¬
rageous  attack  has  lately  been  made  on  the  pro¬
perty  of  Baron  Yelverton.  Four  hundred  ruffians,

1  Lord  Donegal.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

headed  by  an  engineer,  who  professed  publicly  that
he  was  employed  by  a  certain  absentee  peer,  who
perhaps  has  injured  this  country  more  than  any
other  man  ever  did,  at  midnight,  near  Belfast,  made
an  irruption  into  the  works  which  Baron  Yelverton
had  erected  to  repel  the  tide,  and  where  he  had
erected  several  houses  and  stores  at  a  great  expense.
They  destroyed  the  barriers  against  the  sea,  and  did
damage  which  a  large  sum  will  not  repair.  For  four
hours  they  worked,  and  then,  lest  their  ardour  should
be  damped,  their  commander,  the  engineer,  led  them
into  the  town  of  Belfast,  where  having  dosed  them
with  whiskey,  he  led  them  to  the  charge  again.  The
magistrates  saw  this,  but  did  not  disperse  the  mob  ;
and  now  that  the  injured  man  sues  for  redress,  the
offender  avails  himself  of  the  situation,  skulks  be¬
hind  privilege,  and  refuses  to  plead.’

The  discussion  on  the  Insurrection  Act  spread  into
collateral  subjects,  and  the  whole  situation  of  Ireland,
in  its  social  relations,  came  up  night  after  night  for
review.

Mr.  Browne,  a  native  of  America,1  remarked  on  the
nature  of  Irish  tenures.  4  Elsewhere,’  he  said,
4  landed  title  was  purchase,  in  Ireland  it  was  forfei¬
ture.’  4  The  old  proprietor  kept  alive  the  memory
of  his  claim.  Property  in  Ireland  resembled  the
thin  soil  of  volcanic  countries  spread  lightly  over
subterranean  fires.’ 2  Religion  was  thus  vitally  con¬
nected  with  the  land  question;  and  in  Dr.  Curry’s
history,  which  had  just  been  published,  the  Protestant

1  Member  for  tlie  University.  always  known.  They  regularly

2  Arthur  Younghad  just  written:  transmit,  by  testamentary  deed,  the
* It  is  a  fact  that  in  most  parts  of  memorial  of  their  right  to  those
Ireland  the  descendants  of  the  old  estates  which  once  belonged  to  their
owners,  the  heirs  of  an  estate,  are  families.’

480

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  gentry  were  represented  as  invaders,  usurpers,  viola-
_  _TJ— tors  of  treaties  and  public  faith,  the  eldest  born  of
January  perfidy  and  ingratitude.  It  was  no  wonder  that  with
such  impressions  the  Irish  abhorred  both  landlord
and  parson.7 1

Grattan  brought  up  the  miseries  of  the  tithe  payers
in  two  glittering  speeches.  He  charged  the  clergy
with  extortion,  and  with  eloquent  platitudes  contrasted
the  modern  well-paid  incumbent  with  the  barefooted
Apostle.  If  fine  speeches  could  have  healed  chronic
wounds,  Ireland  would  soon  have  taken  leave  of  her
sorrows.  But  the  medium  which  she  needed  was
truth ;  and  Grattan’s  impassioned  sentences  might
possess  every  other  title  to  admiration,  but  true  they
wrere  not.  Fitzgibbon  repeated  that  the  Munster
peasants  were  ‘  in  a  state  of  oppression,  abject  poverty,
sloth,  dirt,  and  misery,  not  to  be  equalled  in  the
world.’  The  tithes  might  be  an  aggravation  of  their

1  Of  all  the  varieties  of  negli¬
gence  with  which  Irish  interests
have  been  treated,  none  has  been
more  mischievous  than  the  tacit
indifference  with  which  Dr.  Curry’s
legend  has  been  allowed  to  pass
into  accepted  history.  Dr.  Curry
represents  the  rebellion  of  1641  as
having  been  instigated  or  allowed
by  the  Puritans,  who  wanted  an
excuse  to  rob  the  Irish  of  their  es¬
tates.  He  represents  the  massacre
as  a  fiction,  invented  by  fraud  and
supported  by  perjured  witnesses.
The  truth  being,  according  to  him,
that  the  Protestants  began  to  mur¬
der  the  Catholics,  and  that  the
Catholics  took  arms  in  self-defence.
Was  this  account  a  correct  one  P
If  it  was,  the  forfeiture  and  the  Act
of  Settlement  were  the  most  atro¬
cious  injuries  ever  inflicted  on  the

weak  by  the  strong.  The  resentment
of  the  Irish  would  be  as  legitimate
as  it  ought  to  be  undying  till  the
fullest  reparation  had  been  made.
How  vain,  how  mendacious,  how
absurd  the  story  is,  was  shown
long  ago  in  the  1  Fiction  Unmasked’
of  Dr.  Harris.  But  Harris  is  for¬
gotten,  Temple  and  Borlase  are
unread  or  denounced  as  liars ;  while
Dr.  Curry’s  version  has  possession
of  the  field,  and,  being  unquestioned,
is  accepted  by  the  Irish  Catholics
as  true.  English  statesmen  them¬
selves  half  believe  it,  and,  forgetting
the  alternative,  that  if  the  Irish
Catholics  were  not  guilty  in  1641
their  estates  ought  to  be  restored
to  the  nation  from  which  they  were
violently  taken,  talk  blandly  of
their  regret  for  past  oppression.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

481

sufferings,  but  the  real  source  of  those  sufferings  lay  chap.

in  the  middlemen,  4  who  having  no  inheritance,  no  _ TI-! _

education,  no  profession,  ground  the  people  to  powder.’  1787-8
If  tithes  were  abolished,  as  Grattan  desired,  the  people
would  be  no  better  off  4  while  those  harpies  were
allowed  to  prey  on  them.’  The  landlords,  who  ought
to  have  protected  them,  handed  them  over  to  middle¬
men,  the  middlemen  sublet  to  annual  tenants  at  a  rack-
rent  ;  and  if  the  provision  for  the  clergy  was  taken
away,  the  effect  would  only  be  that  they  would  exact
another  pound  an  acre  for  the  potato  grounds.  Mr.
Browne  vindicated  the  clergy  from  Grattan’s  personal
charges.  If  they  were  guilty  of  extortion,  they  had
no  benefit  of  clergy  to  screen  them.  The  courts
were  open  and  they  could  be  prosecuted  ;  the  absence
of  attempt  at  legal  remedy,  and  the  recourse  to  vio¬
lence,  proved  their  innocence  more  than  a  thousand
allegations.  4 1  wish,’  he  said,  with  the  eloquence  of
truth,  4 1  wish  you  had  seen  them  as  I  have  seen  them,
with  ruined  hopes  and  broken  hearts,  despondently
sitting  amidst  the  blasted  comforts  of  declining;  life.

Is  your  pity  confined  to  the  peasant  ?  Suspected  pity
whose  handmaid  is  interest !  They  embraced  a  pro¬
fession  on  the  public  faith  plighted  by  you — plighted
by  the  Constitution.  You  enticed  them  to  purchase
education,  and  with  it  keener  sensibility.  Is  it  safe
to  sport  with  property  ?  Is  it  policy  to  teach  the  mob
logic?  You  say  the  clergy  do  not  reside  to  do  their
duty.  It  is  not  generally  true.  But  do  you  do  your
duty?  Have  you  no  duty  to  your  country?  to  your
friends?  to  yourselves?  Do  you  do  your  duty?  You
say  the  clergy  have  too  much.  Did  you  ever  hear
of  Agrarian  laws?  Do  you  think  it  easy  to  persuade
VOL.  II.  i  i

482

BOOK

VII.

1787-8

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

the  famished  beggars  that  it  is  right  for  one  man  to
have  ten  thousand  a  year  and  another  nothing?  ’

Fitzgibbon  finally  wound  up  the  subject  in  words
which,  few  as  they  were,  contained  the  whole  secret
of  Ireland’s  wretchedness.

‘The  right  hon.  gentleman’  (Mr.  Grattan)  ‘has
said  we  do  not  know  the  people  of  the  South.  I  ap¬
prehend  rather  the  right  hon.  gentleman  does  not
know  them.  I  have  lived  among  them  almost  my
whole  life ;  he  but  a  few  weeks.  I  am  very  closely
and  have  been  very  closely  attached  to  them.  I  will
again  state  what  I  mentioned  before.  It  is  the  duty
of  the  landlord  to  protect  his  tenants.  If  landlords
would  take  the  trouble  to  know  their  tenants,  and  not
leave  them  in  the  hands  of  rapacious  agents  and  mid¬
dlemen,  we  should  hear  no  more  of  discontents.  The
great  source  of  all  these  miseries  arises  from  the  ne¬
glect  of  those  whose  duty  and  interest  it  is  to  protect
them.’

The  perversity  of  history  has  stamped  Fitzgibbon
as  the  reviler  of  his  country,  and  the  enemy  of  the
race  from  which  he  sprung.  The  Irish  peasant  never
had  a  truer  friend,  nor  Ireland  a  nobler  patriot.

In  debates  on  these  questions,  and  in  the  practical
legislation  arising  out  of  them,  the  entire  session  was
busily  consumed.  Alarmed  by  the  wild  spirit  which
was  abroad,  the  House  of  Commons  abstained  from
obstructing  the  Government  or  making  frequent  de¬
monstrations  in  favour  of  Irish  ideas.  They  listened
to  Grattan’s  rhetoric,  but  they  allowed  Fitzgibbon  to
guide  them.  Grattan  himself  would  perhaps  have
been  less  violent  had  he  not  been  aware  that  the
temper  of  the  majority  would  be  proof  for  the  present
against  mere  declamation.  Three  Bills  were  passed

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

of  a  character  which  showed  that  in  ordinary  circum¬
stances  the  Parliament  was  fully  equal  to  its  respon¬
sibilities.  The  Insurrection  Bill,  or  Tumultuous
Assemblies  Bill,  as  it  finally  became  law,  though  it
lacked  the  clause  for  the  destruction  of  the  chapels,
was  a  formidable  measure.  It  embodied  in  the  first
place  the  provisions  of  the  Riot  Act,  hitherto  un¬
known  in  Ireland.  The  magistrates  had  power  to
order  every  meeting  of  more  than  twelve  persons  to
disperse.  Persons  so  ordered,  who  disobeyed,  were
liable  to  be  shot.  Attacks  on  clergymen,  or  on
churches  of  the  Establishment,  were  made  felony.
Conspiracies,  terrorism,  administering  unlawful  oaths,
seizure  of  arms,  interfering  to  silence  witnesses,  all
these  were  made  felony,  with  death  for  a  punish¬
ment.  For  combination  to  deprive  clergy  of  their
tithes  the  penalties  were  fine,  imprisonment,  and  the
whip.1

No  plan  could  as  yet  be  formed  for  the  commuta¬
tion  of  tithes.  The  clergy,  who  for  a  year  had  re¬
ceived  either  nothing  or  so  much  only  as  the  White-
boy  Committee  was  pleased  to  sanction,  were  not  to
be  allowed  to  starve.  A  second  Act  was  passed  giv¬
ing  them  power  to  recover  their  dues  by  civil  bill  at
the  assizes,  and  an  extremely  significant  provision
was  inserted,  that  4  on  the  hearing  of  any  civil  bill
under  this  Act  no  jury  should  be  empannelled  nor
should  any  appeal  be  received.’ 2

Laws  were  still  nothing  without  force  to  execute
them.  A  third  measure  gave  power  to  the  Viceroy
for  three  years  (should  he  see  occasion)  to  extend  to
the  whole  country,  or  part  of  it,  the  provisions  of  the

1  Irish  Statutes ,  1787,  cap.  15.

2  Ibid.  cap.  36

484

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

- - - -  ^

1787-8.

Dublin  Police  Bill,  to  appoint  a  Protestant  constabu¬
lary  in  every  barony  in  the  kingdom,  superseding  the
corrupt  or  incapable  local  officers,  and  a  body  of  sti¬
pendiary  magistrates  to  assist  or  take  the  place  of  the
justices  of  the  peace.1  Had  this  last  measure  been
carried  fully  out,  it  would  have  provided  3,000  police¬
men,  520  chief  constables,  and  a  trained  and  compe¬
tent  magistracy  to  direct  them.  Unfortunately,  it
was  permissive  only,  intended  only  as  a  force  in
reserve,  and  in  its  permissive  form  was  too  weak  to
resist  the  storm  of  vituperation  to  which  it  was  ex¬
posed.  It  was  called  a  conspiracy  against  liberty,
a  contrivance  to  increase  the  patronage  of  Govern¬
ment  and  change  the  Constitution.  Fitzgibbon’s
powerful  intellect  overbore  the  clamour.  For  the
present  session,  and  the  session  which  followed  it,  the
Irish  representatives  had  the  courage  to  emancipate
themselves  from  the  eloquent  agitators,  whose  panacea
for  misery  was  the  cant  of  political  independence.
For  two  years  of  their  existence  the  Irish  Parliament
addressed  themselves  in  earnest  to  the  active  sores  of
the  Commonwealth,  and  the  country  gentlemen  en¬
dured  to  be  told  of  their  own  shortcomings,  in  lan¬
guage  which  even  then  if  taken  seriously  to  heart
might  have  changed  the  face  of  the  country.  Si  sic
omnia !  it  was  but  a  lucid  interval,  and  another  mad
tit  was  imminent.  Meanwhile  the  incendiary  leaders
discovered  that  further  tumults  would  be  dangerous.
In  the  face  of  Grattan’s  resistance,  an  Act  had  been
passed  which  made  their  occupation  death,  and  means
had  been  provided  which,  if  they  gave  further  provo¬
cation,  might  perhaps  turn  the  threat  into  reality.

1  Irish  Statutes,  cap.  40.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

Irish  disturbance  is  systematic.  It  proceeds  on  a
principle  and  is  governed  by  word  of  command.  The
order  went  out  for  the  Whiteboys  to  resume  their
character  of  quiet  citizens  till  the  Irish  legislators
should  be  again  inflated  with  their  recurring  deli¬
rium.  The  Duke  of  Rutland  went  on  progress
through  Munster  in  the  summer  of  1787,  where  he
was  received  with  universal  enthusiasm.  Trade  be¬
gan  to  grow.  The  commercial  relations  between
England  and  Ireland  resolved  themselves  in  detail
without  further  convulsions  ;  and  the  Volunteers,  the
fountain  of  so  much  poisonous  hope,  the  symbol  of  so
much  childish  infatuation,  flickered  out  and  for  a
time  disappeared.

In  the  October  of  the  same  year  the  Duke  also  who
had  brought  the  ship  into  harbour  was  attacked  by
fever  in  the  Phoenix  Park,  and  died  after  a  few  days7
illness  amidst  universal  mourning.

485

CHAP.

H.

1787.

48fi

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

Tt8tT

SECTION  IY.

The  Rutland  Administration,  taken  as  a  whole,
had  been  the  most  successful  which  Ireland  had
known  for  a  century.  For  the  first  time  the  anarchic
spirit  had  been  encountered  and  beaten  back,  and  the
partial  establishment  of  a  police  in  the  teeth  of  Grat¬
tan’s  opposition  had  given  his  Constitution  a  chance
of  surviving  the  extravagances  of  its  author.  Success,
unfortunately,  had  been  bought  at  the  usual  price,
and  the  measures  essential  to  the  very  life  of  the
country  had  added  20,000Z.  a  year  to  the  wonderful
Pension  List.  Corruption  in  Parliament  implied  cor¬
ruption  everywhere.  When  Peers  sold  their  influ¬
ence  and  members  of  the  Lower  House  their  votes,
subordinate  officials  were  not  likely  to  be  more  scru¬
pulous  than  their  superiors.  The  customs,  the  excise,
the  ordnance,  the  treasury,  were  still  plundered  with
but  faint  disguise.  The  public  stores  were  preyed
upon  in  the  open  day;  supplies  were  charged  for  goods
which  had  never  been  received.  The  smugglers
landed  their  cargoes  while  the  revenue  officers  were
conveniently  absent.  Government  clerks  in  Dublin,
with  salaries  of  a  hundred  a  year,  had  their  town  and
country  houses,  and  their  shining  establishments  of
servants.  Beautiful  conditions,  for  which  the  one  ex¬
cuse  was  that  Government  could  in  no  other  way  be
carried  on.  Very  evidently  to  an  unprejudiced  looker-
on  Fitzgibbon’s  measures  were  no  more  than  seda¬
tives.  The  quiet  was  but  as  Mr.  Browne  described  it,
a  thin  coat  of  ashes  spread  over  subterranean  fires.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

487

The  Duke  of  Rutland’s  successor  was  the  Marquis
of  Buckingham,  who  as  Lord  Temple  already  had  ex¬
perience  of  Ireland,  and  had  been  universally  popular
there.  Temple,  during  his  brief  administration,  had
thrown  himself  into  the  spirit  of  ’82.  He  had  been
recalled  as  more  inclined  to  yield  to  Irish  sentiment
than  had  been  considered  safe  at  a  period  of  excite¬
ment.  Disorder  having  disappeared  with  the  Tumul¬
tuous  Assemblies  Bill,  and  the  dissolution  of  the
Volunteers,  it  was  thought  a  gracious  act  to  restore  a
Viceroy  whose  removal  had  been  so  much  regretted.
Lord  Buckingham  was  received  with  enthusiasm.
The  horses  were  taken  from  his  carriage  when  he
landed,  and  he  was  drawn  through  the  streets  by  the
people  amidst  universal  acclamation.  They  had  mis¬
taken  his  character,  and  his  favour  was  as  brief  as  the
loss  of  it  was  honourable.  The  Duke  of  Rutland,
while  peremptory  in  action,  had  been  gracious  and
generous.  His  expenditure  had  been  lavish.  The
hospitalities  of  the  Castle  had  been  magnificent.  He
had  been  personally  brilliant  and  accomplished,  and
while  bent  chiefly  on  suppressing  Whiteboys  and
maintaining  the  public  peace  he  had  not  troubled
himself  to  look  too  curiously  into  the  methods  by
which  public  officials  maintained  their  fine  appear¬
ance  in  Dublin.  The  liberality  of  Lord  Buckingham
was  confined  to  his  politics.  He  cut  down  extravagance
at  the  Castle,  and  he  was  considered  mean.  He  was
reserved  and  distant  in  manner,  while  Rutland  had
been  accessible  to  everyone.  He  had  an  Englishman’s
contempt  for  meanness,  and  received  the  sycophants
who  pressed  about  him  to  ask  for  favours  with  cold
distaste.  Worse  than  all,  he  instituted  an  immediate
enquiry  into  the  departmental  frauds.  The  clerks

CHAP.

ii.

'17877

488

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

"1787^

were  called  on  suddenly  to  surrender  their  books  and
keys  and  produce  the  outstanding  balances.  The
result  was  a  tragi-comedy.  It  was  as  if  the  police
had  come  unexpected  upon  a  gang  of  forgers.  Some
fled  out  of  the  country,  some  cut  their  throats,  some
were  dismissed  with  ignominy.  Lord  Townshend,
who  had  found  the  same  practices  on  foot,  had  endea¬
voured  to  make  them  impossible  by  altering  the  con¬
stitution  of  the  Board  of  Revenue,  increasing  the
number  of  commissioners,  and  introducing  English¬
men  among  them.  The  patriotic  reformers  had  re¬
sented  the  enclosure  of  their  favourite  domain.  They
had  never  wearied  of  denouncing  the  change.  They
had  succeeded  before  ’82  in  replacing  the  old  system.
Lord  Buckingham,  at  the  outset  of  his  Administration,
found  himself  obliged  to  revert  to  Townshend’s
principles,  and  at  once  made  determined  enemies  of
every  patriot  and  every  friend  of  corruption.

He  was  unfortunate  every  way,  for  the  lawlessness
suppressed  in  the  South  was  now  breaking  out  in
another  form  in  Ulster.  The  reader  will  remember
the  Antrim  evictions,  where  so  many  thousand  Pro¬
testant  families  were  expelled  from  their  farms  in
favour  of  Catholics  who  outbid  them  in  the  market.
The  ill-feeling  against  the  intruders,  which  had  ap¬
peared  first  in  the  Hearts  of  Steel,  had  continued
smouldering  under  the  surface.  The  Presbyterian
farmers  resented  the  presence  of  the  new  comers
in  a  country  which,  before  their  appearance,  had  been
almost  exclusively  Protestant.  Resentment  had  been
embittered  by  the  declaration  of  the  Dungannon  Vo¬
lunteers  in  favour  of  Catholic  emancipation.  The
Volunteers  represented  the  Americanised  liberal¬
ism  of  the  manufacturing  towns.  The  Calvinistic

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

inhabitants  of  the  country  districts  retained  the  tradi¬
tional  abhorrence  of  Popery,  and  gloried  in  the  recol¬
lection  of  the  Defence  of  Derry.  Quarrels  had  thus
arisen  and  local  fights.  The  Catholics,  in  spite  of
the  law,  were  seen  to  possess  arms,  gathered  from
the  stores  of  the  disbanded  Yolunteer  corps;  and
when  it  became  known  in  Ulster  that  the  Catholic
Whiteboys  had  disarmed  every  Protestant  in  the
South,  and  were  robbing  and  ill-treating  the  Protes¬
tant  clergy,  a  Protestant  Association  formed  itself  in
Antrim  under  the  name  of  Peep-of-day  Boys,  to
search  the  Catholic  houses  in  turn,  and  take  away
their  weapons  in  retaliation.  The  Catholics,  who  were
unable  to  recognise  that  if  they  ill-treated  others
they  might  perhaps  be  ill-treated  themselves,  made  the
air  ring  with  their  complaints.  The  popular  party
in  Parliament,  who  had  acquiesced  patiently  when
the  Whiteboys  were  disarming  the  Protestants,  were
indignant  when  Protestants  deprived  Catholics  of
pikes  and  muskets  which  they  were  not  entitled  to
keep.  The  Northern  Catholics,  backed  by  Dublin
patriotism,  organised  themselves  into  an  antagonistic
association  of  4  Defenders  ;  ’  and  Ulster  on  Temple’s
arrival  was  drifting  rapidly  into  a  war  of  religion.

In  the  winter  there  were  again  symptoms  that  the
mischief  in  the  South  was  not  extinguished.  The
permissive  County  Police  Bill  remained  an  unfulfilled
threat;  and  though  the  outrages  were  less  flagrant,
the  help  of  Parliament  had  to  be  called  in  a  second
time,  to  enable  the  clergy  to  recover  their  arrears  of
tithe.

Lord  Buckingham  required  all  his  vigour  and  all
his  intelligence  to  encounter  the  work  which  lay
before  him.  He  began  well  in  attacking  official

r

490

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  swindling.  He  was  less  careful  to  avoid  giving  the
v — -  swindlers  an  opportunity  of  retaliating  on  himself.
1787‘  Soon  after  his  arrival  the  most  valuable  sinecure  in
Ireland1  falling  vacant,  he  gave  it  to  his  brother,  Mr.
Grenville.  The  existence  of  such  offices  in  so  poor  a
country  was  inexcusable.  The  bestowal  of  them  on
English  favourites  and  politicians  wras  among  the
most  mischievous  of  Irish  abuses,  and  for  a  reform¬
ing  Viceroy  to  set  so  gross  a  precedent  was  an  im¬
prudence  amounting  to  a  crime.

Thus  it  was  that  before  Lord  Buckingham  had
been  six  months  at  the  Castle  he  was  as  much  de¬
tested  as  he  had  been  adored  at  his  coming.  The
disasters  in  the  country  were  charged  to  his  inca¬
pacity.  The  misuse  of  his  patronage  had  alienated
the  honest  and  gave  the  dishonest  an  occasion  for
misrepresenting  him  when  he  acted  rightly ;  and
by  the  summer  of  1788  the  desire  was  universal
that  he  would  take  himself  away.2  At  this  moment
there  now  rose,  without  warning,  a  fresh  political
hurricane.

1  The  office  of  1  Chief  Remem¬
brancer/  whatever  that  might  have
been,  worth  in  itself  4,000/.  a  year,
with  extensive  patronage  attached.

2  No  better  illustration  can  be
given,  either  of  Lord  Bucking¬
ham’s  unpopularity  or  of  the  cha¬
racter  of  the  Irish  Parliament,  than
a  description  which  Sir  John  Bla-
quiere  was  allowed  to  give,  unre¬
buked,  in  the  House  of  Commons,
of  the  representative  of  his  sove¬
reign  : —

‘An  imperious,  reserved,  super¬
cilious  man,  with  mean  talents,  but

an  abundant  stock  of  self-sufficiency
— who,  like  the  Persian  monarch,
would  hide  his  royalty  to  increase
the  veneration  of  the  world.  A  man
whose  disdainful  meanness  led  him
to  be  haughty  to  the  humble,  and
humble  to  the  stout  \  who  was  so
haughty  and  arrogant,  so  hateful
to  the  people  of  the  other  country,
as  not  to  be  able  to  procure  the
meanest  office  in  the  Cabinet,  and
who,  to  be  got  rid  of,  was  sent
away  from  being  the  pest  of  his
own  country  to  be  the  scourge  of
this.’ — Irish  Debates ,  1789.

491

WIIITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

SECTION  Y.

The  summer  of  1788  was  spent  by  Mr.  Grattan  in  chap.
England.  He  was  introduced  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  > —
to  the  mutual  satisfaction  of  both.  The  heir  of  the  14
throne,  though  unbeloved  at  home,  was  esteemed
greatly  in  the  Sister  Island.  4  The  Irish,7  says  Mr.
Plowden,  4  admired  prowess,  generosity,  and  magna¬
nimity,  as  they  despised  and  detested  everything
mean,  sordid,  and  suspicious.7  Therefore,  by  a  sin¬
gular  process  of  reasoning,  they  bestowed  their
affections  on  a  person  whose  prowess  had  been  shown
in  fields  of  dishonour,  whose  generosity  was  profli¬
gate  extravagance,  whose  magnanimity  was  indif¬
ference  to  obligations.  Mr.  Grattan  had  been  re¬
ceived  also  at  the  Whig  clubs  with  the  distinction
due  to  the  Emancipator  of  Ireland.  He  had  listened
to  the  complaints  of  the  Whig  statesmen  against  Pitt
and  the  King  ;  and  the  Whig  statesmen,  forgetting
their  own  experience  in  1782,  had  been  ready  in
turn  to  take  up  Irish  discontent  into  the  scope  of
their  political  campaign.  From  Paris  came  the  in¬
spiriting  news  of  fast-approaching  revolution,  while
the  singular  illness  which  was  growing  upon  George
the  Third  was  exciting  hopes  in  the  Whig  heart  to
which  loyalty  forbade  them  to  give  utterance.  The
visit  was  over.  Mr.  Grattan  was  returning,  at  the
beginning  of  October,  to  Ireland,  and  had  reached
Chester  on  his  way,  when  he  was  overtaken  by  a
message  which  recalled  him  instantly  to  London.

The  King’s  disorder  was  taking  the  form  of  settled

492

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

*  1788. "

November.

delirium,  and  a  Regency  seemed  all  but  inevitable.
Tlie  Crown  only  had  kept  Mr.  Pitt  in  office.  The
assumption  of  the  royal  authority  by  the  Prince  of
Wales  would  imply  a  change  of  ministry  and  mea¬
sures.  Now  at  last  there  was  a  hope  of  shaking  off
Fitzgibbon  and  the  corrupt  majority  which  supported
him,  and  of  securing  for  Ireland  those  broad  reforms
which  would  make  her  independence  at  last  into  a
fact.

The  English  Parliament  stood  prorogued  till  the
20th  of  November.  When  the  day  arrived  there  was
no  longer  a  question  of  the  King’s  condition.  The
Houses  adjourned  for  a  fortnight.  The  physicians
were  examined  in  the  interval  before  the  Privy
Council,  and  declared  that  although  likely  to  recover,
his  majesty  was  for  the  present  incapable  of  discharg¬
ing  his  functions.  On  the  4th  of  December  Parlia¬
ment  met  as  a  convention  to  consider  the  steps  which
were  to  be  taken.  A  committee  of  both  Houses  was
first  appointed  to  re-examine  the  physicians.  On  the
presentation  of  the  report  all  parties  agreed  that
there  must  be  a  Regency,  and  that  the  Prince  of
Wales  was  the  person  on  whom  the  office  must  de¬
volve.  All  parties  were  not  agreed,  however,  on  the
conditions  on  which  the  Prince  was  to  enter  upon  it.
Fox  asserted  that  he  would  succeed  of  natural  right
to  all  powers  which  his  father  exercised.  Pitt  in¬
sisted  that  he  would  receive  his  powers  at  the  hands
of  Parliament,  under  such  limitations  and  restrictions
as  Parliament  might  be  pleased  to  impose.  Meeting
at  once  Fox’s  claim  of  right,  he  proposed  and  carried
a  resolution  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Lords  and
Commons  to  provide  a  substitute  pending  the  inca¬
pacity  of  the  Sovereign.  The  Prince  of  Wales  having

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.  493

declined  a  personal  interview,  Pitt  wrote  formally  to  chap.
inform  him  of  the  Parliamentary  resolutions,  and  to  « — ^ — *
state  that  he  was  prepared  to  propose  the  nomination  Dumber
of  his  Royal  Highness  to  the  regency  on  certain  terms
which  he  specified.

The  Regent,  though  he  was  to  have  power  to
choose  his  own  advisers — power,  therefore,  to  dismiss
Pitt  from  his  councils — was  to  be  prevented  from
squandering  the  royal  property,  to  be  prohibited
from  granting  offices  for  life,  and  from  creating  new
peers.  He  was  to  be  thus  disabled  from  rewarding
and  promoting  his  social  and  political  favourites,
while  the  care  of  the  King’s  person  and  the  manage¬
ment  of  the  household  were  to  be  wholly  reserved  to
the  Queen.

The  Prince’s  reply  was  said  to  have  been  written
by  Burke.  It  was  in  a  tone  of  indignant  resent¬
ment,  reproaching  Pitt  with  creating  divisions  in  the
royal  family,  and  taunting  him  with  trying  the  expe¬
riment  whether  royalty  was  a  necessary  feature  in
the  executive  government.  He  did  not  refuse  to
accept  conditions,  but  he  reserved  his  final  assent  till
they  were  presented  to  him  by  Parliament.  Pitt  in¬
troduced  his  Regency  Bill,  but  the  proceeding  with
it  was  dilatory.  The  physicians  were  again  examined
in  January.  Though  the  King  was  then  no  better,
they  reported  that  he  was  certainly  not  worse,  and  the
forms  of  Parliament  continued  to  prolong  the  crisis.

So  matters  went  in  England.  In  the  Sister  Island
they  were  assuming  a  complexion  singularly  different.

Irish  animosity  has  misrepresented  with  its  usual
perverseness  the  conduct  of  Lord  Buckingham.  His
letters  fortunately  survive  to  show  that  he  was  excep¬
tionally  studious  of  Ireland’s  supposed  rights,  and

494

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

17897

careful  of  her  silliest  susceptibilities.  The  absurd
haste  with  which  the  Constitution  of  ?82  had  been
hurried  through  had  left  the  contingency  which  had
occurred,  like  many  others,  unprovided  for.  By  the
Constitution  the  Sovereign  of  England  was  to  be
Sovereign  of  Ireland.  Whether  if  England  changed
her  Sovereign  Ireland  was  bound  to  follow  the  ex¬
ample  was  a  question  which,  in  spite  of  the  expe¬
rience  of  1689,  was  supposed  to  be  left  open.  Ireland
at  all  events  conceived  she  had  a  right  to  elect  her
own  Regent  on  her  own  terms.  She  was  anxious
to  do  it  quickly,  that  she  might  show  her  indepen¬
dence,  by  anticipating  England.  She  was  anxious
also  to  show  her  spirit  and  gain  the  Prince’s  favour,
by  dispensing  with  the  ignoble  stipulations  by  which
Pitt  sought  to  restrict  his  generosity.

Lord  Buckingham  has  been  accused  of  having  ob¬
structed  the  meeting  of  the  Irish  Parliament  to  the
latest  moment ;  he,  in  fact,  regretted  that  he  had  no
constitutional  power  to  call  it  together  before  the
time  to  which  it  was  prorogued.1  Immediately  on
hearing  of  the  King’s  condition  he  warned  the  Cabi¬
net  of  4  the  extreme  jealousy  which  might  be  looked
for  in  the  most  loyal  Irish  hearts  if  England  should
appear  to  encroach  on  their  Constitution  by  dictating
their  action.’  But  so  little  was  he  prepared  for  the
extravagant  course  on  which  they  were  about  to  en¬
ter,  that  his  chief  anxiety  was  to  leave  them  free,
and  he  undertook  for  them  that  4  any  measures  taken
in  England  would  be  adopted  without  difficulty.’
Had  the  Regency  Bill  been  passed  in  England  with
the  rapidity  which  was  at  first  expected,  the  Irish

1  1  The  Marquis  of  Buckingham  to  Lord  Sydney,  November  23,
1789.  Most  secret.’

WIIITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

patriots  would  have  lost  an  opportunity  of  displaying
their  independence,  hut  the  blame,  whatever  its  first
amount,  would  not  have  rested  on  the  Viceroy.  Lord
Buckingham  at  any  rate  they  had  determined  to
drive  from  the  country.  Grattan  remained  in  Lon¬
don  till  January,  when  the  establishment  of  the
Regency  was  thought  to  be  a  question  of  days.  The
Whig  leader,  anticipating  immediate  accession  to
office,  had  promised  him  that  Lord  Buckingham  should
be  recalled,  that  Lord  Spencer  should  take  his  place  ;
that  he  should  have  his  Pension  Bill,  his  Place  Bill,
and  his  Reform  Bill,  and  be  no  longer  obstructed  by
the  political  janissaries  of  the  CaStle.  He  in  turn  had
undertaken  for  Ireland  that  she  would  elect  the  Prince
of  Wales  Regent,  with  no  idle  restrictions,  and  that
she  would  accept  Fox’s  view  of  natural  right.  For
himself,  perhaps,  he  meant  further  to  loosen  another
rivet  in  the  chain  of  Ireland’s  dependency.  With  these
promises  and  these  views  Grattan  hastened  back  to
Ireland,  to  be  in  time  for  the  opening  of  Parliament
on  the  5th  of  February.

The  Speech  from  the  Throne  announced  the  King’s
illness,  and  promised  attested  copies  of  the  examina¬
tion  of  the  physicians  before  the  Committee  of  the
British  Parliament  to  explain  the  nature  of  it.  On
the  lightest  word  the  explosive  material  was  ready  to
kindle.  George  Ponsonby  sprung  instantly  to  his
feet,  and  enquired  by  whom  these  copies  were  signed.
Yells  from  the  gallery  drowned  the  answer.  Dennis
Brown  and  Mr.  Griffiths  throwing  into  words  the
meaning  of  the  uproar,  exclaimed  that  it  was  deroga¬
tory  to  their  dignity,  it  undermined  the  foundations
of  their  independence,  to  receive  reports  from  the

495

CHAP.

H.

^1789.

February.

496

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VH.

"l789/

February.

Parliament  of  another  country  on  a  subject  relating
to  the  rights  of  the  King  of  Ireland.

The  patriot  spirit  was  all  that  could  be  wished,  but
it  was  starting  off  upon  a  wrong  scent.  If  the  report
was  refused  the  royal  physicians  must  be  sent  for  to
attend  in  person,  and  Grattan’s  object  was  to  take
time  by  the  forelock  and  hurry  on  the  action  of  the
Irish  Parliament  before  the  English  Act  should  be
passed,  to  become  their  precedent.  The  huntsman
called  back  the  too  eager  hounds.

4  The  evidence,’  he  said,  4  was  amply  sufficient.’
4  Such  objections  would  result  only  in  making  the
measures  of  another  assembly  the  rule  of  their  con¬
duct.’  4  They  needed  no  model  from  Great  Britain.’
He  invited  the  Irish  Legislature  to  proceed  in¬
stantly  in  the  nomination  of  their  Regent.  The
meaning  of  this  was  of  course  transparent.  Fitz-
gibbon  protested  against  haste,  4  which  might  dis¬
solve  the  single  tie  which  now  connected  Ireland  with
Great  Britain.’  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  the  Secretary,  in¬
sisted  on  the  propriety  of  Ireland  following  England’s
example  in  so  serious  a  matter.  Every  packet  might
bring  news  of  the  passing  of  the  Regency  Bill,  and
he  begged  for  a  few  days’  delay.  After  an  irregular
debate,  which  degenerated  into  personal  abuse  of  the
Viceroy,  George  Ponsonby  moved  that  the  House
resolve  itself  into  a  committee  for  instant  action.  The
grounds  on  which  the  Government  desired  delay  were
with  the  patriots  grounds  for  precipitation.  The  Par¬
liament  was  again  wild  with  the  vanity  of  nation¬
ality  ;  and  though  Fitzgibbon  warned  the  House
that  whoever  maintained  that  the  proceedings  on  the
Regency  might  differ  in  the  two  countries  was  a
very  bold  man,  Ponsonby’s  motion  was  carried.  In

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

the  expectation  of  Lord  Spencer’s  arrival,  the  Go¬
vernment  phalanx  had  already  dissolved,  and  the  flock
of  members  whose  votes  were  at  the  disposition  of
the  Viceroy  had  already  transferred  them  by  antici¬
pation  to  Lord  Buckingham’s  successor.  On  the  11th
the  committee  was  formed,  with  Sir  Lucius  O’Brien
in  the  chair,  and  the  Clerk  of  the  House,  not  without
a  repetition  of  disorder  in  the  galleries,  read  the  do¬
cuments  on  the  King’s  health.  Then  Grattan  rose.

4  The  House  had  been  informed  by  the  Adminis¬
tration,’  he  said,  ‘that  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  to
be  Regent,  with  limitations.’  c  Limitation  was  an
attack  on  the  King  of  Ireland,’  and  he  would  have
none  of  it.  ‘  Ireland  was  of  opinion  that  the  Prince
should  be  invested  with  the  plenitude  of  Royal  power
4  he  must  therefore  take  the  business  out  of  the  hands
of  the  Castle.’  He  proposed  that  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  should  vote  an  immediate  address  to  the  Prince,
inviting  him  to  an  unrestricted  Regency.

It  was  but  too  plain  that  Grattan  had  the  sense  of
the  House  with  him.  After  two  years  of  comparative
sanity,  the  madness  which  had  rejected  the  commer¬
cial  propositions  had  returned.  The  Irish  gentry
were  again  inflamed  with  national  vanity,  and  a  fresh
convulsion  was  at  hand.  Close  in  front,  too,  lay
to  appearance  a  change  of  Ministry;  an  enthusiastic
Lord- Lieutenant  ready  to  make  himself  Grattan’s  tool;
and  the  control  of  the  State  in  the  hands  of  a  party
who  believed  that  the  spirit  which  ravished  Protes¬
tant  girls,  nailed  the  ears  and  cheeks  of  clergy  to
gateposts,  houghed  soldiers,  and  carded  tithe-proc¬
tors,  was  to  be  cured  by  additional  liberty.  Having
opposed  the  Police  Act  in  vain  in  all  its  stages,  Grat¬
tan’s  now  most  ardent  hope  was  to  repeal  it,  to  arm

VOL.  II.  K  K

4

497

CHAP.

.n.

"17897"

February.

498

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  the  rabble  with  votes,  and  lay  the  country  at  their
mercy,  without  a  force  to  maintain  the  elements  of
1789.  or(}er<  And  out  of  these  constituents  he  dreamt  that

February.

he  could  create  a  nation.

|l  4

The  experiment,  it  was  but  too  likely,  would  imme¬
diately  be  tried,  and  the  precipitate  anxiety  to  anti¬
cipate  England’s  action  on  the  Regency  was  the  first
movement  in  the  game.  Already  Dublin  was  on  fire.
The  debate  was  interrupted  at  its  commencement  by
a  riot  at  the  door  of  the  House.  The  mob  had  as¬
saulted  the  door-keepers  in  trying  to  force  an  entrance.
A  constable  had  been  almost  killed.  As  soon  as  bu¬
siness  was  resumed,  Tom  Conolly,  Charles  Sheridan,
and  Lord  Henry  Fitzgerald  spoke,  amidst  general  ap¬
plause,  in  favour  of  Grattan’s  motion.  Alone — for
none  but  he  dared  encounter  the  lunacy  of  his  coun¬
trymen  in  its  first  paroxysm — Fitzgibbon  came  for¬
ward  to  oppose  it.  To  him  the  enthusiasm  of  Irish
nationality  was  a  combination  of  knavery  and  folly.
To  assume  the  privileges  of  equality  with  England,
to  fly  in  England’s  face,  and  become  a  thorn  in  her
side,  could  end  only,  as  he  well  knew,  in  the  not  dis¬
tant  annihilation  of  the  phantom  Constitution,  Never,
while  they  could  help  it,  would  any  English  Ministry,
Whig  or  Tory,  allow  Ireland  to  be  really  free.  Then,
as  always,  Fitzgibbon  determined  to  make  these  ora¬
torical  senators,  and  the  mob  at  their  backs,  under-
stand  their  real  position.  Even  by  the  letter  of  the
Constitution  itself  they  were  not  justified  in  what  they
were  preparing  to  do.

He  first  desired  the  Clerk  of  the  House  to  read  the
4th  of  William  and  Mary,  which  4  declares  the  king¬
dom  of  Ireland  to  be  annexed  to  the  Imperial  Crown
of  England,’  and  ;  the  Sovereign  of  England,  therefore,

499

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

to  be  by  undoubted  right  Sovereign  of  Ireland  also/
He  then  proceeded.

4 1  am  perfectly  convinced  that  what  I  shall  say
will  have  no  effect  on  gentlemen  on  the  other  side
of  the  House.  Let  them  propose  what  address  they
please,  it  will  certainly  be  voted  ;  and  therefore  I
would  not  have  risen  to  trouble  the  committee  at  all,
if  I  was  not  convinced  that  the  measures  proposed
are  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  realm,  and  criminal  in
the  extreme.  The  crown  of  Ireland  and  the  crown
of  England  are  inseparably  united,  and  the  Irish  Par¬
liament  is  totally  independent  of  the  British  Parlia¬
ment.  The  first  of  these  positions  is  your  security,
the  second  your  freedom;  and  any  other  language
tends  to  the  separation  of  the  crowns  or  the  subjec¬
tion  of  your  Parliament.  The  only  security  of  your
liberty  is  the  connexion  with  Great  Britain  ;  and
gentlemen  who  risk  breaking  the  connexion  must
make  up  their  minds  to  a  union.  God  forbid  I  should
ever  see  that  day ;  but  if  the  day  comes  on  which  a
separation  shall  be  attempted,  I  shall  not  hesitate  to
embrace  a  union  rather  than  a  separation.

4  Under  the  Duke  of  Portland’s  Government  the
grievances  of  Ireland  were  stated  to  be  the  usurpation
of  the  British  Parliament,  a  perpetual  Mutiny  Bill,
and  the  powers  assumed  by  the  Privy  Council.  They
were  redressed.  In  redressing  them  you  passed  a
law  by  which  you  enact  that  all  Bills  which  pass  the
two  Houses  here,  wdiich  shall  be  certified  into  Eng¬
land,  and  which  shall  be  returned  under  the  Great
Seal  of  England ,  without  any  addition,  diminution,  or
alteration  whatever,  shall  pass  into  law,  and  no  other.
By  this  you  make  the  Great  Seal  of  England  essen¬
tially  and  indispensably  necessary  to  the  passing  of

o2

CHAP.

II.

'  1789™"

February.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

500

book  laws  in  Ireland.  You  can  pass  no  Act  without  certi-
» — fying  it  into  England,  and  having  it  returned  with
.Eebruary  Great  Seal  of  that  kingdom ;  insomuch  that  were
the  King  of  England  and  Ireland  to  come  here  in
person  and  to  reside,  he  could  not  pass  a  Bill  without
it  being  first  certified  to  his  Begent  in  England,  who
must  return  it  under  the  Great  Seal  of  that  kingdom
before  his  majesty  could  even  in  person  assent  to  it.

1  Let  me  suppose  that  we,  in  the  dignity  of  our  inde¬
pendence,  appoint  a  Begent  for  Ireland,  being  a  dif¬
ferent  person  from  the  Begent  of  England — a  case  not
utterly  impossible,  if  you  insist  on  our  appointing  the
Prince  of  Wales  before  it  is  known  whether  he  will
accept  the  Begency  of  England  ;  and  suppose  we
should  go  further,  and  desire  him  to  give  the  Boyal
assent  to  our  Bills,  he  would  say,  “  My  good  people
of  Ireland,  you  have  by  your  law  made  the  Great
Seal  of  England  essentially  necessary  to  be  affixed  to
each  Bill  before  it  passes  in  Ireland.  That  Seal  is  in
the  hands  of  the  Chancellor  of  England,  who  is  a
very  sturdy  fellow.  That  Chancellor  is  an  officer
under  the  Begent  of  England.  I  have  no  authority
over  him,  and  so,  my  very  good  people  of  Ireland,  you
had  better  apply  to  the  Begent  of  England,  and  re¬
quest  that  he  will  order  the  Chancellor  to  affix  the
Great  Seal  of  England  to  your  Bills,  otherwise,  my
very  good  people  of  Ireland,  I  cannot  pass  them.’7
Suppose  you  choose  a  Begent  by  address  in  the  man¬
ner  you  suggest,  and  by  fatality  a  different  Begent
be  appointed  for  Great  Britain,  and  your  Begent
chooses  to  come  over  here  and  exercise  his  authority
in  person,  the  moment  a  Begent  is  appointed  in  Great
Britain  he  may  send  a  commission  under  the  Great
Seal  appointing  a  Lord-Lieutenant,  and  to  that  com-

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

mission  your  Regent  is  bound  to  pay  obedience.  If
he  refuses,  he  stakes  his  head  on  the  experiment.

u  There  is  a  feature  in  this  proceeding  which,  in¬
dependent  of  other  objections  to  it,  does  in  my  mind
make  it  so  highly  reprehensible,  that  I  consider  it  a
formal  appeal  from  the  Parliament  of  England  to
that  of  Ireland.  We  shall  sow  the  seeds  of  dissension
between  the  Parliaments  of  the  two  countries  ;  and
though  I  do  not  desire  the  Parliament  of  this  country
implicitly  to  follow  the  Parliament  of  England,  I
should  consider  it  a  wise  maxim  for  this  country
always  to  concur  with  that  Parliament,  unless  for  very
strong  reasons  indeed  we  are  obliged  to  differ  from
it.  If  it  is  to  be  a  point  of  Irish  dignity  to  differ  from
the  Parliament  of  England  to  show  our  independence,
I  very  much  fear  the  sober  men  in  this  country  who
have  estates  to  lose  will  soon  become  sick  of  inde¬
pendence.1  Constituted  as  it  is,  the  Government  of
the  country  can  never  go  on  unless  we  follow
Great  Britain  implicitly  in  all  regulations  of  Impe¬
rial  policy,  and  you  who  profess  yourselves  this  night
advocates  for  the  independence  of  the  Irish  crown
are  advocates  for  its  separation  from  England.  Let
us  agree  with  England  in  these  three  points — one
king,  one  law,  one  religion.  Let  us  keep  these  ob¬
jects  steadily  in  view,  and  we  act  like  wise  men.  If
you  make  the  Prince  of  Wales  your  Regent,  and
grant  him  plenitude  of  power,  let  it  be  done  by  Bill;2

1  Let  the  reader  observe  the  turn  words  of  his  minister,  Fitzgibbon,
given  to  these  most  sensible  words  to  make  the  Irish  gentry  sick  of  their
by  Mr.  Ilenry  Grattan,  in  the  Life  independence .’  (The  italics  are  Mr.
of  his  hither.  ‘  Mr.  Pitt  was  deter-  Grattan’s.)  —  Grattan's  Life ,  vol.
mined  that  the  working  of  the  free  iii.  p.  415.

Constitution  should  be  stopped;  2  Because  the  Bill  before  it  be-
that  the  era  of  1782  should  exist  come  law  must  pass  under  the  Great
merely  in  name ;  and,  in  the  wicked  Seal  of  England.

501

CHAP.

H.

'  1789/

February.

502

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1 — — , - -

1789.

February.

otherwise  I  see  such  dangers  that  I  deprecate  the  mea¬
sure  proposed.  I  call  on  the  country  gentlemen  of
Ireland.  This  is  not  a  time  to  think  of  every  paltry
disappointment  sustained  at  the  Castle  of  Dublin.
If  any  man  has  been  aggrieved  by  the  Viceroy,  and
chooses  to  compose  a  philippic  on  the  occasion,  let
him  give  it  on  the  debates  of  a  Turnpike  Bill,  when
it  will  not  be  disgraceful  to  the  man  who  utters  it,  as
on  the  present  occasion.’ 1

Not  Shy  lock,  when  he  heard  Portia  interpret  the
law  of  Venice,  was  more  astounded  than  Grattan,
when  he  learnt  the  value  to  Ireland  of  the  Constitu¬
tion  of  ’82.  Was  the  child  of  his  enthusiasm,  for
which  his  country  had  magnificently  rewarded  him,
for  which  the  orators  of -Parliament  had  raised  him
higher  than  Lord  Chatham,  was  it  after  all  a  miserable
farce?  Was  Ireland  not  independent,  then?  No;
nor  ever  could  be.  There  is  no  political  indepen¬
dence  save  that  which  is  won  by  the  sword,  and  if
the  dread  appeal  is  insisted  on  can  be  maintained  by
the  sword.  Independence,  save  to  those  who  can
fight  for  it,  is  an  illusion  and  a  curse.

The  debate  which  followed  the  delivery  of  this  ex¬
traordinary  speech  was  more  like  the  screaming  of
macaws  than  the  grave  consultation  of  reasonable
beings.  If  such  was  the  meaning  of  the  Act  of  ’82,
Grattan  wildly  asked,  why  had  not  the  Attorney-
General  warned  them  of  it?  Not  for  this  would  the
patriot  Commons  part  with  their  inalienable  rights.
The  Government  attempted  no  division.  The  next
day  the  address  was  carried  by  acclamation  and  sent
to  the  Lords  ;  while,  as  a  fit  adjunct  to  the  scene

1  Irish  Debates ,  February  11,  1789.

503

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

within,  the  undergraduates  of  Trinity,  armed  with
swords  and  pistols,  were  fighting  the  police  at  the
doors.

The  Peers  were  scarcely  less  insane  than  the  Lower
House.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  and  Lord  Charlemont,
the  Archbishop  of  Cashel  and  Lord  Perry,  were
agreed  c  on  the  duty  of  availing  themselves  of  the
opportunity  of  asserting  the  total  independence  of
Ireland.’ 1  They  carried  with  them  a  large  majority,
and  out  of  seventy-one  Peers  forty-five  voted  for  the
address,  and  returned  it  approved  to  the  Commons.

Though  the  struggle  was  hopeless  for  the  moment,
the  Attorney-General  repeated  his  objection.  He
said  that  he  had  consulted  the  Chancellor  and  the
Judges.  They  were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  he
had  stated  correctly  the  character  of  the  Constitution,
and  that  anterior  to  the  passing  of  the  Eegency  Bill
in  England  the  address  was  not  only  improper,  but
treasonable.  For  the  honour  of  the  Irish  nation,  for
the  honour  of  the  illustrious  personage  to  whom  it
was  to  be  presented,  he  besought  the  House  to  pause.
He  was  speaking  to  the  winds.  A  chorus  of  shout¬
ing  voices  gave  him  for  an  answer  that  the  address
should  be  carried  to  the  Viceroy  by  the  two  Houses
on  the  following  day,  with  a  request  for  immediate
transmission.

Thus,  on  the  18th,  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  Ire¬
land  marched  in  state  to  the  Castle,  with  the  Chan¬
cellor  and  Speaker  at  their  head.  In  the  Presence
Chamber  Lord  Lifford  read  the  invitation  to  the
Prince,  and  presented  it  to  the  Viceroy.

The  next  packet  might  bring  Lord  Spencer,  and

CHAP.

H.

1789.

February.

February

17.

1  ‘  The  Marquis  of  Buckingham  to  Lord  Sydney,  February  17,
1789.’

504

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1789.

February.

it  might  be  his  last  official  act.  Lord  Buckingham
declined  to  purchase  a  recovery  of  his  popularity  at
the  sacrifice  of  honour.

He  drew  back,  and  refused  to  receive  the  roll.

4  Under  the  impression,’  he  said,  4  which  I  feel  of
my  official  duty,  and  of  the  oath  which  I  have  taken
as  Chief  Governor  of  Ireland,  I  am  obliged  to  decline
transmitting  this  address  into  Great  Britain.  I  can¬
not  consider  myself  warranted  to  lay  before  the
Prince  of  Wales  an  address  purporting  to  invest  his
Royal  Highness  with  power  to  take  on  him  the  go¬
vernment  of  this  realm  before  he  shall  be  enabled
by  law  so  to  do.’ 1

Bubbling  over  with  indignation,  the  senators  re¬
turned  to  their  Houses.  The  Duke  of  Leinster  in  one
place,  and  Grattan  in  the  other,  proposed  a  present
adjournment.  They  must  act  with  dignity,  Grattan
said,  and  not  allow  themselves  to  appear  to  be
swayed  by  temper.

The  first  impression  appears  to  have  been  that  no
more  could  be  done  till  Lord  Spencer  arrived.2  But
to  wait  for  Spencer  would  be  to  wait  till  the  Prince
of  Wales  was  English  Regent,  and  therefore  to  miss
the  point  of  the  opportunity.  Braver  counsels  pre-

1  Lord  Buckingham’s  conduct
was  fully  approved  in  England.
i  The  Cabinet/  Lord  Sydney  wrote,

1  entirely  concur  in  the  propriety  of
your  declining  to  transmit  the  ad¬
dress.  His  Royal  Highness  cannot
lawfully  take  upon  him  any  part
of  the  King’s  authority  till  he  is
enabled  by  Act  of  Parliament  to  do
so ;  and  no  Act  of  the  Irish  Parlia¬
ment  for  that,  or  any  other  purpose,
can  be  passed,  except  by  the  Royal
assent,  given  under  the  Great  Seal.
— Lord  Sydney  to  the  Marquis  of

Buckingham,  February  21,  1789.
Secret.’  S.  P.  0.

2  The  Duke  of  Portland,  writing
on  the  21st  of  February  to  Grattan,
says :  ( I  learn,  by  letters  from  Ire¬
land,  it  is  the  intention  of  our
friends  to  defer  the  consideration  of
all  public  business  till  after  the  de¬
parture  or  removal  of  the  present
Lord-Lieutenant.’ —  Grattan's  Life ,
vol.  iii.  p.  373.  The  letters  referred
to  probably  left  Dublin  on  the
evening  of  the  18th.

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

vailed.  The  House  of  Commons  re-assembled  on  the
20th,  the  Viceroy  expecting  violent  resolutions  to  be
passed  against  himself.1

Mr.  Todd  Jones,  the  hottest  and  most  foolish  of
the  patriot  chiefs,  announced  that  4  the  life  of  the
country  was  at  stake/  4  The  Chief  Governor  had  set
himself  at  issue  with  the  Legislature,  and  there  was
a  doubt  whether  by  such  desperate  conduct  he  had
not  virtually  abdicated/  4  The  situation/  he  said,
4  was  awful/  4  In  silent  anxiety  Ireland  confided  in
her  Parliament,  and  demanded  an  unimpeached  Con¬
stitution/

Mr.  Grattan  followed.  He  moved  that,  the  Viceroy
having  refused  to  transmit  the  address  to  the  Prince,
a  deputation  should  be  chosen  from  the  Lords  and
Commons  to  carry  it  over  ;  and  this  being  assented
to,  he  proposed  next  a  formal  resolution  that,  in  ad¬
dressing  his  Royal  Highness,  the  Parliament  of  Ire¬
land  had  exercised  an  undoubted  right.

On  the  first  motion  Fitzgibbon  had  been  passive;
on  the  second  he  again  came  forward  to  confront  the
tempest.  Though  he  was  liable,  as  he  well  knew,  to
be  called  out  by  every  bellowing  patriot,  and  to  be
made  to  answer  for  his  words  to  twenty  champions
of  liberty  at  the  pistol's  mouth,  he  again  cautioned
the  House  4  how  it  followed  the  honourable  gentleman
in  his  ill-advised  and  desperate  speculation/

4  Let  me  tell  the  gentlemen  of  Ireland/  he  said,
4  that  the  only  security  by  which  they  hold  their
property,  the  only  security  they  have  for  the  present
Constitution  in  Church  and  State,  is  the  connexion
of  the  Irish  Crown  with,  and  its  dependence  upon,  the

505

CHAP.

II.

1789.

February,

1  ( To  Lord  Sydney,  February  19.  Most  secret.’  S.  P.  0.

506

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

1789.

February.

Crown  of  England.  That  connexion  and  that  de¬
pendence  have  been  sealed  with  the  best  blood  of  this
country.  If  they  are  now  duped  into  idle  and  fan¬
tastical  speculations  under  the  pretence  of  asserting
national  dignity  and  independence,  they  will  feel  the
effects  to  their  sorrow.  For  give  me  leave  to  say,
sir,  that  when  we  speak  of  the  people  of  Ireland,  it
is  a  melancholy  truth  that  we  do  not  speak  of  the
great  body  of  the  people.  This  is  a  subject  on  which
it  is  painful  to  me  to  be  obliged  to  touch  in  this  as¬
sembly  ;  but  when  I  see  the  right  honourable  member
driving  the  gentlemen  of  Ireland  to  the  verge  of  a
precipice,  it  is  time  to  speak  out.  .  .  .  Sir,  the  an¬
cient  nobility  and  gentry  of  this  kingdom  have  been
hardly  treated.  The  Act  by  which  most  of  us  hold
our  estates  was  an  Act  of  violence — an  Act  subverting
the  first  principles  of  the  Common  Law  in  England
and  Ireland.  I  speak  of  the  Act  of  Settlement ;  and
that  gentlemen  may  know  the  extent  to  which  that
summary  confiscation  has  gone,  I  will  tell  them  that
every  acre  of  land  which  pays  quit-rent  to  the  Crown
is  held  by  title  derived  under  the  Act  of  Settlement.
So  I  trust  gentlemen  on  the  opposite  benches  will
deem  it  worthy  of  consideration  how  far  it  may  be
prudent  to  pursue  the  successive  claims  of  dignified
and  unequivocal  independence  made  for  Ireland  by
the  right  honourable  gentleman.

4  So  long  as  we  remain  satisfied  with  the  Consti¬
tution  as  settled  in  ’82,  so  long  as  we  use  our  oppor¬
tunities  to  cement  the  union  of  the  Crowns  and  cul¬
tivate  the  affection  and  confidence  of  the  British
nation,  we  shall  cultivate  peace,  good  order,  and  pros¬
perity  in  this  country.

4  If  in  a  moment  of  frenzy  the  two  Houses  of

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

Parliament  of  this  country  are  to  sacrifice  their  con¬
nexion  with  the  Crown  of  England  in  pursuit  of  para¬
doxical  phantoms,  perhaps  we  may  live  to  see  Ireland
once  more  indebted  to  a  British  army  for  the  restora¬
tion  of  her  civil  and  religious  liberty.  Do  you  sup¬
pose  the  British  nation  will  submit  to  the  claim  now
set  up  by  the  Irish  Parliament?  If  the  address  of
both  Houses  can  invest  the  Prince  of  Wales  with
Royal  power  in  this  country,  the  same  address  could
convey  the  same  powers  to  Louis  XVI.,  or  to  his
Holiness  the  Pope,  or  to  the  right  honourable  mover
of  this  resolution.

4  It  is  impossible  the  assertion  of  this  claim  will
not  again  commit  this  country  with  Great  Britain,
and  if  by  fatality  we  are  committed,  what  must  be
the  event  ?  We  are  committing  ourselves  against  the
law  and  against  the  Constitution,  and  in  such  a
contest  Ireland  must  fall.’ 1

Fitzgibbon’s  words  might  be  remembered  after¬
wards.  In  the  present  humour  of  men  they  fell  like
rain-drops  in  water,  and  swelled  the  volume  of  in¬
sanity.  Ireland  bravely  asserted  by  vote  4  her
undoubted  rights.’  Grattan  moved  and  carried  another
resolution,2  that  Lord  Buckingham’s  refusal  to  submit
his  address  was  ill-advised  and  unconstitutional.
The  Duke  of  Leinster,  Lord  Charlemont,  Tom
Conolly,  Mr.  O’Neil,  and  William  Ponsonby,  were
selected  as  a  deputation  to  wait  personally  on  the
Prince,  and  they  would  have  sailed  on  the  evening  of
the  21st  but  for  a  severe  easterly  gale.3

1  Irish  Debates ,  February  20,
1789.

2  By  119  votes  to  78.

3  So  childish  was  the  stilted

stage  play,  that  the  deputation  were

going,  uncertain  whether  to  present
the  address  or  not,  if  they  found
the  English  Regency  still  undeter¬
mined  on  their  arrival.  The  opinion
of  the  lawyers  that  they  were  com-

507

CHAP.

H.

t

1789.

February.

508

BOOK

VII.
— , - '

1789.

[February,

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

The  same  wind  which  detained  them  in  harbour
brought  over  news  which  chilled  the  patriotic  heart.
The  King  was  rapidly  recovering.  The  Duke  of
Portland  reported  that  the  Opposition  had  been
unable  to  prevent  an  adjournment  of  the  Regency
Bill.  The  Prince  of  Wales  could  not  command  the
Great  Seal  till  it  was  passed,  and  Lord  Spencer’s
departure  for  Ireland  was  therefore  indefinitely  post-

mitting  treason  had  frightened  declined  to  decide. — The  Marquis
them ;  and  Grattan,  when  they  of  Buckingham  to  Lord  Sydney,
pressed  for  positive  directions,  had  February  21.  Secret.

WH1TEB0YS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

509

SECTION  YI.

Patriotic  effervescences  are  often  irrational.  They
are  only  occasionally  vile.  The  sequel  of  the  ex¬
plosion  on  the  Regency  forms  a  characteristic  episode
in  Irish  Parliamentary  history.  The  Duke  of  Leinster,
Lord  Shannon,  Charles  Sheridan,  William  Ponsonby,
and  many  other  members  of  both  Houses  who  had
been  enthusiastic  promoters  of  the  address,  held  at
the  same  time  lucrative  offices  under  the  Crown.
The  contingency  of  the  King’s  recovery  had  not
occurred  to  them.  They  had  gone  on  fearlessly  in
the  confident  hope  of  Lord  Spencer’s  coming,  when
they  might  rather  look  for  fresh  promotion  than
risk  the  loss  of  what  they  held  already.  If  the
Prince’s  father  became  again  capable  of  discharging
his  functions,  the  Marquis  of  Buckingham  would
remain  at  the  Castle,  and  they  saw  with  horror  im¬
pending  over  them  immediate  retribution  for  the  part
which  they  had  played.  The  complete  recovery  was
still  only  a  possibility,  but  it  was  necessary  to  be
prepared  for  either  alternative.  Twenty  Peers  and
thirty-seven  Commoners  were  the  number  compro¬
mised — members  of  one  House  or  the  other  who  had
pledged  their  service  to  the  Crown  for  valuable  con¬
sideration,  and  were  in  danger  for  breach  of  contract.
They  were  aware  that  they  could  not  trust  one
another,  and  that  each  if  left  to  himself  might  seek  to
make  his  peace  at  the  expense  of  his  companions.
With  the  Duke  of  Leinster  and  Lord  Charlemont  at
their  head,  they  set  their  names  to  a  round-robin,  in

CHAP.

II.

^1789/

February.

510

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

BOOK

VII.

"  1789. "

February.

which  they  bound  themselves  as  a  body  to  make
Government  impossible  should  the  Viceroy  venture
to  punish  either  of  them  for  his  late  vote  by  loss  of
office  or  pension.

Their  fears  having  been  thus  secured,  the  depu¬
tation  sailed  for  Holyhead,  while  Grattan  determined,
if  possible,  to  force  Lord  Buckingham  to  resign,  and
on  the  25th  of  February  moved  a  limitation  of  the
supplies  to  two  months.

Mr.  Brownlow,  in  seconding  this  motion,  reminded
the  House  that  if  the  supplies  were  granted  for
the  usual  time,  the  Viceroy  might  imitate  Lord
Townshend  and  prorogue.  The  situation  had  so  closely
reproduced  itself,  that  if  the  King’s  recovery  became
a  fact,  an  attempt  at  a  similar  solution  might  be
expected  with  certainty.

Fitzgibbon,  alluding  scornfully  to  the  round-robin
and  anticipating  the  consequences,  said  he  was  sorry
to  hear  the  spirit  of  Whiteboyism  had  penetrated
Parliament.  He  had  been  informed  of  a  combination
among  distinguished  lords  and  gentlemen  which,  if  it
had  been  proved  against  a  tithe-proctor,  would  have
made  the  combining  parties  liable  to  be  whipped  at
the  cart’s  tail.  As  to  what  Mr.  Brownlow  had  said  of
Lord  Townshend  and  the  prorogation,  4 he  remembered
it  well.  He  remembered  the  same  Parliament  after¬
wards  voting  Lord  Townshend  an  address  of  thanks,
and  the  majority  which  passed  it  had  cost  the  nation
half  a  million  of  money.’  4  Mr.  Grattan’s  motion,’  he
added,  with  cool  contempt,  4  might,  if  carried,  lead  to
a  similar  address,  which  would  cost  half  a  million  more,
and  he  should  therefore  oppose  it.7

Grattan’s  motion  was  carried,  and  Fitzgibbon’s
prophecy  proved  nearly  true.  The  farce  was  almost

WH1TEB0YS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

over.  The  same  25th  of  February  the  Duke  of
Leinster  and  his  companions  reached  London  and
presented  then*  address.  The  Prince  thanked  Ireland
warmly,  but  was  obliged,  he  said,  ‘  to  delay  his  final
answer  in  consequence  of  the  fortunate  change  which
had  taken  place/  On  the  1st  of  March  official  in¬
formation  reached  Dublin  that  the  King’s  health  was
restored,  and  the  necessity  for  a  Regency  at  an  end.

If  Lord  Buckingham  was  to  continue  Viceroy,  it
was  impossible  for  him  to  pass  over  the  round-robin.

4  The  object  of  it,’  he  said  himself,  4  was  to  compel
him  to  quit  the  kingdom.’  4  The  aristocracy,  who
had  been  broken  once  under  his  Majesty’s  direction,’
had  again  combined  against  English  authority,  and
4  must  be  broken  a  second  time,’  but  they  could  be
broken  only  4  by  measures  of  the  utmost  decision  and
severity.’ 1  Grattan,  too,  knew  that  he  had  gone  too
far  to  retire.  He  knew  that  his  majority  would  melt
from  him  if  the  source  of  patronage  was  to  remain
unchanged.  While  the  Viceroy  was  meditating  when
and  how  to  strike,  Grattan  endeavoured  to  dras;  the
House  of  Commons  with  him,  while  its  ranks  were
still  unbroken,  into  a  series  of  hostile  resolutions,
one  aimed  specially  at  Buckingham  himself,  condemn¬
ing  the  grant  of  high  offices  of  state  to  absentees ;
another,  striking  at  the  Pension  List ;  a  third,  binding
the  House  to  repeal  Fitzgibbon’s  Police  Bill,  which
he  hated  with  the  instinct  of  a  revolutionist.  He  had
been  prompt ;  for  final  news  from  England  arrived
only  in  the  last  days  of  February,  and  the  resolutions
were  introduced  on  the  3rd  of  March.  But  he  was
still  too  late.  His  most  trusted  followers  were  already

511

CHAP.

II.

^  1789^

February.

1  ‘  To  Lord  Sydney,  March  1,  1789.’  S.  P.  0.

512

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

rook  meditating  retreat.  An  article  had  appeared  in  the
< — 4  Freeman’s  Journal,’  written  by  a  Mr.  Higgins,  re-
Ma^h*  fleeting  on  the  ’82  Constitution,  and  insisting  that  for
so  imperfect  a  piece  of  legislation,  as  it  now  proved
to  be,  the  great  liberator  had  been  too  precipitately
rewarded.  Mr.  Parsons  remarked  in  the  House,  in
the  same  cynical  strain,  on  Grattan’s  4  bungling.’  The
House  listened  with  toleration,  if  not  with  favour;
Grattan  could  not  bear  it,  and  forgot  himself.  The
honourable  gentleman,  he  said,  was  not  original.  He
was  repeating  a  charge  wdiich  had  been  expressed
better  elsewhere,  but  whether  said  better  or  said
worse,  it  was  false.  Mr.  Higgins  was  a  liar.  The
4  Freeman’s  Journal  ’  was  a  liar.  The  authority  from
which  Mr.  Parsons  drew  his  argument  was  a  liar,  a
pitiful  public  liar.  He  did  not  mean  that  the  right
honourable  gentleman  was  a  liar,  but  the  paper
from  which  he  took  his  accusation  was  a  liar,  a  pitiful
public  liar.

Parsons  stepped  across  the  floor  and  said  a  few
words  to  Grattan,  4  not  recorded  for  the  honour  of
Parliament.’  Shouts  rose  on  all  sides  of  4  Custody  !  ’
The  galleries  were  cleared,  and  for  two  hours  the
House  was  frantic.1

When  order  was  restored,  Mr.  Corry,  on  behalf  of
the  Government,  moved  an  adjournment  ;  and  a
division  of  115  to  106  in  favour  of  the  Castle  in¬
formed  the  world  that  the  crisis  was  over,  and  that
the  apostate  members  had  returned  to  their  duties.

Both  sides  had  exerted  themselves  to  the  utmost.
Grattan,  whose  resolutions  had  been  originally  more
violent,  had  modified  them  to  conciliate  support.  4  We

1  Plowden,  vol.  iii,  p.  236-7.

513

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

were  convinced/  said  the  Viceroy,  on  the  other  hand,
i  that  it  was  essential  to  the  peace  of  Ireland  and  to
the  existence  of  the  Government  that  the  attempt
should  be  defeated.’ 1  Lord  Townshend’s  precedent
had  been  copied  as  Fitzgibbon  foretold,  and  the  usual
influences  had  been  employed  with  the  usual  success.

To  the  declaration  against  an  increase  of  the  Pen¬
sion  List,  Lord  Buckingham  was  not  in  principle
opposed.  Mr.  Forbes  had  introduced  an  annual  Bill
on  this  subject.  The  Government  had  this  year
been  neutral,  the  Viceroy  was  anxious  to  end  a
vexatious  subject,  and  the  Bill  had  been  read  a  third
time.  It  was  a  compromise,  restricting  the  Civil
Pensions  to  80,000/.  ;  and  by  limiting  the  abuse,  was
understood  to  recognise  them  within  the  limit  defined.
It  established  the  principle  that  no  one  holding  a
pension  from  the  Crown  could  sit  in  the  House  of
Commons;  and  the  Viceroy,  who  really  hated  the
detestable  process  by  which  the  Government  majority
had  been  maintained,  had  congratulated  himself  on
the  prospect  of  being  rid  of  it,2  and  rejoiced  in  the

1  1  The  Marquis  of  Buckingham
to  Lord  Sydney,  March  4,  1789.’
S.  P.  0.

2  1  The  Marquis  of  Buckingham
to  Lord  Sydney,  March  20.  Secret.’
Lord  Buckingham’s  words  indicate
that  Government  had  all  along  been
in  favour  of  this  provision,  and  that
the  difficulty  had  not  been  at  the
Castle, but  in  the  Parliament,  which
was  in  love  with  its  own  corrup¬
tion  : —

‘  Another  principle,’  he  said,  ‘  is
established  in  this  Bill,  entirely
novel  in  the  Statute  Book,  though
often  attempted  by  different  Go¬
vernments,  I  mean  the  principle

VOL.  II.  T

of  vacating,  by  pensions  or  other¬
wise.  the  seats  of  members  of  the
House  of  Commons.  I  need  not
explain  to  your  lordship  the  ma¬
nifest  advantages  of  such  a  power
to  be  lodged  in  the  Crown.  His
majesty’s  service  has  often  suffered
materially  from  the  want  of  it,  and
the  Opposition  lias  always  been  par¬
ticularly  jealous  on  this  subject,
and  I  am  inclined  to  believe  they
would  not  have  passed  this  clause
had  they  clearly  seen  the  operation
of  it.  I  am  not  blind  to  the  danger
of  suffering  so  material  an  innova¬
tion  in  the  system  by  which  the
Government  of  this  kingdom  has

CHAP.

II.

"17897

March.

L

' — ^

514

BOOK

TO.

1789.

March.

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

acquisition  of  a  means  of  clearing  the  House  of
unprincipled  and  troublesome  members.

The  promotion  of  a  measure,  however,  so  de¬
sirable  in  itself,  bad  to  yield  at  the  present  moment
to  the  need  of  punishing  the  subscribers  of  the  round-
robin.  The  Leinster-Ponsonby  cliques  could  not  be
allowed  to  defy  the  Crown  ;  and  when  this  delicate
matter  came  to  be  discussed  in  Council,  it  was  disco¬
vered  that  c  so  violent  and  dangerous  a  combination
could  only  be  destroyed  by  a  considerable  increase  in
the  Pension  List.’  c  It  was  unwise  to  close  the  door
at  a  time  when  every  exertion  had  to  be  made.’1  To
this  view  of  the  matter  the  Cabinet  agreed.  Mr.
Forbes’s  measure  was  thrown  out  by  order  in  its  last
stage  in  the  House  of  Lords,  and  the  means  of  cor¬
ruption  thus  reserved  were  freely  lavished,  prepara¬
tory  to  inflicting  the  intended  chastisement.

Seeing  how  things  were  going,  the  guilty  fifty-seven
were  now  anxious  to  make  terms.  They  first  made
advances  in  a  body.  Lord  Buckingham  c  refused  to
treat  with  them  collectively,’  though  professing  him¬
self  ‘  willing  to  consider  the  representations  of  indi¬
viduals  for  themselves,  if  they  would  disclaim  the
written  association.’  Too  well  they  knew  his  mean¬
ing  ;  too  well  they  foresaw  the  sure  effect  of  such
invitation ;  well  aware  that  each,  if  he  could,  would
scramble  on  the  other’s  back  to  save  himself  from
drowning.  The  noble  lords  and  gentlemen  who  were
lately  so  valiant  thought  only  how  each  could  save
his  own  miserable  skin.  Those  who  felt  most  secure  of

been  so  long  administered,  nor
would  I  have  consented  to  tbe  se¬
cond  reading,  if  1  bad  not  con¬
ceived  tbe  Government  would  be

essentially  strengthened  by  it.’

1  ‘To  Lord  Sydney, x March  20.
Most  secret.’

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

515

being  able  to  make  terms  clamoured  that  the  round-
robin  should  be  burnt ;  those  of  4  less  influence  ’  clung  .
desperately  to  it  as  to  a  raft  on  the  waves.  To  Fitz-
gibbon,  who  had  denounced  them  as  Whiteboys  who
ought  to  be  whipped,  the  penitent  suppliants  came
now  suing  for  forgiveness.  They  told  him  that  the
association  was  dissolved.  They  promised,  that  if  he
insisted  on  it,  the  bond  should  be  destroyed  in  his
presence.1  Lord  Shannon,  Lord  Clifden,  Lord  Loftus,
Hely  Hutchinson,  4  and  many  other  members  of  both
Houses/  begged  him  to  assure  the  Viceroy  4  that  they
did  not  wish  to  oppose  his  majesty’s  Government.’

4  They  laid  themselves  at  his  majesty’s  feet  with  every
expression  of  duty,  and  of  their  humble  hopes,  by
their  future  support,  to  remove  every  unfavourable
impression  from  his  majesty’s  mind.’

The  humiliation  was  held  to  be  penalty  sufficient.

4  Under  these  circumstances,’  Lord  Buckingham
wrote  on  the  23rd  of  March,  4 1  have  not  hesitated  in
authorising  the  Attorney- General  to  declare  that  it
was  not  my  intention  to  recommend  to  his  majesty
the  dismissal  of  any  of  those  gentlemen  with  whom
he  had  conversed,  or  that  might  accede  immediately
to  the  same  declaration  of  submission.  It  is,  how¬
ever,  expressly  declared  that  the  King’s  Government
is  under  no  engagements  for  future  favour  or  counte¬
nance,  either  in  their  counties  or  elections,  to  any  of
those  noblemen  and  gentlemen;  and  it  is  equally  stipu¬
lated  that  any  engagements  to  those  who  have  zea¬
lously  and  uniformly  supported  Government  shall  be
maintained,  though  the  arrangements  may  interfere

1  Apparently,  Fitzgibbon  pre-  Irish  Parliament.  A  fac-simile  of
ferred  that  the  round-robin  should  it  will  be  found  in  1  Sir  Jonah  Bar-
survive  among  the  curiosities  of  the  rington’s  Historical  Memoirs.’

L  l  2

CHAP.

II.

1789.

March.

5  lo

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

ROOK

VII.

1789.

March.

4

with  the  former  engagements  which  had  been  made  to
those  members  when  supporting  the  Administration.’ 1

The  great  peers  and  commoners  who  were  so  ready
to  sacrifice  honour  and  principle  to  save  their  pen¬
sions  and  sinecures  were  most  of  them  the  owners  of
estates  large  enough  to  have  enabled  them  to  afford
the  luxury  of  a  political  conscience.  Familiarity
with  corruption  had  blunted  the  perception  of  its
shamefulness.  There  were  still  found,  however,  a
few  leaders  who,  at  the  last  moment,  refused  to  bend.
The  Duke  of  Leinster,  the  two  Ponsonbies,  and  others
who  were  connected  with  Fox  and  Portland,  stood
out  alike  against  the  entreaties  of  their  companions
and  the  menaces  of  the  Castle.  A  lingering  rem¬
nant  of  honour  so  far  influenced  the  rest  of  the  sub¬
scribers  that  they  affected  to  hesitate  to  make  separate
terms.  They  insisted  that  Buckingham  must  grant 4  a
general  amnesty,’  but  they  allowed  him  to  attach  as
a  condition  that  the  bond  must  be  regarded  as  dis¬
solved,  and  that  the  parties  to  it  must  promise,
collectively  and  severally,  to  abstain  from  faccious
opposition  to  Lord  Buckingham  during  the  rest  of
his  viceroyalty.  The  Viceroy’s  consent  satisfied  the
consciences  of  the  majority.  Shannon,2 3  Loftus,  and
Clifden  authorised  Fitzgibbon  to  say  that  the  asso¬
ciation  was  now  really  at  an  end,  and  if  Lord  Buck¬
ingham  would  have  accepted  a  general  declaration,
the  irreconcilables  would  have  probably  been  con¬
tented  to  leave  him  undisturbed.

The  victory  had  been  too  expensive,  however,  to

1  1  To  Lord  Sydney,  March  23.’

S.  P.  O.

3  Mr.  Henry  Grattan  places  Lord

Shannon  in  the  list  of  those  who
stood  out  and  lest  their  offices.  I

know  not  what  was  Mr.  Grattan’s
authority.  The  Viceroy’s  letters
speak  of  him  throughout  as  the
most  eager  of  the  whole  party  to
be  restored  to  favour.

WHITE  BOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

be  left  half  Avon.  Lord  Buckingham  properly  in¬
sisted  on  receiving  the  promise  from  each  of  the
subscribers  who  held  office.  The  Duke  of  Leinster
was  Master  of  the  Rolls.  George  Ponsonby  had  a
high  place  on  the  Board  of  Revenue.  William  Pon¬
sonby  was  Postmaster-General.  With  the  Duke  and
William  Ponsonby,  who  had  gone  on  the  deputation
to  England,  it  was  especially  necessary  to  be  firm.

The  engagement  which  they  Avere  asked  to  give
A\ras  but  trifling,  and  their  decision  Avas  not  arrived  at
without  effort.  The  Duke  considered  for  three  days
before  he  gave  his  conclusive  refusal.  William  Pon¬
sonby  pretended  illness,  but  at  last  Avrote  an  answer
to  the  Secretary,  which  Avas  equally  explicit.1

Ponsonby  Avas  made  the  protomartyr,  as  Burke
Avas  not  ashamed  to  call  him.  Never  did  victim  of
intrigue  and  vanity  suffer  in  a  cause  more  contemp¬
tible.2  The  Viceroy,  sorry,  as  he  described  himself,
to  dismiss  a  man  from  his  majesty’s  service  who
stated  his  objections  to  be  personal  against  himself,
ordered  Ponsonby’s  immediate  remoATal.  His  friends
attempted  to  make  it  ‘  a  casus  foederis,  on  which  the
subscribers  were  bound  to  re-unite.’  Some  positively
refused ;  others  Avere  1  cautiously  indisposed.’  The
Viceroy  saAV  that  he  might  proceed  safely,  and  the
Treasurer  of  the  Post-office,  Mr.  Lodge  Morris,  Avas

1  1  Sir, — I  intend  to  support  tlie
usual  supplies,  and  his  majesty’s
Government  in  this  country ;  but  I
will  not  enter  into  any  engagement
whatever  with  my  Lord  Bucking¬
ham.  And  as  some  misconceptions
have  arisen  in  consequence  of  verbal
communications  with  his  Excel¬
lency,  I  take  the  liberty  of  giving
this  answer  in  writing.

‘  W.  B.  Ponsonby.’

2  1 1  am  charmed  with  what  I
hear  of  the  Duke  of  Leinster.
Ponsonby,  it  seems,  is  the  proto¬
martyr.  I  am  not  mistaken  in  the
opinion  I  formed  of  him — a  manly,
decided  character,  with  a  clear,
vigorous  understanding.’  —  Burke
to  Lord  Charlemont,  March  29,
1789.

517

CHAP.

H.

1789.

March.

518

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  taken  next  in  hand.  He,  too,  replied  in  writing,
-I?—-  and  with  deliberate  insolence.1  The  Viceroy  en-
March*  closed  it  to  Lord  Sydney,  and  the  Cabinet  answered
with  a  dismissal.  Finally,  the  Duke  of  Leinster  was
deprived  of  the  Mastership  of  the  Rolls,  an  office  of
which  his  possession  was  an  absurdity,  and  retired
to  Carton  to  digest  his  disgust,  and  encourage  his
brothers  in  treason.

So  ended  a  business  disgraceful  to  all  concerned
in  it — disgraceful  to  the  English  Whigs,  who  had
allowed  themselves  for  their  own  purposes  to  trifle
with  the  insanity  of  Ireland  —  disgraceful  to  the
spurious  enthusiasts  for  independence,  who  had  taken
the  pay  of  Government  and  turned  against  it,  ex¬
pecting  a  new  Viceroy  and  a  change  of  wind,  and
when  they  found  themselves  mistaken,  broke  the  faith
which  they  had  sworn  to  one  another 2— most  dis¬
graceful  of  all  to  the  Government,  which  stooped
again  to  gain  its  ends  by  dabbling  in  the  filthy  waters
of  Parliamentary  corruption.  Lord  Buckingham
might  congratulate  himself  on  4  having  been  able  to
withdraw  the  favour  of  Government  from  unprin¬
cipled  politicians  who,  in  critical  movements,  proved
always  false  to  their  engagements.’ 3  But  the  band
of  malcontents  was  broken  by  bribery,  by  the  gross

1  Lodge  Morris  had  private
wrongs  to  complain  of.  The  Duke
of  Rutland  had  promised  him  a
seat  in  the  Privy  Council,  and
Buckingham  had  left  the  promise
unfulfilled.

‘  Lord  Buckingham,’  he  said  in
his  letter,  ‘  has  acted  contemp¬
tuously  and  unjustifiably  towards
Parliament.  He  has  broken  the
faith  of  the  King’s  Government  so¬
lemnly  pledged  for  services  per¬
formed,  and  has  thereby  disgraced
the  memory  of  the  Duke  of  Rut¬

land,  our  late  beloved  Chief  Go¬
vernor.  With  these  impressions  on
my  mind,  it  cannot  be  expected
that  the  Marquis  should  be  the
object  of  great  personal  respect
from  me.’ — MSS.  Ireland,  April  12,
1789.  S.  P.  0.

2  It  is  interesting  to  find  among
the  subscribers  of  the  round-robin
the  unsuccessful  Lord  Rawdon,  of
the  American  war,  now  Earl  of
Moira.

3  1  Buckingham  to  Lord  Sydney  ?
March  30.  Most  secret’

WHITEBOYS,  HIGH  AND  LOW.

519

and  flagrant  purchase  of  the  so-called  independent
members,  and  by  promotion  equally  scandalous  of  per¬
sons  whose  fitter  reward  would  have  been  the  horse¬
whip.  13,000/.  a  year  was  bestowed  in  the  form
of  pensions.  New  offices  were  created  of  which  the
salaries  were  large  and  the  duties  small  or  none.1

CHAP.

ii.

17897

April.

Nine  lords  gained  a  step  in  the  peerage,  Loftus  earn¬
ing  an  earldom  by  his  timely  desertion  of  the  sub¬
scribers  ;  and  seven  commoners  were  translated  into
the  lower  stages  of  those  celestial  regions,  to  rise  in
turn  by  new  services  into  the  higher  spheres.  Some
ascended  by  first  descending;  some  by  genuine  merit
and  proved  fidelity.  In  this  strange  scandal  began
the  noble  house  of  Londonderry.  Lord  Lifford
having  resigned  the  Great  Seal,  Fitzgibbon,  the  one
person  who  had  borne  himself  throughout  with
scornful  integrity,  became  on  the  same  occasion  Lord
Chancellor.

Mr.  Grattan  and  his  friends,  after  so  signal  a  de¬
feat,  found  their  cause  hopeless  so  long  as  the  House
of  Commons  was  unreformed,  and  established  a  sepa¬
rate  Assembly,  through  which  they  could  make
known  their  opinions.  Borne  on  the  rising  tide  of
modern  democracy,  spirited  into  hope  and  daring  by
the  storming  of  the  Bastille,  thej^  formed  themselves
into  the  celebrated  Whig  Club,  where  the  dinners
were  accompanied  with  speeches  which  became  the
ornament  of  the  patriot  newspapers.  Their  objects
were  to  resist  English  encroachments,  to  reform  the
Constitution,  and  maintain  the  rights  of  the  people.
The  aristocratic  chiefs  of  the  party  held  out  their
hands  to  the  members  of  the  secret  societies,  who,

1  A  hundred  and  ten  1  servants  into  obedience  by  the  punishment
of  the  Crown  ’  were  now  in  the  of  the  mutineers.

House  of  Commons  —  disciplined

520

THE  ENGLISH  IN  IRELAND.

book  in  meaner  circles,  had  kept  alive  the  sacred  flame ;

VII  1  7  1

'  and  the  Club  was  composed  of  men  part  of  whom

1  7*3  Q  L

April  were  hanged  or  exiled  for  high  treason  ;  the  other
part  became  Privy  Councillors,  Judges,  or  Cabinet
Ministers.

4  Under  this  banner,’  said  Fitzgibbon  afterwards,
4  was  ranged  such  a  motley  collection  of  congenial
characters  as  never  before  were  assembled  for  the
reformation  of  a  State.  Mr.  Napper  Tandy  was  re¬
ceived  by  acclamation  as  a  statesman  too  important
and  illustrious  to  be  committed  to  the  hazard  of  a
ballot.  Mr.  Hamilton  Rowan  repaired  to  the  same
flag.  In  the  fury  of  political  resentment  noblemen
and  gentlemen  of  the  first  rank  in  this  country  stooped
to  associate  with  the  refuse  of  the  community,  whose
principles  they  abhorred,  and  whose  manners  must
have  excited  their  disgust.’ 1

Lord  Buckingham,  brought  into  haven  at  last,  de¬
clined  further  experience  of  Irish  government,  and
returned  to  England.  Dublin  proposed  to  illumi¬
nate  on  his  departure.  The  mob  designed  him  a
rougher  farewell.  He  disappointed  the  kind  inten¬
tions  of  both  city  and  populace  by  embarking  quietly
and  unexpectedly  at  Blackrock.  The  reins  were
passed  to  the  Earl  of  Westmoreland,  who  landed  on
the  5th  of  January,  Major  Hobart,  afterwards  Earl
of  Buckinghamshire,  being  Secretary.

1  Lord  Clare’s  speecli  on  the  Union.

END  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME.

Spot.isicoode  &  Co.,  Printers,  New-street  Square,  London.

0

n
