Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXVII, Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 2000)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v27).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXVII)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968

Volume XXVII

Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume XXVII)Contents

Preface

Sources

Abbreviations

Persons

U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs

Southeast Asia RegionAustralia, New Zealand, the United States: ANZUS and the Defense of Southeast Asia (Documents 1-45)

The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and President Johnsonʼs Plan for Economic Development of Southeast Asia (Documents 46-96)

Burma (Documents 97-104)

CambodiaJanuary 1964–May 1965: Neutrality Proposals; Border Incidents and U.N. Consideration; Deterioration and Break in U.S.-Cambodian Relations (Documents 105-156)

August 1965–June 1966: Concern Over Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Use of Cambodia; Policy Debate; Decision To Try for Reconciliation (Documents 157-185)

July 1966–December 1968: Reconciliation Attempts; Assessing Cambodiaʼs Support of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese; Attempts to Encourage Cambodia To Confront the Problem; Cambodian Detention and Release of the U.S. Crew of LCU 1577 (Documents 186-263)

ThailandFebruary 1964–October 1966: Consideration of Reintroduction of U.S. Troops Into Thailand; U.S.-Thai Bilateral Military Planning; Concern Over the Insurgency in the Northeast; Deliberations Over the Level of Military Assistance (Documents 264-335)

November 1966–November 1968: Thai Combat Troops to South Vietnam; Review of U.S. Programs in Thailand; Renewed Concern About the Northeast; U.S.-Thai Election Planning (Documents 336-408)

Index

Errata

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of Stateʼs Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editor is convinced that this volume meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of the subseries of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the last five years of the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson. The subseries presents in 34 print volumes a documentary record of the major foreign policy decision and actions of President Johnsonʼs administration.

This volume presents the documentary record of U.S. policy toward and relations with the Southeast Asian countries of Burma, Cambodia, and Thailand. It also contains two Southeast Asian regional compilations. The first one presents high-level discussions among leaders of the Australia, New Zealand, United States about the defense of the Southeast Asia. The second documents U.S. policy toward the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and the Johnson administrationʼs plans and policies for economic development of Southeast Asia. Other volumes in the 1964–1968 subseries with related material are volumes I–VI, all on Vietnam; volume XXVIII, Laos; and volume XXVI, Indonesia, Malaysia-Singapore, and the Philippines.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The editors also apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues and activities, including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted, undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in all agencies in the foreign affairs community;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy, including important information that attended Presidential decisions;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspond-ence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies;

8. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

9. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

10. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

11. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

12. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant U.S. diplomatic activity. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government engaged in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Many of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The declassification review and opening for public review of all Department of State records no later than 30 years after the events is mandated by the Foreign Relations statute. The Department of State and other record sources used in the volume are described in detail in the section on Sources below.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume XXVII

Research and compilation of this volume was completed in 1996. The first compilation, entitled “Australia, New Zealand, and the United States: ANZUS and the Defense of Southeast Asia,” is a departure from previous regional compilations which placed their emphasis on the deliberations at the formal meetings of the ANZUS Council. This compilation concentrates on the increasingly close and personal relations between President Johnson and the Prime Ministers of Australia and New Zealand. It also documents at the highest level the growing concern by Australia and New Zealand about the defense of Malaysia and Southeast Asia after the projected British withdrawal from East of Suez. There are no bilateral compilations for Australia and New Zealand, but the most important bilateral issues are raised in this compilation when President Johnson and Secretary of State Rusk met with the Australian and New Zealand Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers. Some documentation on commercial relationships with these two countries is included in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volumes VIII and IX. In addition, the compilation on Indonesia in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXVI, contains documentation on Australian and New Zealand concern about the Indonesian confrontation with Malaysia.

The other regional compilation has two primary themes: the increasing inability of SEATO to respond to the war in Southeast Asia and the effort by the Johnson administration to foster economic development in Southeast Asia. In documenting U.S. concern with SEATO, the formal meetings have been treated in summary fashion. The economic development theme is presented primarily through the work of former World Bank President Eugene Black, President Johnsonʼs Special Adviser on Southeast Asia.

The compilation on Burma focuses on Ne Winʼs visit to Washington in September 1966 and the Johnson administrationʼs principal initiative to keep Burma non-aligned, independent, and at least partially engaged with the West. The Cambodia compilation documents a bilateral relationship that increasingly felt the strain of the expanding war in Southeast Asia. The steady deterioration of the U.S. relationship with Prince Sihanouk resulted in the May 1965 break in diplomatic relations. Another focus of the compilation is the growing concern in the U.S. Government about the Viet Cong use of Cambodian sanctuaries. The Cambodian Navyʼs capture of U.S. soldiers in 1968 provided a hostage negotiation situation that the Johnson administration feared might become another Pueblo crisis. The resolution of this issue is documented along with the periodic U.S. attempts to explore reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Cambodia.

The compilation on Thailand focuses on the collaboration between the United States and Thailand in the face of wars in Vietnam and Laos and hostility toward both countries from Cambodia. The compilation highlights the deliberations leading up to the decision not to send U.S. troops to Thailand (as was done in 1962), joint U.S.-Thailand military planning, cooperation in Laos, the U.S. interagency debate over the scope of U.S. military assistance to Thailand and the orientation of Thailandʼs armed forces, the need to combat potential insurgency in Thailandʼs northeast, Thailandʼs contribution to the war in Vietnam, and the stirrings of Thai political life in anticipation of elections in 1969.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from a particular document because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the documentʼs source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and, if so, this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

The Advisory Committee has not reviewed this volume but has considered particular declassification issues.

Declassification Review

The Information Response Branch of the Office of IRM Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958 on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12958, specific information may be exempt from automatic declassification after 25 years if its release could be expected to: 1) reveal the identity of a confidential human source, or reveal information about the application of an intelligence source or method, or reveal the identity of a human intelligence source when the unauthorized disclosure of that source would clearly and demonstrably damage the national security interests of the United States;

2) reveal information that would assist in the development or use of weapons of mass destruction;

3) reveal information that would impair U.S. cryptologic systems or activities;

4) reveal information that would impair the application of state of the art technology within the U.S. weapon system;

5) reveal actual U.S. military war plans that remain in effect;

6) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair relations between the United States and a foreign government, or seriously and demonstrably undermine ongoing diplomatic activities of the United States;

7) reveal information that would clearly and demonstrably impair the current ability of U.S. Government officials to protect the President, Vice President, and other officials for whom protection services, in the interest of national security, are authorized;

8) reveal information that would seriously and demonstrably impair current national security emergency preparedness plans; or

9) violate a statute, treaty, or international agreement.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

The editor believes the volume is a thorough, accurate and reliable record of major U.S. foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity. The majority of the denials and excisions were in the Thailand compilation and relate to two issues. Two documents recounting U.S. officialsʼ discussions with the King of Thailand were denied. As for the second issue, U.S.-Thai consultations and planning for the upcoming elections, one document was denied and fifteen excised. While some specific details are withheld, the editors believe that the role that the United States played in supporting the Thai Governmentʼs election campaign is acknowledged and documented.

The declassification review of this volume, which was completed in 1999, resulted in decisions to withhold from publication 1.5 percent of the documentation selected. In all four documents were denied in full. The decision on one key intelligence issue was appealed to a High-Level Panel consisting of senior representatives from the Department of State, the National Security Council, and the Central Intelligence Agency, established in 1998 to determine whether or not a covert activity could be acknowledged by the U.S. Government. The Panel arrived at a determination on Thailand that resulted in the release of most of the appealed documentation. The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that the documentation presented here provides an accurate account of U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia during the 1964–1968 period.

Acknowledgements

The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance in facilitating research of the following: archivists at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library, especially Regina Greenwell and Charlaine Burgess, and the National Archives and Record Administration; historians at the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, especially Scott Koch; Sandra Meagher of the Declassification Branch, Department of Defense, and David Phelps of the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Edward C. Keefer, Chief of the Asia and Americas Division, did the research, compiled, selected, and annotated this volume under the supervision of then General Editor, Glenn W. LaFantasie. Kerry E. Hite, David C. Geyer, and Susan C. Weetman coordinated the declassification, and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing. Max Franke prepared the index.

William Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

August 2000

Sources Sources

The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Departmentʼs Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; the files of overseas diplomatic posts; and the sensitive intelligence files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

When this volume was compiled, all Department of State records consulted were still in the custody of the Department, and the footnotes citing Department of State files indicate that the Department is the repository. By the time of publication, however, all the Departmentʼs indexed central (or decimal) files for these years had been permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II) at College Park, Maryland. Many of the Departmentʼs decentralized office (or lot) files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, are in the process of being transferred from the Departmentʼs custody to Archives II.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Johnson and other White House foreign policy rec-ords. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies, including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants.

The Central Intelligence Agency provides access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency and at the Presidential libraries. This access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record.

Intelligence-related material in this volume comes from the files of the Central Intelligence Agency—including the Deputy Directorate for Operations, the Directorate for Intelligence, and the Directorʼs files—the valuable unretired historical files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR/IL), the retired INR finished intelligence files for East Asia and the Pacific, and the papers at the Johnson Library. One extract from a CIA trip report by William Colby relating to Thailand is from the Harriman Papers at the Library of Congress.

The Department of State arranged for access to the audiotapes of President Johnsonʼs telephone conversations, which are held in the Johnson Library. This volume was able to use only the initial group of audiotapes available in 1995. Since 1995 additional tapes have been made available to the Office of the Historian. Within the tape collection, much of the material relating to Southeast Asia, Cambodia, and Thailand is discussed within the context of Vietnam. The two tapes in the second regional compilation, Documents 52 and 53, and the two in the Cambodia compilation, Documents 120 and 155, are representative of the kind of material that can be found in this audiotape collection. Tapes dealing with Vietnam are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volumes IV-VII. The transcripts prepared by the editor are not a substitute for listening to the tapes, where nuances of voice and inflection can be discerned. The tapes provide unique insights into President Johnsonʼs thinking and personal relations with his advisers. The Johnson Library is now in the process of releasing the entire collection of tapes.

Different sources proved useful for different compilations in this volume, but some general observations can be made. For the bilateral compilations (Burma, Cambodia, Thailand) the Department of State Central Files were most important single source, followed by the papers from the Johnson Library. Because of the strong Department of Defense interest in Southeast Asia, especially Thailand, the record of the Secretary of Defense (various OSD files) and the records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (various OASD/ISA files) were particularly useful. The Thailand compilation also has important documentation from the Official Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. For the regional compilations, the Department of State Conference and Visit files proved more useful than the Central Files.

Almost all of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of the agencies mentioned, the assistance of their staffs, and especially the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

The following list identifies the particular files and collections used in the preparation of this volume. The declassification and transfer to the National Archives of these records is in process. Many of the records are already available for public review at the National Archives. The declassification review of other records is going forward in accordance with the provisions of Executive Order 12958, under which all records over 25 years old, except file series exemptions requested by agencies and approved by the President, should be reviewed for declassification by 2000.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Central Files AID (US) BURMA, U.S. aid to Burma

AID (US) THAI, U.S. aid to Thailand

AID (US) 10 THAI, strategic and political economic aid to Thailand

DEF 1 THAI–US, general U.S.-Thai defense policy and plans

DEF 1–1 ASIA, Contingency plans for the defense of Asia

DEF 4 ANZUS, U.S.-Australia-New Zealand collective defense

DEF 4 SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization collective defense

DEF 6 AUSTL, armed forces of Australia

DEF 6 THAI, armed forces of Thailand

DEF 6 US, U.S. armed forces

DEF 15 THAI–US, U.S. bases in Thailand

DEF 15–3 THAI–US, status of U.S. forces in Thailand

DEF 19 US–THAI, U.S. military assistance to Thailand

DEF 19–3 US–THAI, organizations and conferences on U.S. military assistance to Thailand

DEF 19–8 US–THAI, U.S. military equipment and supplies assistance to Thailand

E 11–2 MEKONG, development of the Mekong Rivers water resources

ORG 7 S, visits of Secretary Rusk

POL ASIA SE–USSR, general policy of the Soviet Union in Southeast Asia

POL AUSTL–US, general U.S.-Australian relations

POL BURMA–US, general U.S.-Burmese relations

POL CAMB, general policy and background on Cambodia

POL CAMB–US, general U.S.-Cambodian relations

POL CAMB–VIET N, general North Vietnamese-Cambodian relations

POL CAMB–VIET S, general relations between Cambodia and South Vietnam

POL FAR E–UK, general British policy in the Far East

POL MALAYSIA–SINGAPORE, general relations between Malaysia and Singapore

POL THAI, general policy and background on Thailand

POL THAI–US, general relations between Thailand and the United States

POL 1 ASIA, general policy and background on Asia

POL 1 ASIA–SE, general policy and background on Southeast Asia

POL 1 ASIA SE–CHICOM, general policy of China in Southeast Asia

POL 1 ASIA SE–US, general policy of the United States in Southeast Asia

POL 1 BURMA–US, general U.S.-Burmese relations

POL 1 CAMB, general policy and background on Cambodia

POL 1 CAMB–US, general U.S.-Cambodian relations

POL 1–2 THAI, joint weekly reports on Thailand

POL 2 CAMB, general reports on Cambodia

POL 7 AUSTL, high-level visits of Australian officials

POL 7 BURMA, visits of high-level Burmese officials

POL 7 BURMA–US, visits of high-level Burmese officials to the United States

POL 7 CAMB, visits of high-level Cambodian officials

POL 7 THAI, visits of high-level Thai officials

POL 7 US–HUMPHREY, visits of Vice President Humphrey

POL 8 ASIA SE, neutralism and non-alignment in Southeast Asia

POL 8 CAMB, neutralism and non-alignment of Cambodia

POL 12 THAI, political parties in Thailand

POL 14 THAI, elections in Thailand

POL 15–1 AUSTL, prime minister of Australia

POL 15–1 CAMB, head of state, prime minister of Cambodia

POL 15–5 THAI, prime minister of Thailand

POL 17 AUSTL–US, U.S. diplomatic representations to Australia

POL 17 CAMB–US, U.S. diplomatic relations with Cambodia

POL 23–1 THAI, internal security and counterinsurgency plans and programs in Thailand

POL 23–8 CAMB, internal security—demonstrations, riots, and protests in Cambodia

POL 23–9 THAI, riots and coups in Thailand

POL 26 THAI, pre-March 1965 insurgency in Thailand

POL 27 ASIA SE, military operations in Southeast Asia

POL 27 CAMB, military operations in Cambodia

POL 27 CAMB–VIET S, South Vietnamese military operations in Cambodia

POL 27 LAOS, military operations in Laos

POL 27 THAI, military operations in Thailand

POL 27 VIET S, military operations in South Vietnam

POL 27–13 ASIA SE, neutrality in Southeast Asia

POL 27–13 CAMB, neutrality declarations for Cambodia

POL 27–14 CAMB, truce, cease-fires, and armistices in Cambodia

POL 32–1 CAMB, boundary disputes, violations and incidents, Cambodia

POL 32–1 CAMB–LAOS, territorial and boundary disputes and incidents between Cambodia and Laos

POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S, territorial disputes and incidents between Cambodia and South Vietnam

POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN, United Nations and Cambodian-South Vietnamese boundary disputes and incidents

SEATO 3, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization meetings

SEATO 3 PHIL (MA), Southeast Asia Treaty Organization meeting in Manila

SEATO 3 UK (LO), Southeast Asia Treaty Organization meeting in London

UN 3 SC, United Nations Security Council meetings

Department of State Lot Files Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272 Files of Under Secretary of State George Ball, 1961–1969.

Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240 Files of William P. Bundy, 1962–1970, largely covering the period when he was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, 1964–1969.

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 International conferences and official visits, May 1961–December 1964.

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347 International conferences and official visits 1965.

Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305 International conferences, January–October 1966.

Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586 International conferences, October 1966–June 1967.

Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453 International conferences, May 1967–January 1968.

INR/EAP Files: Lots 90 D 99 and 90 D 110 Bureau of Intelligence National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence estimates and related documentation on East Asia and the Pacific, 1952–1985.

INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165 Bureau of Intelligence National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence estimates and related documentation on East Asia and the Pacific, 1960–1986.

INR/IL Historical Files Intelligence files, including the records of the Special Group/303 Committee, as maintained by the Office of Intelligence Liaison, Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

S/S-Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451 Files of the Special Group (CI) for 1962–1964.

Visits Files: Lot 67 D 587 Official visits to the United States, October 1966–May 1967.

Visits Files: Lot 68 D 475 Official visits to the United States, June 1967–November 1967.

Visits Files: Lot 70 D 418 Official visits to the United States, January 1968–December 1969.

Central Intelligence Agency DDO/EA Files: Job 78–000032R Files of the East Asia Division of the Deputy Directorate for Operations.

DCI Files, Job 80–B01285A Files of Director of Central Intelligence John A. McCone (1961–1965) William F. Rayborn (1965–1966), and Richard M. Helms (1966–1973).

DCI/Executive Registry Files, Job 80–B01676R Files of the Office of the Director of Central Intelligence.

O/DDI Registry, Job 79–R01012A Registry of National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates as maintained by the Deputy Directorate for Intelligence.

Johnson Library National Security File Agency File: SEATO, SIG

Country File: Australia, Burma, Cambodia, Laos, New Zealand, Thailand, Vietnam

Special Head of State Correspondence

Files of McGeorge Bundy

Files of Robert W. Komer

Files of Walt Rostow

International Meetings and Travel File

Memos to the President

Name File

NSAM File

Special Files Presidentʼs Daily Appointments

Clifford Papers

Ball Papers

Tom Johnson Meeting Notes

John McCone Memoranda of Meetings with the President

Meeting Notes File

Records of Telephone Conversations

Warnke Papers,

McNaughton Files

Transcripts of Telephone Conversations, Alpha Series

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland RG 330 Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary, and the Assistant Secretaries of State for Internal Security Affairs OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306 and FRC 68 A 4023 ISA secret and top secret subject decimal files for 1964.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1265 and FRC 70 A 1266 Official secret and top secret decimal files of the Secretary of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense, and their special assistants for 1965.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717 and FRC 70 A 5127 ISA secret and top secret subject decimal files for 1965.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 6648 and FRC 70 A 6649 ISA secret and top secret subject decimal files for 1966.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546 and FRC 71 A 4919 ISA secret and top secret subject decimal files for 1967.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1498 ISA secret subject decimal files for 1968.

OSD Files: FRC: 69 D 7425 Official secret and top secret subject decimal files of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense, and special their assistants, 1964.

OSD Files, FRC 70 A 4443 and FRC 70 A 4662 Official secret and top secret subject decimal files of the Secretary of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense, and their special assistants for 1966.

OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2467 and OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468 Official secret and top secret subject decimal files of the Secretary of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense, and their special assistants for 1967.

OSD Files: FRC 73 A 1250 Official secret subject decimal files of the Secretary of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense, and their special assistants for 1968.

Department of Defense Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, JCS Official Records

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division Harriman Papers, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations

Published Documentary Collections

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, 1965, 1967. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office. ———Department of State Bulletin. 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Abbreviations Abbreviations

A/A, anti-aircraft

AA, African-Asian

ACM, Air Chief Marshal

ACSI, Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence (U.S. Army)

ADB, Asian Development Bank

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AFP, Agence France Press

AID, Agency for International Development

ANZAC, Australia, New Zealand Army Corps

ANZAM, Australia, New Zealand, and Malaysia

ANZUS, Australia, New Zealand, United States

ARD, Accelerated Rural Development

ARDP, Accelerated Rural Development Program

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

ASA, Association of Southeast Asia

ASPAC, Asian and Pacific Council

BAOR, British Army of the Rhine

Barrel Roll, code name for interdiction and close air support operations in Laos

C–135, four engine, turbot propeller, long-range transport aircraft

CAS, Controlled American Source

CBI, China, Burma, India

CD, civil defense

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

CH–34, cargo helicopter

CHICOMS, Chinese Communists

CHJUSMAG, Chief, Joint U.S. Military Assistance Group

CHMAAG, Chief, Military Assistance Advisory Group

CI, Counterinsurgency

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIA/ONE, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

CIAP, Inter-American Committee for the Alliance for Progress

CIDG, Citizensʼ Irregular Defense Group

CINC, Commander in Chief

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

COMUSMACTHAI, Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Thailand

COMUSMACV, Commander in Crhief, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

CONUS, continental United States

COSVN, Central Office for South Vietnam

CPM, Communist Party of Malaya

C/S, chief of staff

CSOC, Counter Insurgency Operations Command

CST, Central Standard Time

CT, Communist terrorists; Chinese teams; Country Team

CTZ, combat zone

DA, Department of the Army

Daniel Boone, codename for cross border intelligence operations in northeast Cambodia

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DDO/EA, Deputy Directorate of Operations, East Asia, Central Intelligence Agency

Depcirtel, Department of State circular telegram

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DMZ, demilitarized zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DRV or DRVN, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

DTG, date/time/group

EA, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

EA/BUC, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Office of Burma/Cambodia

EA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs

ECAFE, Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (of the United Nations)

Embtel, embassy telegram

EXCOM, Executive Committee (of the NSC)

Exdis, exclusive distribution

EXTAFF, External Affairs

F–5 (Freedom Fighter), twin-engine turbojet, supersonic, light tactical fighter

F–100 (Super Sabre), single engine turbojet, supersonic jet fighter used for daytime mission with a single pilot

FAC, Forward Air Controllers

FAR, Forces Armees du Royaume, Royal Armed Forces (of Laos)

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FE/ACA, Office of Asian Communist Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FE/SEA, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FSO, foreign service officer

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

GNP, Gross National Product

GNZ, Government of New Zealand

GOA, General Accounting Office

GOA, Government of Australia

G/PM, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GUSSR, Government of the USSR

GVN, Government of Vietnam

H, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State

Hardnose, codename for ground reconnaissance of the Ho Chi Minh Trail by Lao tribesmen

HFAC, House Foreign Affairs Committee

HMG, Her Majestyʼs Government

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank)

ICC, International Control and Supervision Commission

IJC, International Court of Justice

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

INR/RFE, Office of Research for the Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IQ, intelligence quotient

IRG, Interdepartmental Regional Group

ISA, International Security Affairs

JCS, Joint Chief of Staff

JSC, Joint Security Center

JUSMAG, Joint United States Military Advisory Group

KL, Kuala Lumpur

KMT, Koumingtang

KS, Khmer Serei

KW, kilowatt

LA, Legislative Affairs

LCU, landing craft, utility

L/EA, Assistant Legal Adviser, Bureau of East Asia and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

LOC, lines of communication

L/UNA, Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Affairs, Department of State

L/UNP, Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Political Affairs, Department of State

MAC, Military Assistance Command

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MATS, Military Air Transport System

MDU, mobil development units

MILAD, military adviser

MSTS, Military Sea Transport System

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NCO, non-commissioned officers

NE, northeast

NLFSVN, National Liberation Front of South Vietnam

Nodis, no distribution

Noforn, no foreign distribution

NSA, National Security Agency

NSC, National Security Council

NU, Nahdlat ul Ulama (Indonesian Moslem party)

NVA/VC, North Vietnamese Army/Viet Cong

NVN, North Viet-Nam

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OSAD/ISA/FER, Office of the Assistant Secretary of State for International Security Affairs, Far East Region

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

P, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

PARU, Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit

PAVN, Peopleʼs Army of Vietnam

PGM, motor gun boat

PHILCAG, Philippine Civil Action Group

PKI, Partai Komunis Indonesia (Indonesian Communist Party)

PM, prime minister

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

POLAD, political adviser

PRC, Peopleʼs Republic of China

RAA, Royal Australian Army

R & R, rest and relaxation

RCT, regimental combat team

RFE, Office of Research and Analysis for the Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

RKG, Royal Khmer Government, Royal Cambodian Government

ROK, Republic of Korea

Rolling Thunder, codename for the air bombardment against North Vietnam and its lines of supply and communication into South Vietnam

RTA, Royal Thai Army

RTAF, Royal Thai Air Force

RTARF, Royal Thai Armed Forces

RTG, Royal Thai Government

RTN, Royal Thai Navy

S, Office of the Secretary of State

SA, supporting assistance

S/AL, Ambassador at Large

SC, Security Council of the United Nations

SE, southeast

SEA, Southeast Asia

SEACOORD, Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SEAMES, Southeast Asia Monetary Exchange System

Secto, indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State

septel, separate telegram

SIG, Senior Interdepartmental Group

SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

SOFA, Status of Forces Agreement

SOG, Studies and Observation Group

SPA, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State

SPA/E, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Economic Affairs

SPT, Saha Pracha Thai (United Thai Peopleʼs Party)

SS, Army communications channel

STPD, short tone per day

S/VN, Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs

SVN, South Vietnam

T–6, Prop-driven, single engine, two seat, trainer aircraft

T–28, single engine, propeller driven, 1950s era trainer extensively modified as counter insurgency aircraft

TC, technical cooperation

TCC, Troop Contributing (to Vietnam) Countries

TOAID, series indicator for telegrams to the Agency for International Development

Todel, series indicator for telegrams to the delegation at the Paris Peace Talks

Tosec, indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State

TS, top secret

UK, United Kingdom of Great Britain and North Ireland

UN, United Nations

UNP, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs

USAF, U.S. Air Force

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USIS, United States Information Service

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission at the United Nations

VC/NVA, Viet Cong/North Vietnamese

VN, Vietnam

Persons Persons

Aldrich, George, H., Assistant Legal Adviser for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, after July 1965

Alexander, Clifford L., Jr., member of the Security Council Staff until 1964; Deputy Special Assistant to the President 1964–1965; Associate Special Counsel 1965–1966; Deputy Special Counsel to the President 1966–1967

Bacon, Ruth E., Director of the Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern (later East Asian and Pacific) Affairs after November 7, 1965

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State until September 20, 1966; Representative to the United Nations June 26, 1968–September 25, 1968

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Economic Affairs

Barr, Joseph W., Under Secretary of the Treasury, 1965–1968, Secretary of the Treasury, December 1968–January 1969

Bator, Francis, member of NSC staff, May 1964; Deputy Special Assistant to the President and senior member of the NSC staff, 1965–1968

Bell, David E., Administrator of the Agency for International Development until June 1966

Berger, Samuel D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, July 1965–February 1968

Bergesen, Alf E., Charge dʼAffaires ad interim to Cambodia, September 18, 1964–May 3, 1965

Black, Eugene R., Special Adviser to the President on Southeast Asia after April 9, 1965

Blair, William McC., Jr., Ambassador to the Philippines, June 8, 1964–October 21, 1967

Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador to France until February 9, 1968; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs after February 21, 1968

Bowles, Chester, Ambassador to India

Brown, George, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, August 10, 1966–March 15, 1968

Brown, Winthrop G., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, after May 1968

Buffum, William B., Director, Office of United National Political and Security Affairs, Department of State, until September 1965; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until January 1967

Bumibol Adulyadej, King of Thailand

Bundy, McGeorge, Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs until February 28, 1966

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until March 14, 1964; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern (later East Asian and Pacific) Affairs after March 16, 1964

Bunker, Ellsworth, Ambassador to Vietnam after April 5, 1967

Burchinal, David A., Director of the Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, February 24, 1964–July 31, 1966

Butler, Richard (Rab) A., British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs until October 1964

Byroade, Henry A., Ambassador to Burma until June 11, 1968

Christian, George, Press Secretary to the President, January 1967–January 1969

Cleveland, J. Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until September 8, 1965

Clifford, Clark, Secretary of Defense after March 1, 1968

Colby, William E., Chief, Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans, Central Intelligence Agency, until 1967

Conlon, Thomas F., Officer in Charge of Australia, New Zealand, and Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until September 1964

Cooper, Chester L., member of the National Security Council Staff, November 1964–April 1966; Special Assistant to Ambassador at Large Harriman, September 1966–1967

Corcoran, Thomas J., member of the Office of the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs until July 1965; Country Director for Laos and Cambodia after July 1968

Couve de Murville, Maurice, Foreign Minister of France until May 1968

Cuthill, David C., Director, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far East Affairs, Department of State, until August 1966

Dawee Chulasapya, Marshal, Royal Thai Army; Deputy Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff of the Supreme Command of Thailand

Dechamps, Noel St. Charles, Australian Ambassador to Cambodia

deSilva, Peer, Special Assistant to the Ambassador for Counter Insurgency, Thailand, 1966–1968

Dexter, John B., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, July 1964–August 1965

Dobrynin, Anatoliy, F., Soviet Ambassador to the United States

Enthoven, Alain, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis

Ewing, Richard T., member of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far East Affairs, Department of State, from August 1965; Country Director for Burma and Cambodia, July 1966–August 1967

Felt, Harry D. Admiral, USN, Commander in Chief, Pacific until June 30, 1964

Forrestal, Michael V., member of the National Security Council staff until April 1964; Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Vietnam July 1964–1965

Fortas, Abe, Associate Justice, U.S. Supreme Court

Fowler, Henry H., Secretary of the Treasury, April 1965–December 1968

Fulbright, J. W., Senator from Arkansas (D) and Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Gandhi, Indira, Prime Minister of India after January 25, 1966

Gaud, William S., Deputy Administrator, Agency for International Development, after February 27, 1964; Administrator after August 1, 1966

Godley, G. McMurtrie, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, after March 1968

Goldberg, Arthur J., Representative to the United Nations July 28, 1965–June 24, 1968

Gorton, John G., Prime Minister of Australia after January 10, 1968

Green, Marshall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until June 4, 1965; thereafter Ambassador to Indonesia

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Habib, Philip C., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs after June 1967

Hamilton, William C., Laos Country Director until July 1966; Supervisory Political Officer, Embassy in Thailand, after September 1967

Hannah, Norman B., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until March 1964; Political Adviser to the Commander in Chief, Pacific, March 1964–July 1966; thereafter Counselor and Deputy Chief of Mission at the Embassy in Thailand

Harkins, General Paul D., USA, Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, until June 20, 1964

Harriman, W. Averell, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until March 17, 1965; thereafter Ambassador at Large

Hasluck, Paul M. C., Australian Minister for External Affairs after April 24, 1964

Healy, Denis, British Minister of Defense after October 14, 1964

Helms, Richard M., Deputy Director for Plans until April, 1965; Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, April 28, 1965–June 30, 1966, thereafter Director of Central Intelligence

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until March 14, 1964

Hirschfeld, Thomas J., Officer in Charge of Cambodian Affairs, Department of State, until February 1965

Holt, Harold E., Prime Minister of Australia, January 26, 1966–December 1967

Holyoake, Sir Keith, Prime Minister of New Zealand

Hughes, Thomas L., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Humphrey, Hubert H., Vice President of the United States

Huot Sambath, Cambodian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Jantzen, Robert J., political officer in the Embassy in Thailand

Johnson, Lyndon B., President of the United States

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until July 12, 1964; Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam, July 1964–September 1965; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, November 1, 1965–October 9, 1965; Ambassador to Japan after November 8, 1966

Johnson, W. Thomas, Deputy Press Secretary to the President, October 1967–January 1969

Jones, Jim R., Assistant to the President, February 1965–January 1968, Deputy Special Assistant, January–May 1968, Special Assistant after May 1968

Jorden, William J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, after April 11, 1965; senior member of the National Security Council Staff, May 1966–May 1968; thereafter member of the Delegation to the Paris Peace talks on Vietnam

Kanh, see Nguyen Kanh

Kantol, see Norodom Kantol

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., Under Secretary of State after September 30, 1966

Kidder, Randolph A., appointed Ambassador to Cambodia July 9, 1964; proceeded to post but did not present his credentials and left post September 18, 1964

Kimball, John W., member of the Office of United Nations Political Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, until December 1967

Kohler, Foy D., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, November 29, 1966–December 31, 1967

Komer, Robert W, member of the National Security Council staff until September 1965; Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until March 1966; Special Assistant to the President March 28, 1966–May 1967

Konthi, Suphamongkhon, Secretary General of SEATO, 1964–1965

Koren, Henry L.T., Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until April 7, 1964; Ambassador to the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), May 13, 1964–August 4, 1965; Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, May 1966–July 1966, Deputy (with the rank of minister) to the Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam, July 1966–February 1968

Lacey, John A., Country Director for Burma and Cambodia after July 1967

LeMay, Curtis E., General, USAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force until January 31, 1965

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Ambassador to Vietnam until June 28, 1964; and July 31, 1965–April 25, 1967

Lon Nol, General, FARK, Cambodian Minister of Defense; Prime Minister of Cambodia, 1966–1967

Macapagal, Dosado, President of the Philippines until December 31, 1965

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence until April 28, 1965

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense until February 29, 1968; thereafter President of the World Bank

McNaughton, John T, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, July 1, 1964–July 19, 1967

Manhard, Philip W., Deputy Director, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, November 1964–September 1967

Mann, Thomas C., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, March 19, 1965–May 31, 1966

Mansfield, Mike, Senator from Montana (D) and Senate Majority Leader

Marcos, Ferdinand, President of the Philippines after 1965

Marks, Leonard H., Director, U.S. Information Agency, July 22, 1965–December 6, 1968

Martin, Graham A., Ambassador to Thailand until September 9, 1967

Meeker, Leonard C., Legal Adviser of the Department of State after May 18, 1965

Mendenhall, Joseph A., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs and Chairman of the Interagency Working Group on Vietnam until April 1964; Director of the Office of Far East Regional Affairs, Department of State, July 1964–August 1965

Menzies, Robert G., Prime Minister of Australia until January 1966

Moore, Jonathan, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, March 1964–June 1966

Ne Win, General, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma

Neubert, Joseph W., Deputy Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, April–August 1964

Nguyen, Kanh, Prime Minister of the Republic of Vietnam, February 4–October 30, 1964; thereafter Commander in Chief of Republic of Vietnamʼs Armed Forces; Chairman of the Armed Forces Council, December 18, 1964–February 21, 1965

Nitze, Paul H., Secretary of the Navy until July 1, 1967, thereafter Deputy Secretary of Defense

Nong Kimmy, Cambodian Ambassador to the United States until March 1964; thereafter Cambodian Ambassador to India

Norodom Kantol, Prime Minister of Cambodia until October 1966

Ormsby-Gore, Sir David, then Lord Harlech, British Ambassador to the United States until April 1965

Pearson, Lester B., Prime Minister of Canada until April 1968

Perry, Douglas R, member of the Office of Burma and Cambodia Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, after July 1966

Pham Hut Quat, Republic of Vietnam Foreign Minister, February 4–November 4, 1964

Phoumi Nosavan, General, Vice Premier of Laos until February 1965

Pickering, Laurence G., Officer in Charge of Thai Affairs, Department of State

Plimsoll, Sir James, Permanent Secretary, Australian Department of External Affairs, 1965–1970

Poats, Rutherford M., Assistant Administrator for Far East, Agency for International Development, April, 1964–May 1967, thereafter Deputy Administrator

Pote Sarasin, Minister of National Development and Economic Affairs of Thailand

Praphat Charusthein (Prapass Charusathiara), General, RTA, Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand

Quat, see Pham Huy Quat

Raborn, William F., Jr., Director of Central Intelligence, April 28 1965–June 30, 1966

Read, Benjamin H., Executive Secretary of the Department of State

Roche, John P., Special Assistant to the President, 1966–1968

Ropa, Donald W., member of the NSC Council Staff, 1965–1967

Rostow, Walt W., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff until March 31, 1966, thereafter Special Assistant to the President

Rowan, Carl T., Director, U.S. Information Agency, February 27, 1964–July 10, 1965

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Salans, Carl F., Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, October 1964–June 65; Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs, June 1965–February 1967; thereafter Deputy Legal Adviser

Saleh, Chaerul, Indonesian Third Deputy Prime Minister and Coordinator Minister for the Development Compartment, until April 1966.

Schultze, Charles L., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget, until 1965, Director of the Bureau of the Budget, 1965–1967

Sharp, Admiral U.S. Grant, USN, Commander in Chief, Pacific, June 30, 1964–August 1, 1968

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Chief of State of Cambodia

Sisco, Joseph J., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs until September 10, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Smith, Bromley, Executive Secretary of the National Security Council

Solbert, Peter, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Son Sann, President of the National Bank of Cambodia

Souvanna Phouma, Prince, Prime Minister of Laos

Spear, Moncrieff J., Country Director for Thailand, Department of State, from July 1967; Country Director for Thailand and Burma after January 1968

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations until July 14, 1965

Stewart, Michael, British Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, January 1965–August 1966 and March 1968–June 1970

Sukarno, President of Indonesia until March 12, 1967

Sullivan, William H., Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until March 1964; Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs to the Secretary of State, March–November 1964; Ambassador to Laos after November 25, 1964

Taylor, General Maxwell D., Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until June 30, 1964; Ambassador to Vietnam, July 14, 1964–July 30, 1965; thereafter Special Consultant to the President

Thanat Khomen, Foreign Minister of Thailand

Thanom Kittikachorn, Field Marshal, RTA, Prime Minister of Thailand

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Ambassador-at-Large until December 26, 1966, thereafter Ambassador to the Soviet Union

Thomson, James C., Jr., Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until June 1964; member of the National Security Council Staff, July 1964–September 1966

Thrasher, Edward J., Officer in Charge Australian, New Zealand, and Pacific Affairs, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State, until September 1964

Trueheart, William C., Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, May 1964–August 1966; Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, after June 1967

Tunku Abdul Rahman, Prime Minister of Malaysia

U Thant, Secretary General of the United Nations

Unger, Leonard, Ambassador to Laos until December 1, 1964; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, January 1965–August 11, 1967; thereafter Ambassador to Thailand

Vance, Cyrus R., Deputy Secretary of Defense, January 28, 1964–June 30, 1967

Vargas, Jesus, Secretary General of SEATO

Waller, J. Keith, Australian Ambassador to the United States after September 18, 1964

Warnke, Paul C., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, August 1, 1967

Westmoreland, General William C., USA, Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, June 20, 1964–July 2, 1968

Wheeler, General Earle G., USA, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army until July 2, 1964; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff after July 3, 1964

Wilson, Harold, British Prime Minister after October 14, 1964

Wright, Marshall, senior member of the National Security Council Staff, 1967–1968

U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs

In compliance with the Foreign Relations of the United States statute to include in the Foreign Relations series comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions, the editors have sought to present essential documents regarding major covert actions and intelligence activities. In order to provide readers with some organizational context on how covert actions and special intelligence operations in support of U.S. foreign policy were planned and approved within the U.S. Government, the following note is offered. It describes, on the basis of previously-declassified documents, the changing and developing procedures during the Truman, Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson Presidencies.

Management of Covert Actions in the Truman Presidency

The Truman administrationʼs concern over Soviet “psychological warfare” prompted the new National Security Council to authorize, in NSC 4–A of December 1947, the launching of peacetime covert action operations. NSC 4–A made the Director of Central Intelligence responsible for psychological warfare, establishing at the same time the principle that covert action was an exclusively Executive Branch function. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) certainly was a natural choice but it was assigned this function at least in part because the Agency controlled unvouchered funds, by which operations could be funded with minimal risk of exposure in Washington.1

CIAʼs early use of its new covert action mandate dissatisfied officials at the Departments of State and Defense. The Department of State, believing this role too important to be left to the CIA alone and concerned that the military might create a new rival covert action office in the Pentagon, pressed to reopen the issue of where responsibility for covert action activities should reside. Consequently, on June 18, 1948, a new NSC directive, NSC 10/2, superseded NSC 4–A.

NSC 10/2 directed CIA to conduct “covert” rather than merely “psychological” operations, defining them as all activities “which are conducted or sponsored by this Government against hostile foreign states or groups or in support of friendly foreign states or groups but which are so planned and executed that any US Government responsibility for them is not evident to unauthorized persons and that if uncovered the US Government can plausibly disclaim any responsibility for them.”

The type of clandestine activities enumerated under the new directive included: “propaganda; economic warfare; preventive direct action, including sabotage, demolition and evacuation measures; subversion against hostile states, including assistance to underground resistance movements, guerrillas and refugee liberations [sic] groups, and support of indigenous anti-Communist elements in threatened countries of the free world. Such operations should not include armed conflict by recognized military forces, espionage, counter-espionage, and cover and deception for military operations.”2

The Office of Policy Coordination (OPC), newly established in the CIA on September 1, 1948, in accordance with NSC 10/2, assumed responsibility for organizing and managing covert actions. OPC, which was to take its guidance from the Department of State in peacetime and from the military in wartime, initially had direct access to the State Department and to the military without having to proceed through CIAʼs administrative hierarchy, provided the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) was informed of all important projects and decisions.3 In 1950 this arrangement was modified to ensure that policy guidance came to OPC through the DCI.

During the Korean conflict the OPC grew quickly. Wartime commitments and other missions soon made covert action the most expensive and bureaucratically prominent of CIAʼs activities. Concerned about this situation, DCI Walter Bedell Smith in early 1951 asked the NSC for enhanced policy guidance and a ruling on the proper “scope and magnitude” of CIA operations. The White House responded with two initiatives. In April 1951 President Truman created the Psychological Strategy Board (PSB) under the NSC to coordinate government-wide psychological warfare strategy. NSC 10/5, issued in October 1951, reaffirmed the covert action mandate given in NSC 10/2 and expanded CIAʼs authority over guerrilla warfare.4 The PSB was soon abolished by the incoming Eisenhower administration, but the expansion of CIAʼs covert action writ in NSC 10/5 helped ensure that covert action would remain a major function of the Agency.

As the Truman administration ended, CIA was near the peak of its independence and authority in the field of covert action. Although CIA continued to seek and receive advice on specific projects from the NSC, the PSB, and the departmental representatives originally delegated to advise OPC, no group or officer outside of the DCI and the President himself had authority to order, approve, manage, or curtail operations.

NSC 5412 Special Group; 5412/2 Special Group; 303 Committee

The Eisenhower administration began narrowing CIAʼs latitude in 1954. In accordance with a series of National Security Council directives, the responsibility of the Director of Central Intelligence for the conduct of covert operations was further clarified. President Eisenhower approved NSC 5412 on March 15, 1954, reaffirming the Central Intelligence Agencyʼs responsibility for conducting covert actions abroad. A definition of covert actions was set forth; the DCI was made responsible for coordinating with designated representatives of the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to ensure that covert operations were planned and conducted in a manner consistent with U.S. foreign and military policies; and the Operations Coordinating Board was designated the normal channel for coordinating support for covert operations among State, Defense, and CIA. Representatives of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the President were to be advised in advance of major covert action programs initiated by the CIA under this policy and were to give policy approval for such programs and secure coordination of support among the Departments of State and Defense and the CIA.5

A year later, on March 12, 1955, NSC 5412/1 was issued, identical to NSC 5412 except for designating the Planning Coordination Group as the body responsible for coordinating covert operations. NSC 5412/2 of December 28, 1955, assigned to representatives (of the rank of assistant secretary) of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the President responsibility for coordinating covert actions. By the end of the Eisenhower administration, this group, which became known as the “NSC 5412/2 Special Group” or simply “Special Group,” emerged as the executive body to review and approve covert action programs initiated by the CIA.6 The membership of the Special Group varied depending upon the situation faced. Meetings were infrequent until 1959 when weekly meetings began to be held. Neither the CIA nor the Special Group adopted fixed criteria for bringing projects before the group; initiative remained with the CIA, as members representing other agencies frequently were unable to judge the feasibility of particular projects.7

After the Bay of Pigs failure in April 1961, General Maxwell Taylor reviewed U.S. paramilitary capabilities at President Kennedyʼs request and submitted a report in June which recommended strengthening high-level direction of covert operations. As a result of the Taylor Report, the Special Group, chaired by the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs McGeorge Bundy, and including Deputy Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer, assumed greater responsibility for planning and reviewing covert operations. Until 1963 the DCI determined whether a CIA-originated project was submitted to the Special Group. In 1963 the Special Group developed general but informal criteria, including risk, possibility of success, potential for exposure, political sensitivity, and cost (a threshold of $25,000 was adopted by the CIA), for determining whether covert action projects were submitted to the Special Group.8

From November 1961 to October 1962 a Special Group (Augmented), whose membership was the same as the Special Group plus Attorney General Robert Kennedy and General Taylor (as Chairman), exercised responsibility for Operation Mongoose, a major covert action program aimed at overthrowing the Castro regime in Cuba. When President Kennedy authorized the program in November, he designated Brigadier General Edward G. Lansdale, Assistant for Special Operations to the Secretary of Defense, to act as chief of operations, and Lansdale coordinated the Mongoose activities among the CIA and the Departments of State and Defense.CIA units in Washington and Miami had primary responsibility for implementing Mongoose operations, which included military, sabotage, and political propaganda programs.9

NSAM No. 303, June 2, 1964, from Bundy to the Secretaries of State and Defense and the DCI, changed the name of “Special Group 5412” to “303 Committee” but did not alter its composition, functions, or responsibility. Bundy was the chairman of the 303 Committee.10

The Special Group and the 303 Committee approved 163 covert actions during the Kennedy administration and 142 during the Johnson administration through February 1967. The 1976 Final Report of the Church Committee, however, estimated that of the several thousand projects undertaken by the CIA since 1961, only 14 percent were considered on a case-by-case basis by the 303 Committee and its predecessors (and successors). Those not reviewed by the 303 Committee were low-risk and low-cost operations. The Final Report also cited a February 1967 CIA memorandum that included a description of the mode of policy arbitration of decisions on covert actions within the 303 Committee system. CIA presentations were questioned, amended, and even on occasion denied, despite protests from the DCI. Department of State objections modified or nullified proposed operations, and the 303 Committee sometimes decided that some agency other than CIA should undertake an operation or that CIA actions requested by Ambassadors on the scene should be rejected.11

Special Group (Counter-Insurgency)

In March 1961 early in the administration of President Kennedy, a Counter-Guerrilla Task Force under CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell was set up. In December the Bissell Task Force completed its report “Elements of US Strategy To Deal With Wars of National Liberation.” NSC Staff member Robert Komer proposed to Bundy that “high-level responsibility” for coordinating counter-insurgency activities should be assigned to “Taylor and the Special Group,” separate from the mechanism for implementing NSC 5412/2.12

On January 18, 1962, President Kennedy signed NSAM No. 124, which established the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) to be composed of the Military Representative of the President (Taylor) as Chairman, the Attorney General, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Deputy Secretary of Defense, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, and the Administrator of AID. The task of Special Group (CI) would be “to assure unity of effort and the use of all available resources with maximum effectiveness in preventing and resisting subversive insurgency and related forms of indirect aggression in friendly countries.” The Special Group (CI) was to confine itself to establishing broad policies and give oversight to country or regional interagency task forces. An annex to NSAM No. 124 assigned Thailand, Vietnam, and Laos to the initial cognizance of the Special Group (CI).13

The Special Group (CI) held its first meeting on January 18, 1962, and subsequently held weekly 2-hour meetings with no substitute members allowed. Although members may have preferred that the Special Group (CI) act as a separate executive body to carry out its decisions, the decisions were coordinated with the various executive departments and agencies within the existing chain of command. General Taylor served as Chairman until he became Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October 1962 when Deputy Under Secretary of State U. Alexis Johnson succeeded him.14

Throughout much of 1962, Special Group (CI) received extensive briefings on the situations in Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Iran, Indonesia, and other countries faced with what the Group regarded as “internal defense problems.” After much debate and interagency drafting, an agreed Special Group (CI) policy statement on counter-insurgency was set forth in a State Department report of September 1962, entitled “United States Overseas Internal Defense Policy.”The policy expressed in the report, which was approved by President Kennedy in NSAM No. 182, included the presumption that counter-insurgency programs (referred to as “internal defense programs” in the report) should not be limited to military measures but should also involve as necessary such additional dimensions as economic development, police control, and effective local government.15

In the course of its existence until 1966, Special Group (CI) spurred the establishment of extensive training courses on counter-insurgency throughout the government; promoted the responsibility of inter-agency “country teams” in the countries concerned to develop “Internal Defense Plans”; examined and reshaped programs for advising, supplying, and training paramilitary and military forces in developing countries; encouraged the redirection and expansion of government programs to equip police forces in developing countries; agreed on programs to encourage the local military in these countries to undertake their own “civic action” programs; asked for additional government weapons research for counter-insurgency operations; urged the Agency for International Development to coordinate economic assistance programs with military civic action programs; and urged the CIA to increase its intelligence and counter intelligence activity in target countries.16

On October 15, 1963, General Taylor, signing as Chairman of the JCS, addressed a memorandum to members of the Special Group (CI) entitled “U.S. Support of Foreign Paramilitary Forces,” which concluded that U.S. policy to support the Honduran Civil Guard had resulted in the overthrow of the constitutional government. Taylor observed that the Honduras experience suggested that U.S. programs in other countries should be reviewed to determine whether similar potentially dangerous situations were being fostered, and he recommended that “interagency working groups which monitor internal defense plans” review these programs and report to the Special Group (CI).17

On January 17, 1966, General Taylor wrote to President Johnson recommending that the Special Group (CI) “be converted into an agency for supporting the Secretary of State in discharging his broadened responsibilities for the direction, coordination, and supervision of overseas affairs.” In NSAM No. 341, March 2, 1966, President Johnson assigned to the Secretary of State the “authority and responsibility to the full extent permitted by law for the overall direction, coordination, and supervision of interdepartmental [counter subversion] activities of the United States government overseas.” A Senior Interdepartmental Group (SIG), chaired by the Under Secretary of State, was established to assist the Secretary of State in discharging his responsibilities. Assistant Secretaries of State would chair interdepartmental regional groups (IRGs) within the SIG structure to coordinate regional planning and actions.18

W. Averell Harriman, chairman of the former Special Group (CI), wrote on March 7, 1966, to Under Secretary George Ball that “real progress has been made in that field. We have learned from mistakes and know considerably more about the matters on which to concentrate.”19 Counter-insurgency doctrine in the areas supervised by the Secretary of State was re-defined in a SIG-approved paper of May 23, 1968.20

1  NSC 4–A, December 17, 1947, printed in Foreign Relations, 1945–1950, Emergence of the Intelligence Establishment, Document 257.

2  NSC 10/2, June 18, 1948, printed ibid., Document 292.

3 Memorandum of conversation by Frank G. Wisner, “Implementation of NSC-10/2,” August 12, 1948, printed ibid., Document 298.

4  NSC 10/5, “Scope and Pace of Covert Operations,” October 23, 1951, in Michael Warner, editor, The CIA Under Harry Truman (Washington, D.C.: Central Intelligence Agency, 1994), pp. 437–439.

5 William M. Leary, editor, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents (The University of Alabama Press, 1984), p. 63; the text of NSC 5412 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1950–1960, Development of the Intelligence Community.

6 Leary, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents, pp. 63, 147–148; Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate, Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence (1976), pp. 50–51. The texts of NSC 5412/1 and NSC 5412/2 are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1950–1960, Development of the Intelligence Community.

7 Leary, The Central Intelligence Agency: History and Documents, p. 63.

8 Ibid., p. 82.

9 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. X, Documents 270 and 278.

10 Text of NSAM No. 303 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume X.

11 Final Report of the Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities, United States Senate Book I, Foreign and Military Intelligence, pp. 56–57.

12  Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vols. VII, VIII, IX, Microfiche Supplement, Document 249, and Richard M. Bissell, Reflections of a Cold Warrior (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1996), p. 149.

13 For text of NSAM No. 124, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. VIII, Document 68.

14 Memorandum by McCone, August 17, 1962, published ibid., 1961–1963, volumes VII, VIII, IX, Microfiche Supplement, Document 277, and U. Alexis Johnson, The Right Hand of Power (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1984), p. 330.

15 “United States Overseas Internal Defense Policy,” September 1962, and NSAM No. 182 are printed, respectively, in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vols. VII, VIII, IX, Microfiche Supplement, Document 279, and ibid., vol. VIII, Document 105.

16 See Johnson, The Right Hand of Power, pp. 330–339.

17 Memorandum from Taylor to Special Group (CI), October 15, 1963, published in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vols. VII, VIII, IX, Microfiche Supplement, Document 300.

18 Memorandum from Taylor to President Johnson, January 17, 1966, NSAM No. 341, and other documentation on the origins of the SIG is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXXIII.

19 Scheduled for publication ibid.

20 Editorial note to be printed ibid., volume X.

Southeast Asia RegionSoutheast Asia Region

Contents

Australia, New Zealand, the United States: ANZUS and the Defense of Southeast AsiaAustralia, New Zealand, the United States: ANZUS and the Defense of Southeast Asia

1. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, June 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret. Drafted by Thrasher, Paul M. Miller of SPA, and Conlon. Cleared by Cuthell, William Bundy, George Roberts of S/VN. Topic 5 cleared in draft by Lieutenant General Fred M. Dean, Assistant Director for Weapons Evaluation and Control, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and topic 4 in draft by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Jerome Jacobson.

2. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 16, 1964, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy on July 16 and approved by the White House July 17. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted from 12:44 to 1:01 p.m. (Johnson Library) A note on the White House copy of this memorandum indicates that it had “not been cleared personally by the President.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. I, 11/63–12/65) The Department of State sent the White House a briefing paper for this meeting with Hasluck, who was in Washington for the ANZUS Council meetings, July 17–18. The primary purpose of the meeting, according to the briefing paper, was for Hasluck to make the Presidentʼs acquaintance. (Memorandum from Read to McGeorge Bundy, July 14; Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

3. Editorial Note

4. Scope Paper Prepared for the ANZUS Council Meeting

Washington, June 22, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2530. Secret. Drafted by Conlon on June 14 and cleared by William Bundy and Rusk.

5. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of East Asian Affairs

Washington, June 24, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret. Drafted by Conlon, cleared in draft by John B. Dexter, Officer-in-Charge of the Republic of China Affairs, Philip W. Manhard, Regional Planning Adviser, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs, Jeffrey C. Kitchen. This paper was sent as Tab A (there were seven other tabs) to Secretary Rusk in anticipation of a meeting with Hasluck during the ANZUS Council Meeting in Washington, June 28. Following the meeting on June 28, the ANZUS Foreign Ministers released a communiqué which is printed in Department of State Bulletin, July 19, 1965, pp. 135–136.

6. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 28, 1965, 12–12:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, New Zealand, Memos, 11/63–11/68. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

7. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, June 29, 1965, 8:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2529. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Robert J. Morris (SPA/E) and Conlon and cleared by Cuthell and William Bundy. Also sent to Wellington and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Conlon and Morris also prepared extensive notes of the ANZUS meeting. (Ibid., Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS)

8. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 26, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. I, 11/63–12/65. Top Secret.

9. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 22, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by McReynolds on October 25 and approved in S on October 29.

10. Telegram From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson and Secretary Rusk

Canberra, January 12, 1966, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. VIII. Secret;Exdis; Pinta. Text is from telegram 508 from Canberra, January 12. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HARRIMAN) Harriman was one of the high-level administration officials sent by the President to seek support for U.S. policy in Vietnam and seek a negotiated settlement. Harriman left Washington on December 29, 1965, visiting Yugoslavia, India, Pakistan, Iran, United Arab Republic, Thailand, Japan, Australia, South Vietnam, and the Philippines. He returned to Washington on January 18.

11. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 5, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Conlon on March 7 and approved by S on March 14.

12. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 11, 1966, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1–1 ASIA SE. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Conlon and approved in S on April 26. This memorandum was Part I of III covering the entire conversation which, according to Ruskʼs Appointment Book, lasted until 1 p.m. (Johnson Library) The other parts concerned the situations in Vietnam and China. (Telegram 853 to Canberra; April 12; Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US)

13. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 18, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 6648, Australian 333, January 1966. Secret. Drafted on April 18 by McNaughton who also approved it.

14. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Canberra, June 27, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis. No time of transmission is on the source text. Rusk was attending the SEATO and ANZUS Council meetings, June 27–29 and June 30–July 1 respectively, at Canberra. A fuller account of this discussion is in Secto 35 from Canberra, June 29. (Ibid., POL AUSTL–US) Both this telegram and Secto 35 were retyped in the White House for the President.

15. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 29, 1966, 4–4:45 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files; FRC 70 A 6648, Australia 333, Jan. ʼ66. Secret. Drafted by James K. Pont and approved by McNaughton on July 7. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office.

16. Editorial Note

17. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, June 30, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 57. Top Secret; Exdis. There was no indication on the source text who drafted it, but it was approved in S on July 28. The same group met the morning of June 30. That discussion related to the general situation in the Pacific, China, the British presence in Southeast Asia, the trends towards a regional grouping of non-Communist Asian states, and Vietnam. (Ibid.)

18. Editorial Note

19. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, October 21, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. II, Memos, 1/66–7/67. Secret. There is no drafter indicated, but Jorden of the White House approved this memorandum on November 23. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at Parliament House. President Johnson was on a trip to Asia and the Pacific, October 17–November 2. He visited Australia October 20–23. The centerpiece of the Asian visit was the meeting in Manila, October 24–25, with those allies who contributed troops to the conflict in South Vietnam. Extensive briefing papers prepared for this trip are ibid., International Meetings and Travel, Asia. There is also a history prepared by the NSC on the Manila Conference, which contains summaries and copies of documents on the Presidentʼs discussions in Canberra and his related talks in Wellington, October 20–21, see ibid., NSC Histories, Manila Conference.

20. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State

Canberra, December 1, 1966, 0650Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 AUSTL. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated priority to Kuala Lumpur and Saigon. On the White House copy of this telegram there is an indication that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. II, Cables 1/66–7/67)

21. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 20, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FAR E–UK. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Berger. This discussion was the quadripartite talks that took place after the SEATO Council Meeting, April 18–20, and before the ANZUS meeting, April 21–22, both held in Washington.

22. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and approved in S on April 27. This was the first of four memoranda of conversation covering this session of the ANZUS Council meeting. Part two, which dealt with Cambodia, is printed as Document 204; part three was about Vietnam and is in the Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS; part four concerned miscellaneous topics—the United Nations, the Philippines, and Northeast Thailand. A complete copy is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 169, which also contains additional records on the ANZUS Council meetings.

23. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 31, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 12 and June 17–19, 1966. Secret. The Department of State sent the President a May 29 briefing memorandum for the Holt meeting. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL) Read also sent Rostow a May 24 memorandum that reported on John J. McCloyʼs visit to Canberra and his discussions with Holt. According to this memorandum, Holt was most concerned with British withdrawals from Singapore and Malaysia and the failure of the United States to make exceptions to the equalization tax as applied to Australia. (Ibid.)

24. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, June 1, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 1–2 and 17–19, 1967. Secret.

25. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, June 17, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 1–2 and 17–19, 1967. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

26. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Holt

Washington, July 11, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. No classification marking appears on the source text, which was the signed copy of this letter, but when it was sent as a telegram to Canberra it was classified Secret. (Ibid., POL AUSTL–US) This letter was drafted by William M. Shumate of AID and cleared by Bundy, Barnett, and in draft with John C. Coleman, Director of the Office of International Monetary Affairs, and Julius L. Katz, Director of the Office of International Commodities, both of the Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State. It was sent to Rostow by Read under cover of a July 10 memorandum.

27. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, August 3, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret.

28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, August 16, 1967, 2304Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The text of this message was received from the White House.

29. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 9, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by John P. Walsh, Deputy Executive Secretary, on October 12. Hasluck was attending the UN General Assembly session in New York and visited Washington from there.

30. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1967, 3:45–4:45 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, Australia, 333. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Nuechterlein on October 26 and approved by Warnke on October 23. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office.

31. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret. Drafted by Barnett and approved by the White House on October 17. The meeting lasted from 6:04 to 6:50 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) Executive Secretary Read sent Rostow an October 9 briefing memorandum for the Presidentʼs meeting with Hasluck, which had as attachments suggested talking points and a position paper on U.K. withdrawal from Malaysia/Singapore. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

32. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Washington, October 13, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4919, 381 Malaysia, 1967. Top Secret. Drafted by Nuechterlein on October 12.

33. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 8, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2467, Malaysia 381, 1967. Top Secret. A stamped note on the source text indicates that McNamaraʼs Special Assistant saw this memorandum.

34. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Holyoake

Canberra, December 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453, CF 253. No classification marking. The notes were taken by Rostow.

35. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, December 21, 1967, 11:13 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Australia and Round the World Trip, December 1967. Secret. Although there is no drafting information on the source text, a letter from William Bundy to Clark, December 30, indicates that this account was prepared by Rostow. (Ibid.)

36. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Canberra, April 6, 1968, 1200Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Rostow sent this telegram to the President on April 7 and there is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram. (Note from Rostow to Johnson, April 7; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Cables, 6/67–1/69.

37. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 25, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visit of Prime Minister Gorton, May 27–28, 1968. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

38. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 27, 1968, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret. Drafted by Robert S. Lindquist, Deputy Country Director for Australia and New Zealand, cleared by Bundy, and approved by the White House on June 3. The White House approval is indicated on the Department of State copy of this memorandum. (Department of State, Central Files, POL MALAYSIA–SINGAPORE) According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting, which was held at the White House, lasted until 1 p.m. when Gorton and Johnson went to the Oval Office for a picture-taking session. (Johnson Library)

39. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 29, 1968, 4:30–5:45 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Australia 091.112. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Nuechterlein and approved by Steadman. The meeting was held in Cliffordʼs office at the Pentagon.

40. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, July 13, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National, Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret; Limdis. Rostow sent this memorandum and its attachment to the President under cover of a note which suggested that, if he had the time and interest, he might read about the “vicissitudes of Gorton who has clearly not settled down yet.” An indication on Rostowʼs note reveals that the President saw it and its attachments. (Ibid.)

41. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State

Washington, July 30, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Cables, 6/67–1/69. Secret. There is no indication on the source text as to who drafted it.

42. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Visit Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. No date appears on the source text, but Document 43 indicates it was dated October 7. There is no drafting information on the source text, although a supplementary memorandum (see Document 43) and a covering memorandum to Katzenbach recommending that it be sent to the President were drafted by Carleton C. Brower, the Officer in charge of New Zealand Affairs, suggesting that he was the likely drafter of this memorandum. Brower also prepared a scope paper, September 16, for this visit. (Department of State, S/S-Visit Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A)

43. Supplementary Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson

Washington, October 8, 1967.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Visits Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. Drafted by Brower with concurrences from Brown, Commander Kuhn of DOD/ISA, and Fred H. Sanderson, Director of the Office of Food Policy and Program, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State. On the covering memorandum from Bundy to Katzenbach, recommending that the Acting Secretary sign this memorandum, Bundy wrote the following note: “ʼHʼ does not concur in recommendation #1 [U.S. Army lamb purchases from New Zealand].This is likely to cause a real storm in Congress. More importantly, we would be going back on our commitment that last time was to be a one-time exercise. Therefore I do not think we should make this recommendation to the President. However, if you think otherwise, I believe that this memo to the President is well worded in that it states the facts frankly [?] to him. WPB.”

44. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 10, 1968, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Visits Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. Drafted by Moore and approved in S on October 15. Bundy sent Rusk a briefing memorandum for this meeting on October 5. (Ibid). The meeting was held at Blair House and lasted until approximately noon. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

45. Record of Meeting

Washington, October 10, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS. Secret. Drafted by Moore and approved in S on October 24. The meeting took place in the Secretaryʼs conference room and, according to Ruskʼs Appointment Book, lasted from 4:45 p.m. to 6:15 p.m. including time for a photo session in the Diplomatic Room. (Johnson Library)

1. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 22, 1964.

SUBJECT

Call on You by the Prime Minister of Australia2

Why He is Here

The Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert Gordon Menzies, is to call on you at 12:00 noon, Wednesday, June 24. Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, will attend. A stag, working luncheon will follow the meeting.

Prime Minister Menzies is making an informal visit to the United States expressly to see you. Although there are no “crisis” matters that demand urgent consultation, he wants to establish with you the same degree of personal contact that existed between him and President Kennedy. He will proceed from Washington to London for the conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers, July 8–15.

Topics You May Wish to Raise

1. Express pleasure on his recovery from illness. He had to cancel a projected visit to Israel prior to coming here because of a bout of influenza, followed by an abdominal complaint.

2. Thank him for Australiaʼs prompt response to our request for aid to South Viet-Nam. Australia is sending 30 more Army training instructors to South Viet-Nam, raising the total to 60, and will allow them to be used in the field at battalion and lower levels as adviser teams. Australia will also provide 6 Caribou transport aircraft and will send a team to Saigon to consult on ways in which Australian non-military aid might be increased.

3. Express gratification at the May 27 statement by the Australian Treasurer, Mr. Harold Holt, that Australia will increase its defense spending by at least $67 million in the 1964–65 financial year, making total defense expenditure more than $649.9 million.

4. Thank him for Australiaʼs excellent cooperation in providing a forecast of significantly reduced meat exports to the United States this year. This forecast was the key to Secretary Freemanʼs recent announcement of an estimated reduction in overall imports to about the 1959–63 average, the level called for in most of the proposed meat-import bills. Australiaʼs exports will likely be reduced to about the average for this period.

Domestic prices, however, are very low and there is still heavy pressure for import quotas. It is very possible that the Senate will pass a bill to restrict meat imports, but the chances of action by the House are less likely.

The following table shows the trend in meat exports to the United States this year (in million pounds): 1963 1964 projection

From:

Australia (incl. mutton) 580 358 (-38%)

All others 581 481 (-17%)

Total 1161 839 (-28%)

5. Let him know that, while we recognize Australiaʼs right to trade with whatever nation it pleases, we are uneasy about Australiaʼs increasing dependence on Communist China as a market. Australiaʼs exports of wheat to Red China have risen from zero in 1959–60 to 1.1 million tons, 1.9 million tons and 2.0 million tons in succeeding years. In 1962–63 more than 42 percent of Australiaʼs wheat exports went to Communist China. Moreover, Communist China is Australiaʼs eighth best customer for wool. You may wish to express our concern at the potential domestic (i.e. within Australia) political problems that might arise should the livelihood of too many Australians come to depend on sales to Communist China.

Topics the Prime Minister May Raise

1. He will probably wish to discuss the situation in Southeast Asia, and especially in Malaysia, South Viet-Nam and Laos. While we do not think he will wish to urge any change in our present course of action, he will probably appreciate having from you an assessment of the progress that has been made and the difficulties still to be overcome.

2. He is likely to raise the matter of Australian relations with Indonesia. He will probably review Australian efforts to establish and maintain friendly relations with Indonesia but point out that Indonesian “confrontation” of Malaysia has strained these ties. Positioning of Australian non-combat forces in Malaysian Borneo has, not surprisingly, attracted adverse comment in Indonesia. Finally, he is likely to raise the fact that on May 14 Indonesian Foreign Minister Subandrio admitted to the Australian Ambassador that it was possible that Indonesia in a few years might seek to unite East New Guinea with West Irian under the Indonesian flag. He will probably express Australian concern over the foregoing train of events.

3. We have no indication of specific interests, but it is not unlikely he may also inquire about other points of world tension—Cuba, Berlin, Cyprus, for example. Australia has sent 40 police to Cyprus in response to a request from U.N. Secretary General U Thant.

4. He may ask for an estimate of possible further advances toward a total ban of nuclear testing or toward disarmament.

5. When Prime Minister Menzies called on President Kennedy last July he raised the question of the U.S. commitment under the ANZUS treaty in the event that Australian forces in Borneo should be attacked by Indonesian forces. For your information, we have enclosed a copy of a paper handed by Mr. McGeorge Bundy to the Australian Minister of External Affairs on October 17, 1963, which summarizes our mutual positions.3

Dean Rusk 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret. Drafted by Thrasher, Paul M. Miller of SPA, and Conlon. Cleared by Cuthell, William Bundy, George Roberts of S/VN. Topic 5 cleared in draft by Lieutenant General Fred M. Dean, Assistant Director for Weapons Evaluation and Control, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and topic 4 in draft by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Jerome Jacobson.

2 According to telegram 110 to Canberra, June 24, Menzies requested that he meet alone with the President, Rusk, and McNamara and no notes be taken. This request was assertedly not made for a desire for secrecy, but from Menziesʼ desire to “put feet up” and have uninhibited talks. Accordingly, no memoranda of conversation were made. (Ibid.) Johnson met Menzies privately from 12:12 to 1 p.m. on June 24 after reading this briefing paper. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

3 Reference is to a “Paper on the ANZUS Commitment,” October 16, which is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XXIII, Document 343. Also attached was a schedule of Menziesʼ appointments in Washington, a biographic sketch, and a suggested toast for the luncheon, none printed.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

2. Memorandum of Conversation 2. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 16, 1964, 12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

General Discussion

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

The Honorable Paul Hasluck, Minister of External Affairs of Australia

Sir Arthur Tange, Secretary of the Dept. of External Affairs of Australia

Mr. Alan Renouf, Charge dʼAffaires of Australia

1. The President, after expressing his warm personal feelings for Australia, opened by asking how the Commonwealth Prime Ministers conference had gone. Mr. Hasluck mentioned the following points: a. Mr. Butler had given them an excellent summary of the world situation, indicating that, with the reduced tensions with the USSR, China had assumed greater importance and become perhaps the central problem. In the ensuing discussion, the Australians and others had stressed the need to contain Chinese expansionism, but they had found in connection with the communiqué that several of the Commonwealth members, notably from Africa, were reluctant to condemn Communist China or even to speak of its being aggressive. (The Pakistani were reported to have been fairly silent on this issue.)

b. Several of the African members had expressed concern nonetheless about the degree of Chinese Communist activity in their area and the effectiveness of the Communist Chinese claim that, unlike the USSR and the major western nations, they the Chinese were a “have not” nation and thus akin to the Africans.

c. In response to the Presidentʼs question Mr. Hasluck indicated that President Ayub of Pakistan had been somewhat less active than in the past in the sessions.

2. The President expressed his appreciation of Mr. Hasluckʼs own statements about Southeast Asia and also about Australiaʼs increased contribution in South Viet-Nam. Mr. Hasluck responded that their contribution was still not really major but that it certainly demonstrated their belief in the importance of the conflict. He went so far as to say that “if South Viet-Nam goes, that is the end in Southeast Asia.”

3. The President mentioned our problem with the fall in beef prices and our hope that Australia would be sending less during the year. The ensuing discussion was in a rather joking tone, with the President asking a number of questions about cattle raising in Australia and specifically about the activities of the King Ranch in northern Australia. It was clear, however, that the Australian delegation was taking no exception to the well understood request to limit their shipments.

4. Following the Presidentʼs presentation to Mr. Hasluck of a picture of himself, Mr. Hasluck said there was one final subject relating to the ANZUS Treaty. He said that Prime Minister Menzies had recently made a statement on this subject in Parliament, and that the US had indicated that this fairly stated the case. The Australians well understood that, in the light of the understood application of the Treaty in the event of attacks on Australian forces in the Pacific area (he did not go into the “overt” distinction but this seemed to be implied), Australia well recognized that it had an obligation to consult carefully with the US before its forces went into exposed positions where attack was possible. He said that they certainly intended to carry out this obligation of consultation, and the President expressed his appreciation for this viewpoint and indicated that we would do the same with respect to our own forces.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy on July 16 and approved by the White House July 17. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted from 12:44 to 1:01 p.m. (Johnson Library) A note on the White House copy of this memorandum indicates that it had “not been cleared personally by the President.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. I, 11/63–12/65) The Department of State sent the White House a briefing paper for this meeting with Hasluck, who was in Washington for the ANZUS Council meetings, July 17–18. The primary purpose of the meeting, according to the briefing paper, was for Hasluck to make the Presidentʼs acquaintance. (Memorandum from Read to McGeorge Bundy, July 14; Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

2  Hasluck met with Rusk later in the day from 4:33 to 5:45 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) A summary of their discussion can be found in circular telegram 127, July 21. (Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2423) Prime Minister Holyoake of New Zealand met privately with President Johnson on July 20, but there were no other U.S. officials present and therefore no U.S. notetakers. (Memorandum of conversation by Thrasher, July 20; ibid.)

3. Editorial Note 3. Editorial Note

On July 17–18, 1964, the Australia-New Zealand-United States (ANZUS) Pact held its Council meetings in Washington. Secretary Rusk headed the United States delegation, Prime Minister Keith Holyoake headed the New Zealand delegation, and Foreign Minister Paul Hasluck headed the Australian delegation. Extensive notes of the sessions, prepared on August 20 by the Officer-in-Charge of Australia, New Zealand, and Pacific Affairs Edward J. Thrasher and Thomas F. Conlon of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, are in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS. Additional documentation on the meeting can be found in Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 759.

At the end of the ANZUS meeting, July 18, the Council issued a communiqué which is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pages 839–841.

4. Scope Paper Prepared for the ANZUS Council Meeting 4. Scope Paper Prepared for the ANZUS Council Meeting1

Washington, June 22, 1965.

ANZ–G/1

U.S. Objectives

1. To help the Governments of Australia and New Zealand to demonstrate to their people that the United States considers the ANZUS Treaty highly significant and that we give full importance to the views of the two countries as expressed in the Council. To demonstrate our common concern for the security of the Southwest Pacific and, through the Council Meeting, to underline the closeness of our association and the importance we attach to Australian and New Zealand participation in Free World efforts in the Far East.

2. To indicate to the Communist Bloc and to potentially unfriendly nations that ANZUS is a going concern and to demonstrate that the ANZUS partners are deeply concerned over the general security situation in Southeast Asia.

3. To obtain Australian-New Zealand reactions to our policies, both present and projected, and to put across jointly to them our views.

4. To express our gratification that both countries have increased their outlays on defense and to express the hope that this trend will continue. To express our understanding of Australian and New Zealand commitments to Malaysia and to express our thanks to both countries for their commitment of military forces to South Viet-Nam.

5. To reaffirm to Australia and New Zealand our intention of continuing our policy towards Communist China until such time as the Chinese Communists abandon their policy of directing subversion and aggression against Free World nations. To reaffirm our determination to continue supporting the Government of the Republic of China.

Australian Objectives

While expressing general understanding and support for U.S. objectives in the Far East, Australia is likely to press for a further spelling-out of U.S. views on how far hostilities are likely to spread in Viet-Nam, particularly in view of the recent commitment of an Australian battalion there. Regarding Malaysia, Australia may want a reaffirmation of the obligations assumed by the U.S. in the Kennedy-Barwick Memorandum of Understanding of October, 1963 (Tab “D”).2

Australian Minister for External Affairs Hasluck has recently informed our Embassy in Canberra that he considers it essential to achieve the maximum coordination possible of the efforts of the U.S., the U.K., Australia, and New Zealand in Southeast Asia. Hasluck continues to be greatly concerned at the possibility of conflict between Australiaʼs commitments to the U.S. and to the U.K. and Malaysia, and would very much like to see them coordinated in some way. We believe that quadripartite coordination is a desirable objective, but we have some reservations about the form in which such coordination might best be effected. We will prepare a contingency talking paper for your use should Mr. Hasluck raise this question.3

New Zealand Objectives

The New Zealand Government, which has encountered relatively greater domestic opposition than Australia to the commitment of troops to South Viet-Nam, will probably emphasize the desirability of pressing on to a negotiated settlement in Viet-Nam. New Zealand may raise a formula for the entry of Communist China into the General Assembly of the United Nations in addition to Nationalist China, should the tide of voting turn against us in the U.N. (This question has already been raised by New Zealand in the ANZUS Discussion Group Meeting.)

Agenda

1) Opening statements of 15–20 minutes by each principal (e.g., covering Sino-Soviet relations, Commonwealth Prime Ministersʼ meeting, Second Asian-African Conference, India-Pakistan relations).

2) Security situation in Southeast Asia (with special relation to situation in Indo-China States, Indonesian “confrontation” of Malaysia, Chinese Communist threat to the whole area). Briefings (15 minutes each) on Viet-Nam and Laos by FE; on Indonesian “confrontation” of Malaysia by Air Chief Marshal Scherger.

3) Chinese Communist representation in the U.N.

4) Nuclear testing and disarmament (including the nuclear umbrella concept and the implications of Chicom and French testing).

5) ANZUS Discussion Group.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2530. Secret. Drafted by Conlon on June 14 and cleared by William Bundy and Rusk.

2 See footnote 3, Document 1.

3 See Document 5.

5. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of East Asian Affairs 5. Paper Prepared by the Bureau of East Asian Affairs1

Washington, June 24, 1965.

SUBJECT

Quadripartite Consultations in Southeast Asia

Problem

Mr. Hasluck has expressed concern that Australia has undertaken commitments to the United Kingdom and the United States, with respect to Southeast Asia (particularly in Malaysia and Viet-Nam), which are not fully integrated with each other. Australia fears a possible conflict in these commitments and wishes to forge a link to coordinate U.K., U.S., Australian, and New Zealand efforts in Southeast Asia.

U.S. Position

While we agree that quadripartite consultations would be of value in obtaining a clear picture of our problems in Southeast Asia and in coordinating our efforts to deal with these problems, it is essential to keep our consultations under ANZUS separate from U.K., Australian, and New Zealand consultations under the ANZAM arrangement (an informal three-power planning body for the external defense of Malaysia), since they were designed for different purposes. Moreover, the meetings must be held under conditions of maximum discretion to prevent Indonesia, for example, from concluding that the “Anglo-Saxon” powers are combining against her. Maximum discretion is also needed to avoid damage to our relations with Thailand, the Philippines and South Korea, for example, which would be likely to resent being excluded from such a consultative body.

We would be prepared to accept one of the following alternatives for quadripartite consultations on Southeast Asia: 1) The U.S., U.K., Australian, and New Zealand representatives—military or civilian, as appropriate—attending SEATO meetings could take the opportunity to meet discreetly. Their presence in a given place would be readily explainable in terms of the SEATO meeting.

2) Meetings might be held in Washington of appropriate civilian or military personnel from the British, Australian, and New Zealand Embassies and appropriate American opposite numbers. Decisions reached could be on an ad referendum basis.

Background

A similar question has been raised in substance in a recent exchange of messages between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and CINCPAC. CINCPAC proposed that a U.K. representative be present at meetings of ANZUS military planners, although he would meet separately with them outside the ANZUS meetings as such. Similarly, he proposed that a U.S. representative might be present at meetings of ANZAM military planners, meeting with them outside ANZAM sessions as such.

We opposed the effective expansion of ANZUS and ANZAM, even on this limited basis, because of the need to keep the two security arrangements separate, since they were designed to serve different purposes. However, we agreed that such quadripartite military discussions might be held discreetly in the SEATO context. CINCPAC has indicated his intention of arranging for informal quadripartite military discussions on an as-required basis at scheduled, semi-annual SEATO MILAD meetings, the next of which is due to be held in October.

It does not appear that CINCPAC has yet approached any of the U.K., Australian, or New Zealand military representatives who might wish to participate in such quadripartite military discussions.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. Secret. Drafted by Conlon, cleared in draft by John B. Dexter, Officer-in-Charge of the Republic of China Affairs, Philip W. Manhard, Regional Planning Adviser, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Political Military Affairs, Jeffrey C. Kitchen. This paper was sent as Tab A (there were seven other tabs) to Secretary Rusk in anticipation of a meeting with Hasluck during the ANZUS Council Meeting in Washington, June 28. Following the meeting on June 28, the ANZUS Foreign Ministers released a communiqué which is printed in Department of State Bulletin, July 19, 1965, pp. 135–136.

6. Memorandum of Conversation 6. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 28, 1965, 12–12:20 p.m.

SUBJECTS

1. New Zealand Forces in Vietnam

2. Public Opinion in New Zealand re US Policy

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. William P. Bundy

Ambassador Hand

Prime Minister Holyoake of New Zealand

Ambassador Laking of New Zealand

The President asked about the status of New Zealand forces for South Vietnam, and expressed gratification at the New Zealand decision to send a combat artillery battery. The Prime Minister noted that preparations to send the battery were far advanced. He went on to say that New Zealand had 1700 men in Malaysia (sic)—(the actual total of military men there is about 1100 according to the Ambassador)—and indicated this was a sizeable contribution in relation to the population, 1/80th as big as the US.

The President asked whether it would be wise to invoke the SEATO Treaty. Mr. Bundy commented that the custom of unanimity in SEATO had precluded SEATO action as such, but that the active SEATO members in Vietnam considered themselves to be fulfilling their SEATO obligations, which they accepted as operating on an individual basis. Prime Minister Holyoake agreed with this point. Mr. Bundy further noted that any question of SEATO action as such might encounter not only French and Pakistani opposition, but reservations by the British, inasmuch as the British troop commitment to Malaysia precluded, in their view, any combat troops to Vietnam.

The Prime Minister commented that the New Zealand decision to send the battery had been taken in the face of negative votes by the Parliamentary Opposition, and commented that the division in the House (approximately 45–35) roughly reflected the division of sentiment within New Zealand. The President asked what the popular reaction would be in New Zealand if the US said it could do nothing further unless it was on some collective basis. The Prime Minister responded that the man in the street had only a very dim idea of what Vietnam stood for, but implied that the government would take a different view.

The President commented that division of sentiment in the US was probably roughly 65–35 in favor of Administration policy at the present time, but said that it might become more adverse, to perhaps 55–45. The Prime Minister said that New Zealand opinion seemed to be moving in a more favorable direction, although the overwhelming bulk of the New Zealand people were emotionally opposed to any war, and it took a good deal to replace this emotion by the logic of the situation. He said that leading newspapers were now generally behind the government, although they had some trouble with universities and the clergy. He said that there should be no doubt that the government itself was 100% in accord with US policy.

The Prime Minister referred again to the New Zealand battery, and said that it was of very high quality and, he added with some pride, had better equipment and training than the Australians.

The President asked about the Commonwealth Prime Ministersʼ Mission, and the Prime Minister said that there was still doubt whether Hanoi would receive it but that if it did not, he supposed there would be no use in proceeding. The President agreed with this position. The Prime Minister said that at least the Mission would show who was “banging doors.” The President responded that it should have this effect on the world, but that the world did not seem to heed the true facts—there was no criticism of aggression and cruelty by others, such as the recent restaurant bombing, whereas we were criticized for everything we did.

The conversation ended on a warm note of feeling.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, New Zealand, Memos, 11/63–11/68. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House.

7. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 7. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, June 29, 1965, 8:30 p.m.

1111. (Following based on uncleared memo, FYI, Noforn and subject to revision pending review.)

ANZUS Council Meeting.

ANZUS Council met Washington June 28 with Holyoake, Hasluck, and Secretary Rusk heading delegations. Discussions concentrated on Viet-Nam. Discussion Indonesia-Malaysia brief and consisted mainly summary current situation. Principal points of interest as follows:

[Here follows Hasluckʼs account of the recent Commonwealth Conference.]

2) Holyoake Position on Pause in Bombing in Viet-Nam—Holyoake suggested that, if U.S. saw any positive advantages to be gained from another pause in bombing North Viet-Nam, we might consider timing to coincide with visit Commonwealth PM mission to those capitals prepared receive it. He noted official rejection mission only received so far from Peking. Also said he prepared postpone sending New Zealand artillery battery to SVN if Prime Ministers mission has prospect of success. Noted this was his own idea but he had been approached by Nkrumah in London, who made similar suggestion. Australians also asked by Nkrumah to withdraw present forces in Viet-Nam pending outcome mission. Response was negative.

3) Negotiations with Liberation Front in Viet-Nam—Hasluck emphasized problem to be anticipated from growing pressures from Australian public opinion for negotiations with VC. Secretary stated VC only one of many factions in SVN and had no more right participate in peace talks than others, which represent far larger segments population. In addition, we cannot concede to armed minority right to shoot way to conference table and participate in negotiations over future government. He suggested our three governments and others increase efforts world capitals counter this sentiment.

4) Communist Attitudes on Viet-Nam—Secretary said that Sovs now appear anxious not to discuss Viet-Nam with us. During recent pause in bombing in North Viet-Nam, Secretary had discussions with Gromyko, who appeared very harsh and uncooperative. Contacts with Chicoms in Warsaw always begin with demand U.S. withdraw from Taiwan and, when we refuse to discuss this matter, conversation becomes stereotyped and unproductive. Informal contacts with Hanoi so far unproductive. Hanoi has also rebuffed UN efforts arrange negotiations.

5) Indonesia-Malaysia—On Malaysia Australian Air Chief Marshal Scherger reviewed military situation, pointed out that since August 1964 over 1000 Indonesian infiltrators into Malaysia killed or captured and that, at present level, Malaysia, with Commonwealth support, well able handle Indonesian military “confrontation”. Hasluck stated view Sukarnoʼs position within Indonesia less and less comfortable and now some question whether he enough in control of situation to call off “confrontation” even if he wished do so. Secretary noted we concerned about growth of PKI and that not clear what combination of counter forces available to prevent Communists from acceding to power under present circumstances.

6) Nuclear Proliferation—Secretary said we had hoped matter nuclear weapons could be brought under international control, under Baruch proposals at end of World War II. Problem of nuclear proliferation is not that present nuclear powers want to spread nuclear weapons but that other states will move to obtain nuclear weapons to ensure own security. Unless something reasonable worked out in NATO to provide Germans with participation in nuclear weapons, future German Government, for example, may move to obtain nuclear weapons on its own. India presents real problem, as would be difficult for U.S. to provide broad nuclear guarantee to India as long as India insists on remaining non-aligned.

Full summary of meeting to follow.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2529. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Robert J. Morris (SPA/E) and Conlon and cleared by Cuthell and William Bundy. Also sent to Wellington and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Conlon and Morris also prepared extensive notes of the ANZUS meeting. (Ibid., Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS)

8. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 8. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 26, 1965.

I understand that you will be dining this evening with Sir Norman and Lady Brookes and Ambassador and Mrs. Waller of Australia. You wish to refer to two key communications that were exchanged in the last 24 hours.

As you know, a message was dispatched yesterday from you to Menzies which reviewed the current situation in Viet Nam, indicated the likely increase in U.S. armed forces there, stated our determination to continue our diplomatic efforts to obtain a peaceful settlement, and emphasized our intent to use “care and restraint” to insure that the war did not expand.2 The message also acknowledged Australiaʼs present aid to the GVN and asked that “most earnest consideration” be given to increasing such assistance. Finally, you stressed the importance of you and the Prime Minister keeping “in close touch” during the coming days, directly and through our respective diplomatic representatives.

Menziesʼ reply was immediate and sympathetic. I quote it in full: “Thank you for your message about your intention to commit further substantial forces for South Vietnam. I appreciate your action in keeping us informed and, also, in recognising our own difficulties. You may be sure of Australiaʼs continuing support and readiness to assist in the defence of South Vietnam to the best of our capacity. We shall consider your message very carefully and with the will to do whatever more we can to assist when practicable. I shall make a statement here welcoming the additional steps you are taking.”

McG. B. 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. I, 11/63–12/65. Top Secret.

2 Telegram 55 to Canberra, July 26. (Ibid.)

3 Bundy added the following handwritten postscript: “I also attach the circular we sent in your name on the basis of your Saturday [July 24] orders to me.” The circular was not attached and has not been identified.

9. Memorandum of Conversation 9. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 22, 1965.

SUBJECT

South Asian Defense

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

The Honorable John Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Mr. R. W. Furlonger, Minister, Australian Embassy

Miss Frances McReynolds, FE/SPA

1. Ambassador Waller left with the Secretary a copy of a top-secret message dated October 22, which Prime Minister Menzies had sent to Prime Minister Wilson and which would be shared with New Zealand.2 Three principal points were made by the Prime Minister: a. the threat in Southeast Asia requires a continued military presence in Asia, and only two Western powers—the United States and the United Kingdom—are capable of exercising world-wide responsibilities for peace;

b. an effective defense must be a cooperative one; the bases in Singapore and Malaysia are pertinent to the defense of the area; they must stay, even in adversity, and must be retained as long as possible, not only during the confrontation period but during the period of continuing instability in Southeast Asia;

c. a ministerial meeting of the four powers should be held. No date was suggested.

2. The Secretary remarked that the message was good doctrine and that we have made strong representations to the British along parallel lines. We feel strongly not only about Southeast Asia but about East Africa, the Indian Ocean areas and the Western Hemisphere. We have been told that Britain will not abandon its commitments for a number of years (ranging from two to three to several) and will keep in close touch with us. It is utterly fundamental that the United States cannot be left as the only free world country expected to act in all parts of the world. The question of who is doing what is a fundamental question with us. While we have the impression that the U.S. will be consulted before the British make decisions on the bases, we will continue to press our view at every opportunity that consultations are necessary.

3. The Secretary noted that he would be seeing British Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart at the NATO meetings and will make it clear that if it comes to a choice between NATO and extra-NATO commitments, it would be better for Britain to meet its extra-NATO commitments. A marginal input by the United Kingdom in NATO is less important that an input in Southeast Asia from the points of view of all of us—the UK, the US and Australia. In reply to a question from Ambassador Waller, the Secretary said that we have not made this known as a formal policy because it has to be made known within a NATO context. The Secretary added that he hoped such a choice would not have to be made and that there were other factors involved for Britain including decisions on a nuclear force and its defense budget. We do not have the impression, however, that Britain is about to make an adverse decision.

4. On the first point raised by Prime Minister Menzies, the Secretary agreed that there must be a continued presence in Southeast Asia. We would contemplate—assuming peace in Vietnam—that there would be a continued presence in the Philippines rather than in Vietnam and that Singapore with the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand would be the principal bases. Deployments in Southeast Asia ought to be at least as large as at present and might be larger; we canʼt permit substantial reductions for a long time.

5. The Secretary queried the Ambassador on the Prime Ministerʼs thinking, i.e. whether he assumed that the US would have to remain permanently in Vietnam. Ambassador Waller confirmed that the Prime Minister had in mind only a presence in the area. The Secretary continued that specific thinking on Malaysia and Singapore must wait because of recent events in Indonesia. If the Army and Muslims can dominate the situation, and if the PKI can be put into second or third position, Indonesia will probably find some way to move away from confrontation while they try to dispose of the PKI.

6. The Secretary thought that the third point, a ministerial meeting, would be largely a matter of timing and that there might be some advantage in top officials quietly making known their attitudes to each other without the publicity of meetings on a Ministerial or Chief-of-Government level. He said that this rather vague reply would have to do for the moment until further study could be made. The Secretary said he had no specific reaction other than to say that the United States Government was prepared to do what was necessary to achieve the desired result.

7. Ambassador Waller asked if he were correct in assuming that there was no difference on the subject of cooperating on defense arrangements. The Secretary replied that we would examine the whole situation and would need to go beyond the broad present agreements and examine arrangements which fall into the specific contingencies framework. We must keep developments fully in mind, exchange views, and then get down to the more specific contingencies arrangements.

8. In this connection, the Secretary asked the Ambassador to keep us informed of anything his government learns about Sihanoukʼs policy and especially the Cambodian Governmentʼs support to the Viet Cong which might become particularly troublesome if it proves to be of a significant nature.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by McReynolds on October 25 and approved in S on October 29.

2 Not found.

10. Telegram From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson and Secretary Rusk 10. Telegram From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson and Secretary Rusk 1

Canberra, January 12, 1966, 3:30 p.m.

For the President and the Secretary from Gov. Harriman.

In call on Menzies at his request Tuesday afternoon,2 we had an hourʼs reappraisal of talks with cabinet in office and at Elinner. Although recognizing it is impractical to bring U.K. into ANZUS Treaty, he emphasized the need for regular consultations on four-power basis. He considered it of prime importance that UK continue global responsibilities and it was not good for the U.S. to be only global power. He hopes we will make this plain to Healey in upcoming talks in Washington and not accept a British policy of gradual pull-out of the Far East.

In reply to my comment that he had a bunch of hawks in the cabinet urging escalation of North Vietnam bombing, he said he and the majority would urge caution and approved 100 percent present U.S. policies not to take dangerous action in North Vietnam but urged maximum pressure to break up and weaken the Viet Cong in the South even at the cost of more casualties. The Australian people are prepared for losses and fully support the government. He approves of the pause and hopes that it will be played to get maximum benefit of world opinion, and that it will be continued until after Tet with resumption if possible after some sort of provocation.

On the question of increased Australian troops in Vietnam, he asked me to report to the President that “we are moving towards a greater contribution but commitment must await talks with Healey in Canberra at the end of January. We are not walking out on Vietnam. The Australian public is with us although a few left wingers will try to make it a campaign issue.” He maintains Vietnam is today central to global conflict with Communism not a regional matter and hopes that more European countries will recognize this and make a greater contribution in material assistance if not troops. De Gaulle should be ignored. In his opinion Red China is the greatest danger to Communist expansion and peace. He opposes admittance of Peking to UN as long as possible but we must act soon enough in promoting two China policy with Formosa membership assured. He wants continuing consultation with us on this subject.

Menzies decries attempt of African countries to use Commonwealth to tell U.K. what to do in Rhodesia and fears it might become an issue with Australia in New Guinea. When Nkrumah expounded one man one vote, Menzies had pointed out that the Ghanaians did not even have a choice since there was only one slate with opposition safely in jail. Although he himself will encounter difficulties he is confident of victory of coalition over labor in election.

He expressed appreciation to the President for my visit saying it was timely, useful and handled just right. He also very much appreciated the confidential information I had given him personally. All told he feels U.S.-Australian close understanding is certainly to the advantage of both but wants to bring in U.K., also Canada, if it wants. He visualizes development of responsibility of Japan, India and other Asian countries slowly as they grow in strength and stability.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. VIII. Secret;Exdis; Pinta. Text is from telegram 508 from Canberra, January 12. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HARRIMAN) Harriman was one of the high-level administration officials sent by the President to seek support for U.S. policy in Vietnam and seek a negotiated settlement. Harriman left Washington on December 29, 1965, visiting Yugoslavia, India, Pakistan, Iran, United Arab Republic, Thailand, Japan, Australia, South Vietnam, and the Philippines. He returned to Washington on January 18.

2 January 11.

11. Memorandum of Conversation 11. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 5, 1966.

SUBJECT

Further Australian Reinforcements for Viet-Nam

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Thomas F. Conlon, FE/SPA

Mr. Robert W. Furlonger, Charge dʼAffaires, Australian Embassy

Mr. Robert H. Robertson, Counselor, Australian Embassy

Australian Reinforcements

1. Mr. Furlonger called at his request to leave with the Secretary a copy (attached) of the letter from Prime Minister Holt to the President which he delivered to the White House March 4, regarding further Australian reinforcements for Viet-Nam.

2. The Secretary said that the President had shown him the letter and that it was very good news indeed. He said that the President would want to reply2 and assured Mr. Furlonger that when the announcement is made (in Canberra Tuesday evening, March 8), it will be very warmly received in the U.S. The Secretary asked if Parliamentary action will be required.

3. Mr. Furlonger replied that Parliamentary approval would be required, but that no problem was anticipated on this score. Mr. Furlonger asked if the Secretary had any comments on the current situation in Viet-Nam.

Military Situation in Viet-Nam

4. The Secretary noted that under present arrangements the Australian Government is getting details on the military situation through the Australian Embassy in Saigon. On an overall basis, we are encouraged at the seizure of the military initiative over the past few months by South Vietnamese and Allied forces. This is not without its problems, for we are also concerned that the American press has given so much attention to American operations and less to Vietnamese operations, which continue to be the main focus of attention. The South Vietnamese in fact are doing most of the fighting and absorbing most of the casualties.

5. The Secretary continued that Allied forces have also been getting into areas not touched by Government forces for years, particularly Binh Dinh province and areas in Quang Tri province. The impact on the DRV and VC regular forces has been severe. In 1965 the VC lost as many killed as the U.S. did during the whole Korean War. Since January 1, 1966, VC casualties, included wounded, have totalled 30,000. This raised a question as to how long the VC can suffer losses of this magnitude. Firepower available to us in Viet-Nam is rapidly increasing, and by mid-1966 more firepower will be delivered than in any month during World War II. General Westmoreland is quietly confident about the outlook, although we realize that there is a tough job ahead.

6. The Secretary added that at some point the other side will have to make a tough decision whether to increase their present effort or to revert to the guerrilla phase. We donʼt know what their decision will be. There are some signs that they are reluctant to accept the risks of maintaining battalions in combat. If they revert to the guerrilla phase, this will, to some extent, ease the burden on our forces and increase the burden on the South Vietnamese.

7. Mr. Furlonger asked how the situation was developing on the civilian side. The Secretary replied that we are encouraged by the evident recognition by the GVN that the civilian side is important. The main problem is how much the Vietnamese can do with their administrative apparatus and the trained people they have. There is a tremendous shortage of trained people available to the GVN. The GVN is getting numbers of trained cadres from the training center at Vung Tau and are sending groups of some 50 or so trained in both the military and civic action fields into the villages. The limitation is the GVNʼs administrative capacity to train enough people to do the job. We hope that some slack can be taken up by international action, in the field of health, for example. The Iranians are taking up the burden of providing health workers for one province. We are trying to persuade the Canadians to take on three provinces. This would not be too difficult to organize and carry out. Overall, we will be doing our best to use things in place of manpower. We will be approaching New Zealand to see what further can be done.

Attachment

March 4, 1966.

Letter From Prime Minister Holt to President Johnson

Dear Mr. President,

The Government has now completed its consideration of what more Australia can do in Vietnam by way of military contribution at this time. Various possibilities were before us and in particular we understood that an additional battalion would have special value.

The position is that the existing Army Force in Vietnam totals some 1,400 men, of which the main element, the battalion, is due for relief in May/June of this year. We are proposing to replace the present force with a substantially enlarged contribution of forces in the form of a self-contained Australian task force of some 4,500 personnel under Australian command. The task force will contain in addition to its headquarters, two infantry battalions, an SAS squadron for deep patrolling and surveillance, and combat and logistic support units. We are advised that to operate most effectively, the task force will need intimate and continuous helicopter support. For this purpose we are providing a flight of eight R.A.A.F. Iroquois helicopters, including four to be withdrawn from Malaysia where they are now assisting security operations in the Thai border area. The flight of Caribou aircraft and the team of 100 Army advisers will be continued.

We have been informed by our military advisers that the provision of a force of this size represents the upper limit of our army capacity, having regard to our existing military commitments in Malaysia. They advise us that the force can be sustained, but make it clear that short of a major emergency it will not be practicable to enlarge it. But we believe that the task force we have in mind will be the most militarily effective contribution we can make to the allied effort in South Vietnam and it is our judgment that we should go this far at this time, in consequence of the high importance of the issues at stake in South Vietnam and to make a clear demonstration of Australian support for the massive efforts of your own nation.

The details of our additional commitment will require examination by Australian and United States military staffs of such matters as command structure, operational role and deployment organization and logistics, and I have arranged for the Chairman of our Chiefs of Staff Committee to take up the preliminary aspects of these matters at once with the Commander-in-Chief, Pacific.3 Also, we have instructed our Ambassador in Saigon to inform the South Vietnamese Prime Minister of our decision, so that the formal request of that Government for additional forces may be obtained. We are already aware, of course informally, of their interest in an increase on our part. We may wish to make the formal request public.

I am letting Harold Wilson and Keith Holyoake know of our decision in view of their concern with us and you in the defence problems of South-East Asia and the inter-relation between the disposition of forces in South Vietnam and in Malaysia.

My present intention is to announce the enlarged Australian contribution in Parliament on the night of Tuesday, 8th March, and until then we are taking steps to ensure that the decision is held in absolute security.

If I may switch down now to another level of topic, I feel that you may like to know that, as a small but interesting piece of emphasis which we place on the significance of the Vietnam conflict, we will be making what is a virtual innovation for us by the issue of a service medal. We plan to provide, jointly with New Zealand, a special Vietnam Medal. I am not sure how soon I can announce this here. I hope to say something about it on Tuesday evening also, but until then at least, it is confidential.

Yours sincerely,

Harold Holt 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Conlon on March 7 and approved by S on March 14.

2 In a March 6 message drafted by Berger and Conlon, cleared by Komer, and approved by Rusk, President Johnson thanked Holt for the decision to send a self-contained force of 4,500 Australian troops to South Vietnam. Johnson saw it as a clear signal of Australian determination to combat “the threat of Communist aggression against the peoples of Southeast Asia” and acknowledged that the commitment, along with Australia forces in Malaysia, represented a “very large proportion of the Australian Armed Forces and is a real sacrifice.” (Text in telegram 728 to Canberra, March 6; ibid.) When the Australian Parliament approved the dispatch of troops, Johnson sent Holt another message welcoming the contribution. (Telegram 736 to Canberra, March 8; ibid.)

3 In Johnsonʼs March 6 letter he indicated that he was instructing U.S. military leaders to enter into discussions with Australian military officials about these command and other arrangements. (Ibid.)

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Holt signed the original.

12. Memorandum of Conversation 12. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 11, 1966, noon.

SUBJECT

Quadripartite Discussions

PARTICIPANTS

The Rt. Hon. Paul M.C. Hasluck, Minister for External Affairs of Australia

Sir James Plimsoll, Secretary, Australian Department of External Affairs

The Hon. J. Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

The Secretary

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Thomas F. Conlon, FE/SPA

1. Mr. Hasluck began the discussion by giving the Secretary a copy of a talking paper on the status and possible future development of Quadripartite Discussions. (Paper attached.)

British Defense Review

2. The Secretary noted the reference in the paper to the discussions with British Minister of Defense Healey in January2 and recalled that underlying the British position seemed to be the desire to have a political role in decision-making, while avoiding the most difficult questions and situations. Healey didnʼt give us the impression that the British are interested in continuing to be involved in mainland Southeast Asia. In the recent British elections both major parties seemed to be vying with each other to assure the electorate that there would be no British involvement in Viet-Nam. For our part, we see no interest in participating with the British in what would become a retreat from Singapore to Perth. On the whole, we didnʼt get any good answers regarding British intentions towards Southeast Asia.

3. Mr. Hasluck said that the Australian Government obtained no good answers from its conversations with Mr. Healey. The talks with Healey turned on the pressing economic problems facing the British. Healey faced the GOA with the view that the British cannot stay in Singapore forever and that the options are either to move British forces to Australia or retreat beyond Suez. Healey based his argument on the long-term untenability of Singapore and British economic limitations. This makes the situation difficult for Australia, Mr. Hasluck continued, since we want the British to stay East of Suez. Further, we want them to stay on mainland Southeast Asia, not leave Singapore.

4. The Secretary agreed with Mr. Hasluck, noting that the tenure of Singapore is as much affected by attitudes in London as in Singapore. The Secretary recalled his wartime experiences in the CBI Theater, when it was evident that, because of decisions made in London not to commit the Imperial Reserve forces then in India, the British were not making as much of an effort in Burma as they were capable of. If the British are itching to get out of Singapore, it wonʼt take much squeezing to get them out.

5. Mr. Hasluck said that the British Government is divided on East of Suez policy, as is British public opinion. The Australian Government feels it is in the Australian interest to use all arguments and pressures available to persuade the British to maintain their presence East of Suez. Defense Minister Healey and Prime Minister Wilson profess an intent to stay. Mr. Hasluck said that in his view it is necessary to keep up the pressure.

6. The Secretary said that we were very frank with Mr. Healey during his visit here in January. We made clear we must be in a position to support something, not nothing. We have told the British it is hard for us to support the pound if they do not see their way clear to supporting us. The Secretary added that we threw this point hard at them.

7. Mr. Hasluck said he didnʼt mind what the United States threw at the British on this point. The Australian Government thinks the British can stay in Singapore “a jolly long time.” The GOA feels that the British are not facing any risk of being pushed out. (Earlier in the conversation, Mr. Bundy noted that one man who doesnʼt want the British out of Southeast Asia is the Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew. Mr. Bundy promised to make available to Mr. Hasluck the text of a speech delivered by Lee Kuan Yew on February 12 on the role of the Chinese in Southeast Asia, in which Lee presented the argument that the overseas Chinese should not identify themselves with Peiping at this juncture.)

8. Mr. Hasluck said that in his view there were three principles to bear in mind: a. The British should stay on the Asian mainland.

b. A British presence in the Far East is essential to give the appearance that the United States is not the only major Western power in Asia, although in this connection it would be better if there were more demonstrations of interest by other European countries as well.

c. The British should play a global role—otherwise, they will decline to the status of Sweden.

9. The Secretary said he doubted the British could occupy a world economic position if they do not maintain a world political position. Trade follows the flag in this case.

Quadripartite Meeting

10. The Secretary noted that we have agreed to hold discreet four-power discussions. However, British proposals for joint planning, joint commands, etc., would give us real problems. This would bring us to the same problem we had when the ANZUS Treaty was being negotiated. Anything like what the British propose would upset the Philippines, which would be concerned at being excluded. It would look too much like a “White Manʼs Club.” The Secretary asked whether the British have asked the GOA for economic assistance on defense deployments East of Suez.

11. Mr. Hasluck said no. The Secretary said that the British havenʼt asked the United States for assistance, either. Mr. Hasluck said the Australian Treasury fears that the British intend to get the GOA to provide the bases in Australia and so relieve them of the financial burden. The Australian answer, if such a suggestion were made, would be that the GOA doesnʼt want to facilitate a British withdrawal from Singapore. The GOA told Mr. Healey that it is willing to review present and projected defense facilities in Australia with a view to possible joint use with the British.

12. Mr. Bundy asked if the British have asked the GOA to assist in building facilities at Butterworth (in Penang, Malaysia). Mr. Hasluck replied that the GOA has put money into the facilities at Butterworth and at Terendak (State of Malacca, Malaysia).

13. Sir James Plimsoll noted that the anchor point of the British presentation had been that they have a ceiling on defense expenditures. The Secretary commented that the United States would rather see reductions on British support of NATO than reductions East of Suez.

Attachment

Memorandum by the Government of Australia

SUBJECT

Memorandum Left With The Secretary By Australian Minister for External Affairs Hasluck, April 11, 1966

1. The United States is opposed to: (a) Four-power discussions leading to joint planning and joint command arrangements. This applies equally to pre-1970 and post-1970 situations.

(b) “Anything that looks like a white manʼs club in Asia”.

(c) Any attempt to change existing treaties (SEATO and ANZUS).

2. Australia has a similar view and would certainly endorse (a) and (b) at present. We do not discard the idea in (c) but accept that it is not practical politics at the moment.

3. In large part, the British interest in quadripartite talks arose from their defence review. They appeared to be interested in the possibility of bringing the U.S. and Australia to relieve them of some of the load of defence east of Suez; or, if Britain reduced forces, to replace them; or, if Britain was obliged to move out of Singapore and Malaysia, to help provide alternative facilities. It is assumed that Britain still has such interests, although the pursuit of them may have been modified by earlier discussions in London, Washington and Canberra.

4. The British defence review led to quadripartite talks by officials in London at end of 1965. U.S. and Australia concerted their efforts to counter any British move to reduce defence effort east of Suez. U.S. and Australia found common ground on the following points: (a) Britain must not pull out of Asia.

(b) Britain must not base her position in Asia solely on Indonesian confrontation of Malaysia.

(c) The British presence is needed in Asia if Britain is to continue to play a global role.

(d) The U.S. should not be the only non-Asian power to support security in Asia.

5. Among the points left unresolved from the London talks are: (a) Whether Britain either expects or can receive any help from her allies in maintaining a role in Asia (e.g., the question of bases or other facilities in Australia).

(b) Whether further arrangements need be made or can be made for concerting the efforts of the four Allies in this region (Australia faces some problems arising from the fact that we are worthy contributors in Malaysia, in Thailand and in Vietnam, as well as defending New Guinea. Some complications would have to be untangled if the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve were to be moved from Malaysia to the Australian mainland; or if British forces based in Australia were to be used as a reserve for duties in theatres other than Asia. Australia has an interest in both Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean security systems. While Australian defence expenditure has been doubled we obviously cannot afford to provide total defence and economically we must avoid duplicated efforts. These are examples, from the Australian viewpoint, of the practical need for concerting the efforts of the four Allies and it is assumed that further discussions on such matters will have to take place).

6. Following the quadripartite talks by officials at the end of 1965, Mr. Healey made his round of visits to Washington and Canberra and the British defence review was published affirming: (a) that Britain would continue to maintain a military presence in “the Far East and Southern Asia”;

(b) that Britain would maintain its existing “military facilities” in Malaysia and Singapore “for as long as the Governments of Malaysia and Singapore agree that we should do so on acceptable conditions”.

But the British statement also indicated that Britain thought

(c) “the load must be more equitably shared than in the past”;

(d) that “significant economies” should be aimed at by deploying forces “more realistically”;

(e) “as soon as conditions permit” some reductions would be made in the forces in the Far East and Southern Asia.

Since the publication of the review, the British elections have taken place. Will this affect the nature of the timing of any British adjustments or change the emphasis placed on any aspect of their defence effort?

7. Mr. Healey, during the visit to Australia, spoke of “quadripartite arrangements” but was not definite about what he meant by them. There has been some tendency to interpret “defence arrangements” as relating to military planning and command. The Australian Government has preferred the phrase “quadripartite discussions”. At present we do not think it necessary or practicable to raise questions of joint planning or joint command. What we want is a continuing dialogue with our Allies at all appropriate levels to obtain a common outlook and purpose and a common understanding on what it is best for each of us to do. Our view was expressed in a passage in the communiqué issued after Mr. Healeyʼs talks in Canberra: “The primary objective of the talks would be to secure agreements on the strategic concept and aims for allied cooperation in the area in the face of threats from Communist China or elsewhere; and, arising from this, on the future co-ordination of military activities of the four powers on the area.”

In messages to President Johnson and Mr. Harold Wilson after Vice-President Humphreyʼs visit to Australia, the Australian Prime Minister wrote of the importance we attached to discussions “at a political level, aimed at a political meeting of minds and, deriving from that, some broad joint understanding on our overall objectives in Asia and on defence strategy, on the roles of forces and their dispositions, and the better coordination both of our military and economic aid policies”.

8. The present visit is being made in keeping with that view and our expectation is that it will be followed by further Ministerial talks in Canberra at the end of June, when the Foreign Ministers of the four governments can meet unobtrusively after having come to Canberra for the SEATO Council meeting. We hope that, in preparation for the Canberra talks, the three Ambassadors in Washington and the appropriate representative of the Department of State can meet to do some preparatory work on the agenda for the talks.

9. The Australian view does not favour any attempt to create additional machinery (such as a regular conference or a Council of Ministers). We believe we can do better by building on the confidence and respect we already have in each other to continue consultation on all matters of common concern as frequently as the need arises and at the level and in the manner appropriate to each occasion.

10. Against this background, it is suggested that the present talks be devoted to: (a) An exchange of information and views on the present situations we all face.

(b) A discussion of the short-term and the long-term objectives in Asia and the practicable means of achieving them.

(c) Arising from these discussions some guidance to the officers in respect of the agenda for the Canberra talks.

(d) In the light of (a) and (b) some discussion of ways in which we can coordinate our policies and ensure the effective application of our policies both in respect of military support and economic aid to countries of Asia.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1–1 ASIA SE. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Conlon and approved in S on April 26. This memorandum was Part I of III covering the entire conversation which, according to Ruskʼs Appointment Book, lasted until 1 p.m. (Johnson Library) The other parts concerned the situations in Vietnam and China. (Telegram 853 to Canberra; April 12; Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US)

2 For the record of these talks on January 27, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIII, Document 126.

13. Memorandum for the Record 13. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, April 18, 1966.

I–22629/66

SUBJECT

McNamara-Hasluck Conversation, 1630–1715 Hours, 12 April 1966

The conversation was held in Secretary McNamaraʼs office. Present were: Australian Foreign Minister Paul Hasluck, Sir James Plimsoll, Permanent Secretary for the Department of External Affairs, Sir Edwin Hicks, Permanent Secretary of the Department of Defense, Ambassador Waller, Secretary McNamara and I.

1. Vietnam. Secretary McNamara said that the military situation in Vietnam was going well, but the political side is discouraging; Ky may not survive; the military could fragment. Minister Hasluck remarked that perhaps there should be a reshuffle of the present power structure, or possibly a turn to some formula for civilian rule. McNamara said a question the American people are asking is, “Why die for people who canʼt discipline themselves?” Hasluck asked what would be done if we were asked out of Vietnam? McNamara thought that it would not come in that clear a form, but more likely in the form of (1) anti-US demonstrations or in (2) South Vietnamese weakness. Hasluck suggested that our best “cover” is that we are helping at their request, while our real reason is that we simply canʼt let the Communists succeed. McNamara said that to prevent such success, the people must want you; based on reports of I and II Corps activities, McNamara is convinced that ground operations from March are off 25–40%; as for bombs being dropped, we are running three times the Korean war rate; we are hitting the enemyʼs bases. McNamara went on that the buildup is not affected by the political situation, but we have doubts being expressed by the Congressional leadership; we have 200,000 US men there now and 20,000 in the pipeline, with 385,000 planned by yearʼs end; however, we would stop the next day and reverse the flow in the pipeline if Australia reversed its position as to its commitment. Hasluck said, conversely, that they are committed to go ahead, but it would be “politically calamitous if Australia appeared more hawklike and the US more dovelike.” McNamara assured him that the US would consult with Australia if there was a change on our part. Hasluck said that Vietnam will be the issue during their elections in early December (in connection with the first deployment of National Service men). Hasluck feels it is extremely important to coordinate US and Australian planning very closely.

2. 4-Power Consultation. Hasluck left a paper with Secretary Rusk concerning the question of four-power consultation on defense arrangements in the Indo-Pacific area.2 Hasluck thinks these discussions should be just that and not deal with command and planning arrangements, political or military. McNamara expressed his deep concern over the possibility that these four-power discussions might appear to Asians as a “White Manʼs Club”; as for the decisions as to the sort of arrangements which may be necessary, he prefers to await the results of the discussions in June. Hasluck feels it is important to talk, in order to achieve a common strategy concept and common effort; the UK wants to drive bargains. McNamara said that he is anxious for the discussions to get under way, when we all should examine each otherʼs hand; our people believe that the US is bearing too large a share; the Senate Foreign Relations Committee cut military assistance, and “I had to lobby it back”; this year our economic and military requests are in jeopardy; people ask, “Why are there four times more US than Australians in Vietnam per capita of population?” Hasluck said they had 30,000 in Malaysia. McNamara reported that we have 225,000 in Europe; we need to aim and plan for 5–10 years ahead; we are glad that the UK in their White Paper on Defence expressed their commitment to a role East of Suez. Hasluck was concerned that some British might want to fall back to pre-Indonesia Confrontation levels. McNamara said that that would involve movement by India, Japan and the Philippines; the US people wonʼt tolerate a quadripartite arrangement leaving out Asians. Hasluck said India wonʼt join yet, but asked that McNamara thought about Japan. McNamara explained that Japan wants to run Okinawa, but we need the base; Japan must accept responsibility for US being there as control of Okinawa passes from the US to Okinawa and Japan; we would prefer this sooner rather than later; for our own defense, we can return to Hawaii. He continued that what we need are (1) bases (refueling on Okinawa base, nuclear submarine calls in Japanese ports, etc.) to help defend her; (2) overall political support of our defense of Asia; (3) Japan take over more of the cost of her defense (pay for bases, troops, etc.); (4) Japan help offset our foreign exchange costs; and (5) Japan contribute forces to joint defense outside the Japanese islands. He said India, too, should do some of these things. McNamara referred to Europe noting that there we have twice the number per capita in military service and twice the FRG percentage of GNP spent on defense.

Hasluck asked how can they cooperate in Indian Ocean matters. McNamara replied that that is the UK area; if carriers are out, F–111s are in; he did not know where they would be based; the UK would need alternative bases in northern Australia for the F–111s; there is danger of Singapore becoming untenable for the British, but it is not clear whether the UK wants out of Singapore or not. Hasluck remarked that the UK does not say “How can we stay in Singapore?” But “What do we do when we get out?” McNamara cautioned that we should not encourage or facilitate their getting out. He noted that Australia wants bases in northern Australia too. Hasluck mentioned that he had told Healey that the Australians are reviewing the Australian needs for bases and the possibility of sharing them.

Hicks said that it may be better to have F–111s in Darwin rather than Singapore.

McNamara envisaged the four-power talks covering political as well as military issues. Hasluck thought we must determine if there is a complete difference between US–UK views and trying to resolve them in order to achieve our objectives. McNamara said it is not clear if the UK thinks China should be allowed to dominate Southeast Asia. Hasluck asked how can security exist if there is a string of small unaligned states? He feels it unlikely that it can. McNamara commented that security might be able to exist best with guarantees, and that we should talk about it; an aligned SVN is not an objective; but we need guarantees to have stability—perhaps US–UK-Australia-international arrangements of some kind; without it, non-alignment will not last long; there would be a susceptibility to Communist domination and an alignment with China.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 6648, Australian 333, January 1966. Secret. Drafted on April 18 by McNaughton who also approved it.

2 See attachment to Document 12.

14. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 14. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 1

Canberra, June 27, 1966.

Secto 19. Eyes only for the President and Acting Secretary. I had a forty-five minute talk with Prime Minister Holt this morning and found him one thousand percent in support of what we are trying to accomplish in Southeast Asia. I expect, therefore, that his visit will be most helpful.2 I would hope that he could be given exposure to some of our Congressional people. It seems to me that his visit should be in the framework of an ally meeting its responsibilities. Putting together their enlarged forces in Viet Nam and their forces in Malaysia, their effort has been entirely respectable, particularly when we take into account the military establishment with which they started two years ago. In other words, we should help ourselves by bragging on the Australians and not subject them to the question “why donʼt you do more?” The impression I have gotten during the day from chit chat from Australian political leaders, including some Labor Party opposition, is that the government will take the Viet Nam issue into the next election in a very strong position in so far as Australian public opinion is concerned. We have friends here and Holtʼs visit should underline this fact.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis. No time of transmission is on the source text. Rusk was attending the SEATO and ANZUS Council meetings, June 27–29 and June 30–July 1 respectively, at Canberra. A fuller account of this discussion is in Secto 35 from Canberra, June 29. (Ibid., POL AUSTL–US) Both this telegram and Secto 35 were retyped in the White House for the President.

2  Holt visited Washington on June 29.

15. Memorandum of Conversation 15. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, June 29, 1966, 4–4:45 p.m.

I–24673/66

SUBJECT

Visit of Australian Prime Minister Harold E. Holt, 29 June 19662

PARTICIPANTS

United States Side Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—John T. McNaughton

Assistant to Director, FER, ISA—James K. Pont

Australian Side Prime Minister—Harold E. Holt

Secretary, Prime Ministerʼs Department—Edward J. Bunting

Deputy Secretary, Department of Defense—G.E. Blakers

Ambassador to US—John Keith Waller

1. Introductory: Greetings were exchanged and photographs taken. The Secretary said Prime Minister Holtʼs luncheon remarks were most gracious and it was a pleasure to meet with the leader of such a staunch ally. The Prime Minister responded that he believed the Secretary was doing a fine job.

2. Bombing Hanoi-Haiphong POL Areas: The Secretary indicated the bombings that day had been a successful operation both from the point-of-view of (1) civilian casualties, which available information indicated were negligible, and (2) loss of aircraft, which, as he had publicly released, was only one. He pointed out that the strikes were timed during good weather conditions to reduce the possibility of civilian casualties. Alluding to British “blockbuster” tactics in Berlin and VC tactics against civilians in SVN, Prime Minister Holt stated we should not, and that he would not, be apologetic over the civilian casualty problem. He indicated he viewed this as a matter of military judgment. Such supplies could provide the wherewithal needed by the enemy to inflict injury on US and/or Australian troops. He did not foresee any opposition to such strikes in his government which he could not overcome and he would support the US regardless of the unfavorable British reaction. He then showed the Secretary his short endorsement of the strikes which he would issue later. The Secretary indicated the sincere appreciation of the US for the continued Australian support. He said, “we will do more in the next few days.”

Ambassador Waller then prompted Prime Minister Holt to query the Secretary on how they should handle the question of “prior notice” to the Australians regarding such strikes. The Secretary suggested the Prime Minister state categorically that he was “aware,” but to avoid any details or specific answers as to the timing of such notice. The Prime Minister agreed. Mr. McNaughton then explained that Under Secretary Ballʼs statement of “no decision to bomb” was made after the earlier decision to bomb had been cancelled and before the new one to go ahead had been made. The Prime Minister expressed concern over the behavior of the press in the whole affair. Mr. McNaughton concurred.

The Secretary indicated that certain Congressional critics had begun intensive blasts at the bombings, some of which were of a personal nature and directed toward the President and himself. He went on to say that the Administration was mobilizing its supporters to offset these attacks. Mr. McNaughton noted that while the Wilson statement showed displeasure with bombings near heavily populated areas, it contained two added paragraphs which indicated support of US policy generally in SVN.

3. British Support or Lack Thereof: In addition to the statement above, other evidence of the lack of British support in SEA became a major topic of discussion. The Secretary said that a possible British public statement of unwillingness to sell munitions to US or Australia for use in Vietnam would be most unfortunate. He added that while we donʼt now need the munitions, such a showing of the lack of support by a major world ally would make the US position seem to be one of going it alone and harder to justify domestically. He reiterated his appreciation for the Australian role, but emphasized the need for more international support as we couldnʼt stand alone in Asia.

Prime Minister Holt indicated that parliamentary problems have probably colored many official British actions. He said he had “jumped Healey in Canberra” over lack of British support and would continue to discuss the subject with them. Mr. McNaughton wondered how much Wilson was influenced by the fringe of his party (“Labor Left” and “Europe-First Group”). The Prime Minister indicated that his contacts with the British indicate a fear of supporting corrupt governments not worthy of support and a feeling that a major drain on resources in SEA would preclude playing the role of a “big European power.” He added this was Australiaʼs first time at fighting without the British beside them and that he had argued with the British along two lines. First, only through the firm stand of the US in SVN and the beneficial counter-effect that this stand has had on Chinese Communist influence, have we been able to achieve the existing successful developments in SEA. He specifically referred to the “remarkable efforts” of the US in Thailand and the beneficial role of the Thais in the Indonesian-Malaysian situation and their assistance in Laos and Vietnam. (He also referred to Thanatʼs criticism of SEATO, aimed at the British and French, that as SEATO didnʼt come to the aid of SVN, US assistance was required.) Among other beneficial effects, he cited the Indonesian developments which he argues would not have taken place had not the Indonesians seen an Asia with an increasing US vis-à-vis Chinese Communist influence. His second line of approach is to query the British on how they can expect to be a major power without being involved in the business of SVN.

The Secretary indicated general agreement that current developments in Asia suggest a favorable trend, e.g., indications from Sihanouk in Cambodia. He continued by saying he had little hope of obtaining British forces for SVN, but believed they must join us in Thailand if we are to be forced to stand in that country. He wondered where the British would stand if not Thailand. With confrontation ending, all the more reason exists for British being with us. He postulated that if we stood in Thailand without the British, support from the people of the US could diminish greatly.

Mr. Blakers asked what type of current role we could see for the British in Thailand. Mr. McNaughton answered by pointing to Ambassador Martinʼs request to provide US pilots to man US helicopters in Thailand. He said that while the requirement was not large when compared with our resources, there were two other factors to consider: (1) we would again be standing alone and (2) the more we do the less indigenous forces tend to do. British participation wouldnʼt have helped the second point, but it would have assisted greatly in the first respect and would have provided a very beneficial effect in the US. He added, however, that the British seemed more interested in SVN than other European countries. He said the Europeans seem to believe that a natural balance would develop in Asia if we allowed it to do so. He offered the hypothesis that the inexpensiveness of such reasoning might help explain its attractiveness. In regard to this line of reasoning, Prime Minister Holt said that he liked to use Vice President Humphreyʼs remark about putting a fox in the chicken coop.

The Secretary again pointed to the US public and Congressional criticism of Administration policy is SVN which stemmed considerably from the need for more and wider international support. When our people see such attitudes as those exhibited by the English, Japanese, and Indians, they wonder if we are not wrong. If not wrong, are we foolish? In addition, there is the fear of perpetuating a regime which doesnʼt deserve it. Prime Minister Holt reaffirmed his belief that we need to show what has been done in the area and that nothing would have been possible without the sense of security established by the US stand in SVN. Our firmness has given such developments a chance to take place and we need to continue providing this opportunity. The Secretary agreed and said he hoped the Prime Ministerʼs public statements, especially those here on this trip, would continue to emphasize these points. The Prime Minister said they would and referred to his statement in Canberra where he used “domino theory in reverse” as a shorthand expression for this rationale. The Secretary expressed his gratitude for such remarks and said they were the kind which the US public needed to hear.

Prime Minister Holt said he had also been telling the British that while Australia has done some planning in regard to possible bases, there was no question about the bases “up there” being far preferable. He said it would somewhat silly to begin all over again just because of some doubts about being able to remain in current areas.

4. Japan and India: The Secretary asked Prime Minister Holt what roles he expected Japan and India to play in Asia. The Prime Minister indicated he was encouraged by Japanese participation in ASPAC and the increasing trade developing between Japan and Australia. He indicated he was not really an Indian specialist, but he felt that considerable time would be required for India to develop.

The Secretary expressed his view that if Asia is to know stability, Japan and India must necessarily assume greater roles in Asia within the next few years. He said that while Japan is experiencing good economic health, it has no real military power base and is not moving fast enough in the direction of obtaining one. India has a foundation for power but has no political projection. He reiterated his belief that these countries would need to begin assuming a military and political role in order to stabilize the area, especially when viewed in conjunction with the ChiCom buildup which canʼt help but increase. This buildup would probably bring with it an increasing tendency for the Chinese to lean on their neighbors. Prime Minister Holt said he saw a close inter-relationship between economic and military affairs in Japan. The former would continue to come first, hopefully followed by the latter. Japan might be forced into moving more rapidly in the latter direction if it begins to see its sources of supply and hence its economy threatened.

5. New Zealand and Indonesia: Prime Minister Holt said he felt New Zealand had a balance of payments problem and an over-heated economy. The government could not take remedial steps, however, until after the elections late this year. He asked the Secretary what he heard from the New Zealanders. The Secretary answered that we did not hear very much. He knew they did not want to increase their current contribution to SVN and with the forthcoming elections we were not seeking to pressure them on the issue.

The Prime Minister said that he believed before we embark on extensive aid to Indonesia we must be assured that confrontation is ended and the Indonesians accept British bases in Malaysia.

6. Australian/Asian Relations: Prime Minister Holt indicated Australians were increasingly being considered as a part of Asia by many Asians. He indicated his people were also now feeling more a part of Asia with a definite stake in Asian affairs. The Secretary said we were delighted with the role which the Australians were playing in Asia. The Prime Minister said there had been a considerable problem in regard to conscriptees being sent to SVN. He added, “the boys behaved so well, however, that the political sting was taken from the issue.” He said that upon his return from his trip to SVN he found a whole new atmosphere. The friendly reception he and the Australian forces had received in SVN and the scenes from Saigon showing normal activity, including the fact one didnʼt need an armored car to get around, had helped considerably in establishing this atmosphere. He added that upon the return of the first battalion from SVN, people stood ten deep to cheer them.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files; FRC 70 A 6648, Australia 333, Jan. ʼ66. Secret. Drafted by James K. Pont and approved by McNaughton on July 7. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office.

2  Holt met privately with President Johnson at 12:50 p.m. in the Oval Office after the official arrival ceremony on the White House lawn and before a 1:06 p.m. luncheon at the White House. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No record of the discussion between Johnson and Holt has been found, but the Department of State prepared a briefing memorandum that suggested that the main purpose of the visit was for Holt “to get acquainted with the President, to continue the close personal relationship which has existed between Australian Prime Ministers and Presidents of the United States, and to get a first hand outline of United States policy and assessments with respect to Viet-Nam and other major international problems.” (Memorandum from Read to Rostow, June 27; Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL) Holt also met with Acting Secretary Ball on June 30 for discussions on Vietnam. An account of their meeting is in a memorandum of conversation, June 30; ibid., POL 27 VIET S.

16. Editorial Note 16. Editorial Note

The 15th ANZUS Council held its annual meeting in Canberra June 30–July 1, 1966. Secretary Rusk headed the U.S. delegation, Prime Minister Holyoake led the New Zealand delegation, and Foreign Minister Hasluck headed the Australian delegation. Notes on the meeting are contained in airgram A–2 from Canberra, July 8. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS) Verbatim records of the ANZUS Council meetings are ibid., S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 45. Secretary of State Rusk sent President Johnson and Acting Secretary of State Ball a combined telegraphic report on the ANZUS Meeting, the SEATO Meeting which preceded it June 27–29, and the quadripartite discussions of June 30; Document 76.

17. Memorandum of Conversation 17. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, June 30, 1966.

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Canberra, June 27–28, 1966

ANZUS MINISTERIAL MEETING

Canberra, June 30–July 1, 1966

PARTICIPANTS

United States Secretary Rusk

Mr. Bundy

Admiral Sharp

Ambassador Powell

Mr. Kitchen

Mr. McCloskey

Brig. Gen. Seignious

Mr. Weiss

United Kingdom The Right Honorable Michael Stewart, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Sir Paul Gore-Booth, Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Air Chief Marshal Sir John Grandy, UK Commander-in-Chief, Far East

Australia The Rt. Hon. Paul M.C. Hasluck, Minister for External Affairs

The Hon. Allen Fairhall, Minister for Defence

New Zealand

The Right Hon. Keith Holyoake, Prime Minister

Mr. G.R. Laking, Ambassador to the United States

SUBJECT

Quadripartite Discussions Between the United States, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand

1. Mr. Stewart began the discussion by suggesting that these talks should be followed by official level discussions at a later date. He suggested that as a prelude each Government in the Asian-Pacific area might be subjected to an analysis with a view to assessing the nature of the threat in each country and with each of the four participating nations in the current discussions writing individual papers. This would then permit an evaluation of the material and the development of a scale of the political and military threats to the countries in the area over the next five to ten years. The analysis would include the capability of these countries to meet the threat. On the basis of such studies, the four nations could then decide what needed to be done.

2. Mr. Hasluck stated that he assumed that what we actually do would not be contingent on the studies. Australia believed that there was a need for increased security immediately and that it could not wait upon the development of studies within individual countries. Mr. Stewart said this depended to some extent “on the march of events.” Mr. Hasluck countered by saying he would not wish to wait for Thailand to become an enlightened society before being willing to take necessary security actions. Mr. Stewart agreed that we should not be foreclosed from taking necessary actions solely because our studies were not finished. The point was that such studies should help in deciding how to approach assistance to the countries in question.

3. Mr. Hasluck said he could certainly accept the desirability for participating in such studies on behalf of Australia. Secretary Rusk said that he was somewhat troubled by the use of the Quadripartite forum for this purpose. He noted that the four nations were all members of SEATO. He said that while he did not object to the exchange of views, he thought that there was a delicate problem in that the Philippines, Thailand and others should not find themselves being dissected by the four nations without their own involvement. But he reiterated that he had no objections to the exchange of views among the four. Mr. Stewart asked whether we could not start by an exchange of papers and then discuss these papers at the official level. Secretary Rusk stated that he thought discussion at the official level was acceptable but not of formalized papers per se. Mr. Hasluck agreed that it might be politically dangerous to formalize such discussions in the Quadripartite forum given the various political relationships which existed with the other Asian states. Mr. Holyoake also agreed.

4. Secretary Rusk agreed to “discreet discussions” in autumn at the official level.

5. Mr. Hasluck returned to the question of the British position in Singapore and Malaysia. He said that he would paraphrase the British position as a willingness to remain as long as there were acceptable conditions for doing so. He stated that Australia believed we should make it our business to stay as long as possible. Mr. Stewart agreed, but was not sure what we could do to facilitate this. Mr. Hasluck said that this was precisely his point. He suggested that we look at the questions of what we can do to make a Western presence in Asia more acceptable. This may perhaps permit us to stay till 1980 or 1990 rather than 1970 and this will be useful. It was agreed that this would be examined.

6. Mr. Hasluck then suggested that the group turn to a discussion of defense concepts for the area (Item D on the Agenda). He said that he had already commented on the problem which was presented to Australia as to what it does with its forces after confrontation. Decisions could not be taken in a vacuum. The question was whether the Commonwealth strategic reserve was to remain in being or whether Australia and New Zealand were to continue in the reserve. Mr. Fairhall commented that Australia believed in a forward defense position. He said that Australia needed to look at its future commitments to the U.S. and the UK as well as of its own. He therefore needed the benefit of U.S. and UK thinking on the future disposition question.

7. Mr. Hasluck pointed out that taking part in SEATO planning was without substance if forces were not available for the plans. What we had before confrontation, he pointed out, was available for SEATO plans or for the defense of Malaysia. The hope was that both contingencies would not occur at the same time. While not a military man, it was clear to him that military force without a base from which to operate was obviously impossible.

8. Secretary Rusk said that the U.S. view was simple. It had one-half million men west of California with 50 percent operationally engaged. Australian and New Zealand forces in Viet-Nam, though important in and of themselves, had an importance far beyond their mere numbers. The Secretary stated that he could see the U.S. running into two questions. First, if there are not several nationsʼ flags standing with the U.S., are we right in our own commitment? Secondly, and perhaps a more important question, would be “are we suckers if others wonʼt share the burden?” He said we will have a difficult political problem at home if, after confrontation forces which were there for confrontation go home without regard to other needs in the SEATO area. Whether there are other uses for these forces needs to be examined, but clearly there is not yet peace in the area. The Secretary jocularly commented that he was not saying we should go to the Indonesians and encourage them in confrontation although one was often tempted. In a more serious vein he said he was not suggesting that others should ask themselves whether or not they support the U.S. This was not the question. The real question is what does the individual national interest require and what can each nation effectively do about it? At this point the U.S. factor becomes relevant. If it was not important for the U.S. to be in the area, that was one thing. If a U.S. involvement was important, that was quite another. He believes that as independent nations, it is important to all present not to have Southeast Asia overrun.

9. Mr. Hasluck stated that Australia had made no decision to diminish its own forces, they simply were seeking enlightenment on redisposition. He went on to note that the U.S. and UK have worldwide roles. He wondered what strategic importance should be attached to the Indian Ocean and the Straits of Malacca. Subsidiary to that was the position of India. He believed that the Indians did not want a foreign defense, but “if scared” might expect significant material help and even direct assist-ance. Moreover, if China was disposed to use its nuclear weapons against an easy target like India, what then? In the Australian view it would be preferable not to have too many hands on the bomb. Yet India might well wish for a nuclear capability unless there was some other nuclear deterrent available “in the neighborhood.”

10. Mr. Stewart said “we have staging posts” in the Indian Ocean. For the time being this is our insurance. At the far end, in the Persian Gulf, there is a job to be done. He was not quite clear with regard to the question Mr. Hasluck was posing in connection with India.

11. Hasluck said the question was whether India for fear of its safety or out of desire for prestige would wish to develop a nuclear capability. He believed it was undesirable for India to waste its resources and to proliferate nuclear weapons. The question was how does one withstand pressure in India of this sort. He followed by again stating the need for clearer lines for programming and policy in the entire area. He stated that Australia could fairly clearly see their course in regard to Viet-Nam and continental security, but was very unclear in Malaysia and Singapore.

12. Secretary Rusk said the nuclear problem in India was a highly complex question requiring careful thought and the U.S. Government is now studying it. He would not, therefore, wish to make definitive comments. He did venture the view, however, that Australia was presumably primarily concerned with the threat from Southeast Asia. An Australian role on the sub-continent seems less likely. With regard to the Chinese nuclear threat, he doubted that we would need to go to the Indian Ocean to meet it: there were more direct ways to shoot back. Of course, he stated he implied no commitment. With regard to India we think it wrong for her to go nuclear, but maybe an Indian Prime Minister will not necessarily reach the same conclusion. As to nuclear guarantees, this was a serious matter. It put 100 million American lives on the line and in connection with India there was no reciprocity. So far as Soviet and Peking views and attitudes were concerned these were unclear. Mr. Rusk said that his hunch was that India was not likely to go nuclear soon, though he could anticipate their “becoming five months pregnant” by way of preparing themselves to go nuclear, keeping this preparation in reserve. (Mr. Hasluck pointed out that the Australian kangaroo can in fact arrest its pregnancy if necessary. Mr. Rusk commented that this was very convenient.) Mr. Hasluck said that in the Viet-Nam war the Australian Government understood the nature of the problem, but much less so in connection with the nuclear contingency. He wondered if we could get together and have further exchanges to gain a better appreciation of each otherʼs views.

13. Secretary Rusk said that he wanted to emphasize strongly the importance which the U.S. attached to Southeast Asia, the Straits of Malacca, etc. When Communist China came to power in the 1940ʼs the U.S. analyzed the value of Southeast Asia and concluded that it was of vital importance to the security of the free world. Frequent reviews since that date have reached the same conclusion. If Southeast Asia were seized by force, this would have an important impact on Japan, Indonesia, the Philippines, and the Indian sub-continent. For reasons of geography, resources and prestige, the importance of Southeast Asia could not be under-rated.

14. Mr. Hasluck agreed that this was a critical area. He cited its immense natural resources. He speculated that if sufficient security and stability could be provided, the area could move toward more prosperity and more participation in world affairs. He thought this tremendously important. In economic terms and in trade terms this could be a major asset. Either the area gains security and moves in one direction or it doesnʼt and thereby becomes a source of worry and a drain on our resources.

15. Secretary Rusk asked Mr. Stewart what he expected to come from his visits to Indonesia and Malaysia. Mr. Stewart replied that they were exploratory. He stated that he might only see Malik in Indonesia, although he hoped he would also see Suharto. He said he would take the opportunity to note that military action was still going forward in Borneo and that it was necessary to bring this to a halt if confrontation was to cease. He said he was not sure where the conversation would go from there although he anticipated some talk about the Indonesian economic and debt mission that was coming to London. He said he had never visited Indonesia and wanted to gain a firsthand impression as to whether Indonesia really wanted to end confrontation and secondly as to what Malaysia really wanted. In the latter connection, he was particularly interested in their attitude toward Indonesia and as to the importance which Malaysia attached to the Borneo states.

16. Secretary Rusk asked whether the British were clear whether they wanted to be invited to stay or to depart. Mr. Stewart responded that ideally they would like to be invited to depart if confident that Malaysian security was protected. They would like to be sure that Malaysiaʼs future was in fact protected with UK help if necessary. With regard to Singapore, he thought there was need for the dust to settle on the Indonesian/Malaysian dispute before more could be done there.

17. Secretary Rusk stated that he hoped that the objective of UK policy would be to remain for a considerable period until the general situation in Southeast Asia was improved and until one could be certain that Malaysian security was safeguarded. He wished to make it clear that the U.S. could not pick up the commitment to Malaysiaʼs security.

18. Mr. Hasluck said that Australia had made no bones about wanting the British to stay. He thought that to leave just because Malaysia feels secure misses the point in that Malaysian security depends upon Thailandʼs security, and the latter depends upon SEATO. Therefore, he foresaw a need for British, Australian, and New Zealand troops in the area, for example in Malaysia, so that they could be utilized to safeguard Thailand. If Thailand “became rotten and fell, it would be the end of the story for Malaysia.” He hoped that Thailand would build its own strength and capability, but if a direct threat came, it would require help from the area of Malaysia. Mr. Stewart reverted to his earlier point regarding the limited utility of helping countries like Thailand unless popular support could be demonstrated. Mr. Fairhall interjected to say that if the UK leaves, there would be no base structure for Australia and others to operate out of. Mr. Stewart said that at the moment, of course, the Thais were not asking for forces.

19. Mr. Holyoake said that a subsidiary question to him was the place of the Chinese in Malaysia, Singapore, and Southeast Asia generally. He said that he thought the Malaysians were scared and the Indonesians hated them. He said the overseas Chinese tended to look to China as their ultimate home. He thought that we should use whatever power we have on people like the Tunku to get them to understand the facts of life and the need to live together with the overseas Chinese. Sir Paul Gore-Booth said that the Chinese problem presented a different pattern in each place. The Secretary said that to some extent it depended on what Chinese we were talking about, how politically active they were, and in what direction. Mr. Hasluck then turned to the question of contingency planning for a base structure in Australia. He said that the Australian Government was looking at the question of how its facilities could also be made available to the UK, but that such planning was being done solely on the assumption that if the British were forced out of Singapore and Malaysia by unacceptable conditions, Australia might be an alternative. They had made it clear, of course, that they believed that Britain should remain in Singapore and Malaysia as long as possible. UK forces in Australia would not be as anywhere nearly as useful in contrast to their deployment in Singapore and Malaysia. Moreover he foresaw political difficulties. For example, 5000 UK troops in Australia would be a problem if at the same time 5000 Australian conscripts were fighting in Viet-Nam. Similarly it would be politically difficult if British troops were deployed from Australia for military action against Rhodesia. Mr. Holyoake said New Zealand shared precisely the same views. In response to a question, Mr. Fairhall briefly summed up the service-to-service consultation on a naval base on the West Coast of Australia and the deployment of British F–111 aircraft with Australian F–111s. He said there would, however, be a need for an estimate of costing and time. In short an outline existed which requires filling in.

20. Secretary Rusk raised the question of the purpose of British forces in Australia. Would they be for defense of bases in Australia or to project forces forward? Mr. Hasluck stated that it was the latter.

21. There was some discussion about the missions involved. Mr. Fairhall pointed out that in the case of the F–111, the bases in Australia would not be for operational purposes. These would be a backup for operational bases further north. Mr. Stewart said that he assumed that the talks between the British and Australian Governments had proceeded satisfactorily and would continue. Mr. Hasluck agreed, although he again referred to the political problems not only for Australia, but for future British Governments in explaining the purpose of British forces in Australia. Mr. Stewart reiterated the purposes for which he saw British forces being utilized. He said that the lack of their immediate involvement in conflict did not necessarily invalidate their utility. To the contrary, if the forces were successful, they would not have to engage in conflict. Forces in Western Europe for example were well understood as a deterrent.

22. Secretary Rusk said that he saw a problem of timing. If forces were in Singapore for meeting overt aggression, then certainly the 14 North Vietnamese regiments operating in South Vietnam were as overt as you can get. Redeployment of forces in the immediate future to Australia was irrelevant to what we want to accomplish in Southeast Asia. Maybe in the mid-1970ʼs this might make sense. The forces which at this time go 2000 miles further south rather than 1000 miles north would be politically counter productive. He expressed the hope that the British would be cautious about judgments on the end of confrontation. Mr. Stewart said he had couched all his comments about possible redeployment in a carefully qualified way. Secretary Rusk said that Mr. Stewart had asked his opinion of what the British ought to do with their forces and he told them. Mr. Stewart said that this was a subject they had discussed before and in particular the problems posed for the British in connection with committing forces to Viet-Nam.

23. With regard to the official level discussions in the autumn, Mr. Stewart asked where they were to be held. Mr. Hasluck said that Australia would be willing to host them. Secretary Rusk suggested that the element of discretion made it perhaps more advisable for the discussions to be held in London where they would be less visible. It was agreed that such discussions might be held in late September or early October, but that in the interim the various governments would continue to exchange views bilaterally. Secretary Rusk also suggested that Foreign Ministers might get together briefly if all were going to be present at the UN in September.

24. There was agreement reached on the nature of response to the press inquiry. The meeting adjourned.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 57. Top Secret; Exdis. There was no indication on the source text who drafted it, but it was approved in S on July 28. The same group met the morning of June 30. That discussion related to the general situation in the Pacific, China, the British presence in Southeast Asia, the trends towards a regional grouping of non-Communist Asian states, and Vietnam. (Ibid.)

18. Editorial Note 18. Editorial Note

At the invitation of President Johnson, Prime Minister Holt returned through Washington on his way home from London. Holt and Johnson met at 5:32 p.m. in the Oval Office with Secretary Rusk, Assistant Secretary William Bundy, Special Assistant Walt Rostow, Chief of Protocol James Symington, Secretary of the Prime Ministerʼs Department Sir John Bunting, and Australian Ambassador John Keith Waller. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the group reviewed Holtʼs trip to London and prospects in Vietnam and Asia. Holt then joined the President and Rusk for a walk around the White House flower garden. The President and Holt returned to the Oval Office at 5:52 p.m. where they stayed until they left for Anacostia pier at 6:52 p.m. for a trip with European Ambassadors on board the Sequoia. (Johnson Library) The Department of State prepared a briefing paper for the second Holt visit with suggested talking points for the President. (Memorandum from William Bundy to Rusk, July 13; Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL) A copy of the joint communiqué issued at the end of the Holt visit, July 14, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pages 639–640.

19. Memorandum of Conversation 19. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, October 21, 1966.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam and Related Matters

PARTICIPANTS

For Australia: Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, Prime Minister

Rt. Hon. J. McEwen, Minister for Trade and Industry

Rt. Hon. William McMahon, Treasurer

Rt. Hon. C.F. Adermann, Minister for Primary Industry

Hon. Allen Fairhall, Minister for Defence

Senator Denham Henty, Minister for Supply

Hon. A.S. Hulme, Postmaster General

Hon. David Fairbairn, Minister for National Development

Hon. C.F. Barnes, Minister for Territories

Senator J.G. Gorton, Minister for Works

Hon. L.H.E. Bury, Minister for Labour and National Service

His Excellency Mr. J.K. Waller, Ambassador to the United States

Sir John Bunting, Secretary, Prime Ministerʼs Department

Mr. Peter J. Lawler, Deputy Secretary, Prime Ministerʼs Department

For the United States: Hon. Lyndon B. Johnson, President of the United States

His Excellency Mr. Edward Clark, Ambassador

Mr. Farris Bryant, Director, Office of Emergency Planning

Mr. Walt Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Mr. Marvin Watson, Special Assistant to the President

Mr. James W. Symington, Chief of Protocol

Mr. E.M. Cronk, Counselor of Embassy

The Prime Minister introduced members of the Cabinet. In welcoming the President and inviting him to address the Cabinet, the Prime Minister declared the pleasure which he and his colleagues found in the historic visit of a President of the United States to Australia and the importance which they attached to the opportunity for an intimate discussion of issues of mutual interest.

The President recalled his contact with Australia during World War II and spoke of the stimulating experience for him in returning now as President of the United States.

Underlying the world importance of the Asian area from the standpoint of population, needs, and potential, the President referred to attitudes in the United States in earlier years, and even now, particularly in the American press, which tended to be oriented toward Europe. His experiences in the area during World War II had changed his own views about Asia. While he attached great importance to keeping NATO together, the United States must also work for unity in Asia. He wished to see more emphasis put on the problems of poverty, disease and ignorance in the depressed areas of the world.

The President spoke of the series of alliances which America had entered into since World War II—NATO, SEATO, ANZUS—so that members of these alliances could join in meeting aggression where it occurred. Once the United States had pledged its word, there would be no faltering—the would-be dictators of Asia should understand that. However, the United States had been disappointed in the SEATO alliance on the issue of Viet-Nam, in particular with Britain. It was a great disappointment to him that Prime Minister Wilson had dissociated Britain from the United States position in Viet-Nam.

The Communists had been making great efforts to influence the thinking of the peoples of the free world. They sought to induce in the public mind a false image that the United States was acting alone to impose its will on the people of Viet-Nam and that we had no reason to be there.

The President said he had not come to Australia to ask for a man or a dollar or anything else: Australia would continue to reach its own decisions in offering assistance. He paid tribute to the job Australian forces were doing. He was here, and the U.S. had committed forces, because the Communist aggression in Viet-Nam was dangerous for Australia, for America and for freedom everywhere. If the United States were to pull out of Viet-Nam tomorrow, other countries of Southeast Asia would quickly fall. The aggressor would get to Australia long before he got to San Francisco.

There were in America some who thought the U.S. should bomb our way out of Viet-Nam and some who thought we should sell out. He did not want to get into a war with China, but equally he did not want to surrender. Between these extremes the United States would pursue a policy of putting pressure on the enemy to the point where they would be convinced that they could not win. The United States was committed to put-ting in whatever was needed to achieve its objective, not of unconditional surrender or the overthrow of the North Vietnamese regime, but of a solution such as had been achieved in Greece.

With respect to the Manila Conference, the President said there naturally would be a review of the military situation which looks better than many realize. But he did not want to see the Conference turn into a military exercise. The United States was anxious to discuss better means to pacify and develop areas liberated in Viet-Nam. In one area where 62 schools had been built, 55 had already been destroyed by the Viet Cong. They would have to take steps to give better guidance to people who have never had stable government. In this he was looking particularly to the views and leadership of Mr. Holt and Mr. Holyoake in the Conference.

The recent election in Viet-Nam had been most encouraging, but this process must be carried forward. The U.S. wished to see Viet-Nam make it on the path of political development, but at the same time we have to recognize the great problems that they faced in doing so. On the economic front there was much to be done in overcoming corruption, controlling inflation, in long range planning, land reform, and so on. But these were sensitive matters with the Government of Viet-Nam so it would be necessary to work quietly behind the scenes. President Marcos might want to bring forward proposals for an early peace conference. The U.S. wanted a peace conference, but offers of an early conference would not put pressure on Ho Chi Minh. The President said that at Manila he would follow the Tran Van Do formula of July. Certainly the U.S. wanted peace, but it could not be a unilateral matter. The demonstrators for peace in Western countries did not need to worry about the United States intentions; they ought rather to concentrate their energies on Ho Chi Minh. But these demonstrators had an influence out of proportion to their members. They were people in universities, intellectual circles and in the news networks and they were using their liberty to destroy themselves.

The Communists entertained a hope that his (President Johnsonʼs) position on Viet-Nam would be repudiated by the American people in the November elections.

But this entirely misjudged the temper of the American people. While there was a lot of political infighting, there was unity on the defense issue. The vote in the Senate on a recent appropriation bill for Viet-Nam was 87 to nothing.

The President said the United States intended to treat its obligations seriously in Viet-Nam, just as it had in Greece, Turkey and the Dominican Republic, and as it had not done in Cuba. They would put into Viet-Nam the resources needed to do the job. However, they wanted Australia and others to stand up with them to show that it was not just an effort of the United States. The seven participants in the Manila meeting might get this across to a hundred other nations.

The President said he had not come with a formula for peace. Nor did he think peace was just around the corner. It would not be achieved until enough power had been applied to make the Communists desist. However, as long as they thought they could win in Washington or promote disunity among the allies they would pursue their aggression. One thing the United States wanted out of the Manila Conference was that more countries should become interested in what is happening in Viet-Nam.

The Prime Minister said the Australian situation was clearly known to the President and his advisers. Australia had played her part with the United States in World War I, World War II and in Korea and Viet-Nam and had suffered half a million casualties. Australia saw herself with a problem of economic growth and development. This was important to Australiaʼs allies since the stronger she became the greater contribution she could make.

It was also of mutual interest that Australia should continue to maintain a military presence in the Singapore/Malaysia area, not only for herself but as a means of influencing Britain to maintain forces east of Suez. There were also the demands made by the development of Papua and New Guinea.

The Prime Minister said he mentioned these things because it was important to see the total picture of Australiaʼs defense and development. The Government would not hold back. He had repeatedly drawn attention to Australiaʼs vital interest in the outcome in Viet-Nam. The Government had introduced conscription (National Service), the first time this had been done in peace-time, and this had become the principal issue in the current political campaign. The Government welcomed this. They wanted to be able to say that the people had endorsed the policy of conscription at the forthcoming Federal election.

The Prime Minister and the President agreed that they should issue a joint public statement on the discussions which they had had.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. II, Memos, 1/66–7/67. Secret. There is no drafter indicated, but Jorden of the White House approved this memorandum on November 23. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at Parliament House. President Johnson was on a trip to Asia and the Pacific, October 17–November 2. He visited Australia October 20–23. The centerpiece of the Asian visit was the meeting in Manila, October 24–25, with those allies who contributed troops to the conflict in South Vietnam. Extensive briefing papers prepared for this trip are ibid., International Meetings and Travel, Asia. There is also a history prepared by the NSC on the Manila Conference, which contains summaries and copies of documents on the Presidentʼs discussions in Canberra and his related talks in Wellington, October 20–21, see ibid., NSC Histories, Manila Conference.

20. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 20. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 1

Canberra, December 1, 1966, 0650Z.

2886. Ref: Stateʼs 89909; Embtel 2847.2

1. In brief conversation with DCM, Prime Minister said he intends undertake general review of GOA military commitments as soon as Sir John Wilton, Chairman Chiefs of Staff, returns from Saigon, and new Cabinet formed sometime next week. Holt indicated that, with election success behind him in which Viet-Nam major issue, Cabinet should consider on urgent basis what more GOA can contribute to Viet-Nam. He said Cabinet would also review forces committed to Malaysia and get determination whether some elements GOA forces there might better be utilized in Viet-Nam. He stressed GOA desire maintain British forces in Malaysia and said GOA would have to take account of this in their consideration of possible adjustments in their own force structure in Malaysia.

2. Comment: Following are present prospects for an increase in military commitment to SVN:3

Three of eight army battalions are overseas now. Two of remaining five were recently activated and will not be equipped or combat-ready for some time. Army is hard put to absorb new Selective National Service input of personnel and support present overseas deployment. A third battalion could be sent to Viet-Nam by consolidating and transferring trained personnel from Australian based battalions. This could be done in three to four monthsʼ time, at expense of slowing down training other battalions and absorption National Service men. Armyʼs position is that there should be a third battalion in Australian Viet-Nam Task Force and RAA does have plans to implement increase providing order is given.

Most likely source for relatively early augmentation in SVN is Air Force. Probably units would be light bomber squadron (Canberraʼs) for fighter-bomber squadron (Sabreʼs). Like all Australian units, Air Force is familiar with US operations and could be easily integrated.

Navy could probably release up to four minesweepers now based Malaysia. In addition, as new patrol boats now being acquired become available, these could be assigned. But this would not be possible for about two years.

Clark

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 AUSTL. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated priority to Kuala Lumpur and Saigon. On the White House copy of this telegram there is an indication that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. II, Cables 1/66–7/67)

2 Telegram 89909 not found. Telegram 2847 from Canberra, November 29, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 UK.

3 On December 16 Rostow informed the President that the Australians had decided to send 900 more men to Vietnam, a fighter squadron of 8 fighter bombers, a ship, and 6 frogmen for harbor clearance. (Note from Rostow to Johnson, December 16; ibid., Memos 1/66–7/67)

21. Memorandum of Conversation 21. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 20, 1967.

SUBJECT

British Plans East of Suez

PARTICIPANTS

George Brown, UK Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Paul Hasluck, Australian Minister for External Affairs

Keith J. Holyoake, New Zealand Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs

John Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Jack Shepherd, New Zealand Charge dʼAffaires

Ian L.G. Stewart, Head of Defense Division, New Zealand Department of External Affairs

Frank Cooper, Assistant Under Secretary, UK Ministry of Defense

The Secretary

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Samuel D. Berger, Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

1. Mr. Hasluck welcomed the group to the Australian Embassy Residence and opened the discussion by saying the Australians had made contributions to British vital interests in two world wars and in the European area during the Berlin airlift, and they were ready to cooperate again in the European area. Australia was therefore surprised to learn that the British are contemplating completely withdrawing from the Singapore-Malaysia area where Australia has a vital interest. Secretary Rusk said he appreciated what the British are doing as members of the International Control Commission to help in Viet-Nam. The American people would do what is necessary in Viet-Nam and, if there is no honorable alternative through negotiations, the US will stay as long as necessary. He wished to point out, however, that for the first time we are facing serious domestic challenges to our overseas commitments. The Senate Democratic leadership is pressing for a reduction of our forces in Europe. We will keep our commitments there, the Secretary said, but we are being asked what others are doing in Europe and elsewhere in fulfillment of their commitments and in support of us. He wished to stress that what others do affects us, and affects the American attitude toward our commitments. The United Kingdom should be very, very careful about pulling back on its commitments in Southeast Asia, because of the reaction which it would set in motion here. He hopes there will be no major move out of the area while we have forces fighting in Viet-Nam.

2. Mr. Brown said the British government is supporting our position in Viet-Nam, but it is holding that line with great difficulties and under very heavy pressure. The UK is not contributing troops to Viet-Nam but is doing other things, especially in the realm of trying to get peace negotiations going. Ironically, he finds himself under attack here because of what the UK is thinking about doing in Singapore and Malaysia, but when he goes home he finds himself under attack for the support he is giving to our efforts in Viet-Nam. He will be going to Moscow in May to take a reading, and will report to us on what he finds there. As for this meeting, he is under instructions to report what the UK is thinking in respect of Singapore-Malaysia, and he does not want to leave us in any doubt about their position. The UK simply has to reduce its expenditures and the demand on its military forces and resources; that is the essence of the UK problem. There will therefore need to be some changes in the defense field. Indeed, some of his colleagues want him to go very much further and say that the UK is not only thinking about withdrawing from the area, but has virtually taken that decision. That they have not yet done, but they are clearly moving in that direction. Mr. Brown said he recognized the difficulties this will present for the United States, Australia, and New Zealand.

3. The Secretary asked why is it necessary to take up now what the UK means to do in the mid-1970ʼs; why such a long lead time on this matter?

4. Mr. Brown said the reasons for making decisions now for the mid-1970ʼs were: a. To give the services a firm policy to work to.

b. The Labor Party and Parliament are pressing for a decision, and the UK government must tell the country very soon what they intend. The plan is to make an announcement in July, before this Parliament rises.

c. The cut in forces between now and 1971 will not yield great savings; real savings can be made only if the decision is taken now for the mid-1970ʼs

d. It is essential that Malaysia and Singapore know about their future so orderly arrangements can be made in advance of a British withdrawal.

e. There will, however, be no dramatic changes in the next fifteen months.

Prime Minister Holyoake said he hopes the British would not say now what they would do in 1975. This move would be interpreted as an indication that there is no place on the mainland for the white man. He did not accept that. The British had a century of experience in handling the problems in this area and they could not just withdraw and leave it to others to deal with the problems.

6. Mr. Brown said the British role today had to be different from what it was in the past. The governments of Malaysia and Singapore were under heavy criticism because of an outside presence, and it complicates their problems of governing. If the UK withdraws it will cut the ground out from under the critics. Moreover, such a withdrawal will induce the people of Singapore and Malaysia to take a stronger lead in developing their own defenses, and in this the UK will continue to help support them.

7. Mr. Hasluck said the British were making the assumption that by the mid-1970ʼs Malaysia and Singapore would not be under threat from hostile forces. He questioned the validity of this view.

8. The Secretary said that he thought the free Asian nations would much prefer a friendly white presence to a hostile Chinese. He asked how Malaysia and Singapore will look after their defense if the British withdraw. If they come to the United States and ask us to take over their commitments, the answer is, we canʼt. The Senate will not ratify any additional commitments. Mr. Hasluck said Australia and New Zealand cannot assume these commitments if the British abrogate their treaties with Malaysia and Singapore: this would involve an extension of commitments under ANZUS which the United States is not prepared to accept.

9. Mr. Brown said that Healey was off to talk to Malaysian and Singapore leaders in order to reassure them so they wonʼt get panicky when the announcement is made. The British do not mean to abrogate their defense treaties with Malaysia and Singapore, but there will have to be adjustments and modifications. He said that Prime Minister Lee of Singapore expects this to happen and it will ease Leeʼs problems in that he can no longer be called a British “stooge.”

10. Mr. Hasluck made the point that he was most concerned about what the effect would be on Lee if Healey told him the British were pulling out in the mid-1970ʼs. There was also the effect this would have in Australia, and in Burma. The Secretary said that we have just learned that Burma is on the point of asking the United States and the United Kingdom for overt assistance. Mr. Holyoake said he has drafted a telegram to Wilson expressing his dismay over the contemplated withdrawal, and asking that Healey not give any indication that this is the UK intention when he visits Singapore. Mr. Brown said that when he returns to London the following day he will see his colleagues and Healey before the latter departs from Singapore and Malaysia. He promised faithfully to convey the strong views which had been expressed. He does not know what the decision will be about disclosing British intentions, but at some stage he feels there must be a disclosure.

11. The Secretary asked if the proposal to disengage in Asia was related to Britainʼs effort to get into the Common Market. Brown said there was no connection. The decision to withdraw arises from Britainʼs desperate financial situation. The British simply have to reduce the burden of taxation on their people, partly because of the effect of high taxes on economic incentives, partly in order to enable the UK to pay off its debts. The Secretary said that when Michael Stewart was asked what the UK would do if Thailand was attacked, he had said the UK would come to its support under its SEATO obligations. He realized the difficulties the British are in and the need for a reduction in defense expenditures, but he was troubled by the decision to go all the way in this area. Would the British consider in the course of planning for their new policy in the area a contribution of, say, two battalions to a SEATO reserve? What counted was visibility. He felt it was important that there should be a visible UK presence. Mr. Brown said he could not answer that question. The new UK policy would involve a renegotiation of UK commitments in the area and he could not say now what these would be. Mr. Hasluck asked if they contemplated renegotiating the Malaysia-Singapore Treaty of Defense, the present arrangements for the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve, and their commitments under the various SEATO contingency plans. Mr. Brown said he did not think a renegotiation was necessary, but there would have to be changes.

12. The Secretary said he wanted Mr. Brown to take home and have his colleagues consider the chain reactions in the US of this UK move. Mr. Hasluck said he could not understand why the British had to take this decision now. The end of hostilities in Viet-Nam is not yet in sight and no one can say what further outbreaks there may be elsewhere. The Secretary said that Hanoi might very well step up its effort in Laos.

13. Mr. Brown said the problem is that the UK simply cannot afford to maintain its presence and manpower on the same scale as in the past. The UK is thinking of providing assistance to the area in other forms and other ways which will help serve as a deterrent to those who are hostile, but he could not say what these were. Brown said that they mean to say very soon that they intend to cut their forces in the area by half by 1971. The Secretary asked why doesnʼt the UK qualify this by saying “if the situation permits.” Mr. Brown said that he would talk to the Prime Minister along these lines, but thinks it will be difficult in terms of planning. The Secretary said he would supply Mr. Brown with a memo on the chain reactions in the US for his talks next day with his Cabinet colleagues. Mr. Brown said the Cabinet will not make a final decision or announcement on the complete withdrawing of forces before July, but, he repeated, a decision and an announcement must be made before Parliament rises in July. The Secretary asked Mr. Brown and the Cabinet to consider what the effect would be on Hanoi if they made the announcement now that they intend to withdraw from Singapore and Malaysia in the 1970ʼs. He said the UK simply must consider that they are dealing with 1967, not the 1970ʼs, and what they do in July is very important. He hoped the UK would not make any decision now to withdraw in the mid-1970ʼs; he hoped Healey would not give any indication of such an intention when he goes to Singapore; and he hoped that if any such decision is taken that there be no announcement of it. Mr. Holyoake and Mr. Hasluck associated themselves with this, urging that there be no decision and no announcement.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FAR E–UK. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Berger. This discussion was the quadripartite talks that took place after the SEATO Council Meeting, April 18–20, and before the ANZUS meeting, April 21–22, both held in Washington.

22. Memorandum of Conversation 22. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 21, 1967.

SUBJECT

ANZUS Council Meeting—Part One—British Position East of Suez

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Prime Minister Keith Holyoake of New Zealand

Minister for External Affairs Paul Hasluck of Australia

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary, EA

Mr. Ian Stewart, Head, Defense Division, Department of External Affairs of New Zealand

Sir James Plimsoll, Secretary of the Department of External Affairs of Australia

Mr. Jeffrey C. Kitchen, Deputy Asst. Secy, G/PM

Hasluck summarized communications just exchanged between Prime Minister Holt and Prime Minister Wilson. Wilsonʼs message had confirmed that the British felt they must make substantial additional reductions in defense expenditures, which were the largest share of their 550 million pounds of overseas expenditure. Since European and Middle Eastern cuts were not enough, they proposed to reduce their forces in the Far East below the levels contemplated in the 1966 defense review, and on an over-all basis by one-half, by 1970–71. Concurrently, the British felt they must make, and announce, a “long term planning assumption” that they would have completely withdrawn from Malaysia and Singapore by the mid-1970ʼs.

In the message, Wilson had said the British would avoid sudden adjustments and would carry out the reductions in an orderly fashion so as to fit in with reductions elsewhere and over-all logistics factors (presumably including facilities in the UK to hold the troops withdrawn). Moreover, the British felt that their reduction must not impair the economic situation in Malaysia and Singapore, and the British would consider other steps they could take to offset the impact of the reductions on the economies of the two. Lastly, the proposed decisions envisaged a further look at the possibility of basing in Australia.

Wilsonʼs message had said that the British were considering such decisions, looking to a final view and decision in July. In concluding, Wilson reiterated that the British would continue to stand by Australia if trouble ever arose, and suggested that they would then rely on rapid transport capacity. Hasluck added that Brown in his talk with Hasluck here had said that the British maintained a clear continued interest in the Far East and believed that the people in the area wanted them.

Hasluck went on to say that Holt had responded to Wilson that the British presence was vital to the security of the area and also to the position of the UK. Holt had pointed to the general forward movement in Asia and the importance of Britain remaining a part of the Asian situation as it improved. Holt had described the proposed British decisions as a shock to Australia. He had said the Australians had been prepared for some adjustments but had supposed that the British would take no action that would impair the Commonwealth reserve.

In particular, Holt had stated that any announcement of prospective complete withdrawal would be very bad in its effect on Hanoi, on Malaysia and Singapore, and on relations between the US and UK. As to the British assurance of support to Australia and other areas, Holt had commented strongly that there was a vast difference between forces being on the spot and any projected employment of reserve forces however mobile.

After reporting this exchange, Hasluck went on to report a reaction stated by Defense Minister Goh in Singapore. Goh had said that his government wanted no withdrawals. They were in a most difficult economic phase, and the effects of British reductions would be serious; their economic situation might improve so that they could live with withdrawals from this standpoint in 4–5 years or even 2–3, but not now. Goh had pointed out that the Indonesian future remained uncertain. Finally, he had complained that the British had never completed a firm bilateral defense agreement as they had promised at the time of separation between Malaysia and Singapore.

Hasluck then reported a more general reaction from Razak of Malaysia. He was said to be equally unhappy, and complaining that Healey had earlier assured the Malaysians that a substantial presence would be maintained.

Hasluck then said—and Holyoake and the Secretary agreed—that Australian defense planners seemed to be in the best position to do an independent study on the economic and military aspects of any British concept of using mobile forces in the Far East. Their preliminary judgment was that such a concept would not be effective, and that it would be possible to show that a military transport capacity, combined with offsetting economic aid to Malaysia and Singapore, would in fact cost the British more than maintenance of their present positions. The Australian planners could make use of ANZAM ties in getting data for such a study. The Australian military reported that General Hull, the British CGS, appeared clearly unhappy with what was in prospect.

Stewart of New Zealand then commented that Hull had described to them a British concept of maintaining small forces in the area to hold ports of re-entry. This appeared to differ from any plan for ultimate complete withdrawal. The Secretary then said that he could not see why there was any valid planning requirement to announce a timetable for complete withdrawal. In response, there was general agreement that the basic reasons the British wished to announce a timetable were political. The Secretary asked whether the British were seeking in part to dissociate themselves from Viet-Nam. Hasluck thought that their purpose was rather to indicate that they were getting out of Asia in general, although this in turn was linked to their view on Viet-Nam.

Holyoake said that he had told Brown emphatically that Britain could move to half-strength “if you must” by 1970–71, but had taken a strong position against any announcement of withdrawal by 1975.

The Secretary and Hasluck both commented that it would really be desirable to have the British move their forces north to Thailand.

Hasluck summarized major strategic arguments against British withdrawal. We could not count on the change in Indonesia. A threat to Thailand would remain even if Viet-Nam came out satisfactorily. There were remaining threats in east Burma, southern Thailand, and other parts of the area.

Holyoake asked if Cambodia was not another case of potential instability. The Secretary thought a Communist threat there was not serious for the time being.

The Secretary and Holyoake then reported that they too had sent messages to Brown. The Secretary summarized his message as arguing against significant reductions while Viet-Nam was going on, and arguing most strongly against any announcement of withdrawal by the mid-1970ʼs.

Returning to the subject of British motives, the Secretary speculated that the British might be seeking to avoid any possibility of becoming engaged with China. This led to some discussion in which there was general agreement that British motives included some belief that their prospects for admission to Europe would be enhanced if they announced ultimate withdrawal from Asia. Hasluck said that the British had seemed to him devious for a long time on this subject, and that he thought what Brown had given us might reflect a considered plan that included the handling of the US, Australia, and New Zealand as simply one of its elements.

The Secretary asked whether Brown might have been, in effect, appealing for economic help to enable Britain to carry on in the Far East. If so, he said, the US had no intention of volunteering such help.

Hasluck commented that British planning might have gone too far for any such economic help to have an effect. Kitchen noted that we had given some contingent thought to this question, and had concluded that any method for assistance that we can devise would involve so much money that it would clearly show itself as a subsidy. The Secretary rather wryly remarked that he did think we could help the British if they put forces in Viet-Nam.

Kitchen commented that the current British agitation on the issue probably had something to do with the adverse results of the London elections and with the substantial defections on the recent White Paper.

The discussion was left at this point. In essence, it had been an exchange of views and a sharing of comments given the British. The only concrete action is that the Australian defense planners will seek to develop facts to counter any mobile concept the British may be entertaining.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and approved in S on April 27. This was the first of four memoranda of conversation covering this session of the ANZUS Council meeting. Part two, which dealt with Cambodia, is printed as Document 204; part three was about Vietnam and is in the Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS; part four concerned miscellaneous topics—the United Nations, the Philippines, and Northeast Thailand. A complete copy is ibid., Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 169, which also contains additional records on the ANZUS Council meetings.

23. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 23. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 31, 1967.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with Australian Prime Minister Holt 2

Previous visits by Holt have well established in the public mind the warm and close relationships between our two countries. You may wish in this visit to emphasize our respective roles in Asia, bringing in the Manila Declaration and generally putting Viet-Nam in the context of an Asia that may be turning the corner.

The following topics are expected to arise in your discussions with Holt:

British East of Suez

Australian Position

The Australians strongly oppose any British decision now to withdraw completely by the mid-1970ʼs. They have been extremely cooperative in coordinating with us their approach in dealing with the British, as well as with Singapore ad Malaysia.

United States Position

You may wish to assure Holt of your intentions to inform Prime Minister Wilson 3 in strongest terms: —that you see no supportable reason for a British decision at this time for total withdrawal by the mid-1970ʼs;

—that such a decision, whether made public or not, would have serious consequences for stability in the area, for U.S. policy, and for British relations with the U.S. and its ANZUS partners;

—that the U.S. does not intend to assume commitments previously assumed by the British.

Interest Equalization Tax

A separate detailed memorandum has been sent to you on this subject.4 Chief points in U.S. position are: —we cannot risk undercutting pending legislation designed to strengthen this tax program;

—other nations previously refused exemption have problems more urgent than that of refunding debts;

—we may have proposed an Export-Import Bank loan designed to meet as fully as possible Australian refinancing needs at reasonable interest costs;

—we stand ready to explore this proposal further in the attempt to be as helpful as possible.

Viet-Nam Australian Military Commitment

The Prime Minister may discuss current thinking in the Cabinet regarding a further increase in Australian military support. The level of Australian forces in Viet-Nam is now nearing the projected 6,300.

We have been in close contact with the Australians regarding priorities for increased support and are ready to help coordinate any aspect of a decision to strengthen that support.

Future Seven Nations Summit Meeting

Prime Minister Holt recently sent you a letter suggesting another seven nations summit (Tab A).5 You may wish to point out the following factors bearing on the timing of such a meeting: —President Parkʼs inauguration July 1, and a special session of Congress in the Philippines ending about July 5, preclude any date previous to the middle of July;

—by then the Vietnamese election campaign will be in full swing with Thieu and Ky both possibly being candidates;

—an October or November date may be more promising;

—a meeting at that time would strengthen and publicize the new Vietnamese government, and by then changes in the military situation and pacification program may give substantial cause for summit level consultation;

—if the Vietnamese elections are successful, we might think of an October or November meeting, but we do not wish to be committed publicly this far ahead, with so many unknowns to be faced in the interim.

Australian Participation in East Asian Regional Affairs

You may wish to: —congratulate Holt on Australiaʼs increasing and constructive participation in regional affairs such as the Asian and Pacific Council (ASPAC), the Asian Development Bank, the Colombo Plan, and UN specialized agencies.

Kennedy Round

Holt is pleased with the successful conclusion of the Kennedy Round. He considers that the grains agreement is better than seemed possible. Bilateral Australian-U.S. negotiation concluded amicably but without agreement because of Australian unwillingness to make a significant offer to the U.S. on tobacco. Lacking this offer, the U.S. withdrew its offer on raw wool.

R & R for Australian and American Troops

Both governments are agreeable to the idea of U.S. troops being giving rest and recreation in Australia, and Australian troops in Hawaii. Specifics are yet to be worked out, but we see no real problems. I would ask for his opinion.

Call on You by Opposition Leader, Mr. Whitlam

Holt may recommend that you receive Whitlam, recently elected leader of the opposition Australian Labor Party, on the grounds that his moderate and practical foreign policy position will thereby be strengthened. A memo on this subject was recently sent you (Tab B).6

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 12 and June 17–19, 1966. Secret. The Department of State sent the President a May 29 briefing memorandum for the Holt meeting. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL) Read also sent Rostow a May 24 memorandum that reported on John J. McCloyʼs visit to Canberra and his discussions with Holt. According to this memorandum, Holt was most concerned with British withdrawals from Singapore and Malaysia and the failure of the United States to make exceptions to the equalization tax as applied to Australia. (Ibid.)

2 Johnson and Holt met for a private meeting from 12:01 to approximately 12:40 p.m. This private meeting took place after the White House welcoming ceremony and before a lunch with Holt, which lasted from 2 to 3:30 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other records of the Presidentʼs meetings with Holt have been found.

3  Wilson made an official visit to Washington on June 2.

4 Memorandum from Rostow to Johnson, May 31. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 12 and June 17–19, 1966)

5 Not further identified.

6 Memorandum from Rostow to Johnson, May 26. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. II, Memos, 1/66–7/67.

24. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 24. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 1, 1967.

SUBJECT

Conversation Between Prime Minister Holt and Secretary Rusk

The following was covered this afternoon,2 for your reference before you see the Prime Minister this evening.3

1. Middle East. The Secretary gave a full recital of our efforts to get a declaration by the maritime nations. Holt was in agreement.

2. Bombing. Holt expressed his clear view that bombing should not be suspended, and said that he would take this line strongly with Pearson.

3. East of Suez. The Secretary called Holtʼs attention to a cable just received today from London, from a source within the British Government (who must be protected). This source stated that the British Cabinet had reached a decision on a formula providing that “Britain would maintain, for the foreseeable future, a military capability for use in the area.” The source further reported that the British Cabinet was split as to whether there should be a formal announcement in these terms.

The Secretary told Holt that we saw grave danger in this formula, since it might be taken to mean that the UK would keep no bases in the area but only an ear-marked force with some air transport, in the UK. Holt agreed that this interpretation would probably be made, and would amount to much the same thing as outright British withdrawal from the bases.

Holt went on to say that he would see Wilson on June 13, and that Wilson had promised to make no decision until after he had seen him. Holt said that he would stay away from the detail on reductions and focus on: (a) knocking down the British argument that “white faces” were no longer welcome in Asia; (b) getting the British to agree to make no firm statement on complete withdrawal.

The Secretary pointed out that focusing on not having any firm statement might miss the point. If a decision were reached, it would certainly leak. The Secretary noted that his own latest message to George Brown had urged the British not to reach a decision, for this very reason. Holt expressed understanding of this distinction and seemed prepared to talk to Wilson in the same sense as the Secretaryʼs message.

Holt dwelt at length on the theme that any British decision or announcement on withdrawal would be a gross breach of faith in view of repeated assurances the British had given the Australians. He repeated that he would not be too forceful about the reductions with Wilson, but would focus on withdrawal. The Secretary responded by noting the importance of what others were doing in terms of Congressional sentiment here.

4. Australian Wheat Sales to China. Holt reported in confidence that the British—because of the Hong Kong riots—had asked the Australians to stall on current wheat negotiation. Holt had checked and found that a firm offer had already been made. However, the Australians had sent an additional message, to the effect that the sale would not necessarily go forward if there was a continuing threat to the security of Hong Kong. The British had much appreciated this Australian action, and Holt regarded it as Australian support for a British position, comparable to the support that we were all asking the British to give us by not making a decision on a withdrawal East of Suez.

5. Economic Issues. At the close, Holt raised a number of economic issues: (a) a $50 million exemption for Australia from our interest equalization tax;

(b) getting a cut in our wool tariff in return for an Australian concession on tobacco;

(c) various dairy products problems;

(d) an increased sugar quota particularly if the British got into the Common Market and the present British-Australian sugar deal fails;

(e) the disastrous effect on Australian exports of lead and zinc to the US, if pending US proposals for an annual quota variable quarterly were adopted;

(f) US restrictions on Australian meat, particularly lower grade varieties, which Holt argued did not hurt US producers.

Holt argued points (a) and (b) at some length. The Secretary responded that we would look into all of these points before Holtʼs return. He did point out, on the wool tariff, that it was our impression that the Australian concession on tobacco had not been substantial enough.

WP Bundy

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 1–2 and 17–19, 1967. Secret.

2  Rusk, Bundy, and Clark met with Holt and Waller from 4:10 to 5:02 p.m. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

3 Prime Minister and Mrs. Holt attended a State dinner at the White House preceded by drinks and exchange of gifts on the second floor of the White House. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

25. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 25. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 17, 1967.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Prime Minister Holt 2

You may wish to ask Holt about his talks with Wilson. The main focus was on the East of Suez problem. Holt pressed the British hard on the political importance of not reaching a final decision on total withdrawal of forces by the mid-1970ʼs.

You may wish to ask him:

What do the British mean when they talk of keeping “a substantial capability for use in the area?” Should we jointly try to nail them down on specifics? Does Holt think there is any chance of the British delaying a firm decision or “planning assumptions” on withdrawal. (Summary of East of Suez problem at Tab C.)3

Holt undoubtedly will raise: —the Kosygin visit and your plans for meeting the Soviet leader;

—the prospects in the General Assembly;

—outlook for a solution of the Middle East problem;

—prospects in Viet-Nam and the meaning of the McNamara visit.

His principal interest will almost surely be bilateral economic problems. You received a separate memo on this from Francis Bator (Tab A).4 Detailed treatment, with pros and cons on each issue, is attached (Tab B).5

The main elements are:

Interest Equalization Tax—Australia wants an exemption. This would raise serious problems on the Hill and with other borrowers. We proposed an Ex-Im Bank credit. The Australians turned it down for “technical reasons.” You might ask Holt to reconsider. If he is negative, you might propose an Ex-Im Bank guarantee for an Australian bond issue of $50 million. There would be no IET on such an issue; it would cover about two yearsʼ worth of Australiaʼs New York borrowing at present rates. Treasury (Fowler) will be unhappy unless the offer depends on a balance of payments offset.

Meat—Aussies are worried about possible Congressional restrictions on meat imports. You may wish to assure the Prime Minister you will make a maximum effort to prevent passage of such legislation.

Lead and Zinc—Australians are concerned about pending import control legislation. You may wish to reassure him that you will try to prevent reimposition of import quotas. You might mention the stockpile problem. Unless imports are cut back, we face trouble with plans for disposal of about $600 million of lead and zinc considered surplus to our needs.

Dairy Products—Holt is concerned about legislative restrictions on dairy imports, and possible Tariff Commission proceedings. You could assure him (1) you will oppose protectionist dairy legislation, and (2) Tariff Commission action may limit imports below the high 1966–67 level, but Australian imports are not likely to be much lower than the healthy 1962–65 level.

Wool—A tariff cut of the size the Australians want would cost us about $33 million a year—$19 million lost in customs receipts, $14 million in additional subsidy payments to producers. We have long linked action on wool to Australian liberalization of tobacco tariffs. All concerned recommend against any liberalization on wool tariffs.

Sugar—Australia has been pushing for a new international sugar agreement. None of our specialists think it has a chance.

In addition, you may wish to press Holt for greater Australian help to Indonesia (see Tab D).6 We have committed so far $33 million; others have offered about $117 million; Australia only about $770,000. We would be grateful if Australia could offer more at The Hague meeting later this month.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visits of Prime Minister Holt, June 1–2 and 17–19, 1967. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

2 Prime Minister Holt and his wife spent the weekend of June 17–18 at Camp David with the President. There were numerous occasions for the President and the Prime Minister to talk, but the most formal discussions took place on June 18, from 6 to 7:45 p.m. In addition to the President and Holt, Sir John Bunting, Ambassador Clark, and Under Secretary of Agriculture John Schnittker attended. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found.

3 Tab C, a background paper entitled, “East of Suez,” was attached to a June 16 memorandum from Rusk to the President. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

4 Dated June 15. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Holt Visits, June 1–2 and 17–19, 1967)

5 The detailed treatment, entitled “United States/Australia Bilateral Economic Issues,” was attached to the June 16 memorandum from Rusk to Johnson. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

6 Not printed. (Ibid.)

26. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Holt 26. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Holt 1

Washington, July 11, 1967.

Dear Harold:

I appreciate very much receiving your letter of July 32 with the kind expression from you and Zara regarding our recent visits together. It was a great lift to my spirits to see you again.

Lady Bird was terribly disappointed not to be with us at Camp David, but I am sure you understood that Luci needed her. All went well and I have now seen the young man, who looks like a strapping character. Many thanks for your kind words.

I also have your July 5 letter to me on the British defense position.3 I have weighed in again with Harold Wilson, and Dean Rusk did so in more detail with George Brown. By the time you receive this letter, we may know what the effect has been of our concerted effort. I believe that we have presented our case as forcefully and logically as possible, and I trust it will have a real effect on the thinking of the British Cabinet.

Turning to the economic issues raised in your letter of July 3, I share your disappointment that despite the strenuous efforts of the officials of both our governments no agreement could be reached on the problems of wool and tobacco. I do understand, however, the political pressures from your tobacco farmers, which made it impossible for your officials to offer more extensive concessions on tobacco. At the same time I hope you can appreciate why it was impossible for us to cut the duty on wool without significant concessions to counter the economic problems and political pressures we face with our wool growers.

On the dairy products, I believe the action I took was the only realistic course open to me, against the background of the very strong feelings of our dairy farmers and the real threat of even more restrictive legislation. Nevertheless, within the over-all level of our dairy imports, we are making allocations which will assure Australia at least its historic share of the trade.

On the matter of the interest equalization tax, I understand that our Treasury people have been in direct contact with yours in the past days. I believe there is now an understanding of the range of possibilities available to you in the plan outlined in Secretary Fowlerʼs letter to Mr. McMahon of June 24. I hope this plan will lead to a satisfactory arrangement for solving the question of your borrowing here.

Thank you especially for your thoughtful views on Viet-Nam. I agree with your feelings on the timing of another “Manila-type” conference, and we should continue to keep in touch on this. As to force requirements, Secretary McNamara is, as you know, on the ground now assessing General Westmorelandʼs recommendations in the light of the over-all situation. I appreciate the factors you mention, and of course we shall be reaching no decisions until we have assessed McNamaraʼs conclusions from the trip with great care. But we may well have to do significantly more, simply to meet the military necessities of what the other side is doing, and I want to say frankly that if the need for additional forces becomes clear, we shall need to talk fairly urgently with you and the other troop-contributing nations on whether a substantial part of the need can be met by others. Even since our meetings, it is plain that key members of our Congress feel very strongly about this, and I am sure you would agree that additional burdens should be shared as equitably as possible. I will keep you posted on our thinking as it develops.

Lady Bird joins me in sending our fondest regards to all of you, and in hoping that we soon again will be together.4

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. No classification marking appears on the source text, which was the signed copy of this letter, but when it was sent as a telegram to Canberra it was classified Secret. (Ibid., POL AUSTL–US) This letter was drafted by William M. Shumate of AID and cleared by Bundy, Barnett, and in draft with John C. Coleman, Director of the Office of International Monetary Affairs, and Julius L. Katz, Director of the Office of International Commodities, both of the Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State. It was sent to Rostow by Read under cover of a July 10 memorandum.

2 Attached, but not printed.

3 Not found.

4 Johnson added the following handwritten postscript: “Today [July 10] I received your friends Ronald MacDonald and Graham Perkin of the Melbourne Age and had a good conversation.” MacDonald was Managing Director and Perkin was Editor of the paper.

27. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 27. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, August 3, 1967.

SUBJECT

Letter from Prime Minister Holt 2

Bob Furlonger, the Australian Charge, just delivered the attached letter to you from Prime Minister Harold Holt.

He expresses warm appreciation for the Clifford-Taylor visit.3 He promises to review Australiaʼs position on more troops in light of our problems and our special close relationship.

The main purpose of the letter is to set forth the limitations within which he and his colleagues must operate. These include: —rising defense costs;

—requirements for internal development;

—high foreign aid outlays;

—Britainʼs planned withdrawal from Malaysia and Singapore.

The key sentence in the letter is: “As I assured your emissaries, I do not mention these things to argue there is nothing more we can do.”

I think a reply would be helpful, one that underlines our own problems here at home and stresses the special Australian role as our “major non-Asian partner.” You will want to hear the report from Clark and Max first. But I believe a personal message from you reinforcing the arguments made by Clifford/Taylor will nudge the Prime Minister in the right direction.

W.W. Rostow 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret.

2 Dated August 3. (Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US)

3 Presidential advisers Clark Clifford and Maxwell Taylor made a 2-week trip to East Asia and the Pacific, in late July and early August, to consult with government leaders in those nations assisting South Vietnam with military forces.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, August 16, 1967, 2304Z.

22024. 1. Please deliver following Presidential letter to Prime Minister Holt as soon as possible.

“Dear Harold:

I express my appreciation for the courtesies extended to my emissaries, Mr. Clifford and General Taylor. They have been most complimentary in their comments on the reception given them by you and your colleagues. I am highly gratified at the frank and forthright discussions that took place, and am confident that they have contributed to an even closer relationship and understanding between our two countries.

I now have your long and thoughtful letter, delivered to me on August 3,2 giving your reflections on the visit and the issues discussed.

I fully appreciate the points you have made, and the various factors that you and your Cabinet will have to take into account in arriving at a decision. I particularly welcome your statement that you will be announcing on August 15 an 18 per cent increase in defense expenditure for this financial year. This continues the constructive trend toward greater responsibility of the last four years.

Australiaʼs performance in foreign aid and in the allocation of resources to development continues to call for our admiration. Your recent decision to give 150,000 tons of wheat to India is a particularly helpful and timely act of responsible generosity.

With the full realization of the complexities of your problem, I do return to the hope that you and your Cabinet can make an early decision to send a two-battalion combat team. My emissaries have reported on the discussions which you had as to specific increases in your forces. My hope is that you will make the maximum effort in this regard, and that you will be able to make an announcement as speedily as possible.

May I particularly point out some of the timing factors at this end? As you know, I have now put before the Congress proposals for a major tax increase and at the same time have announced our decision to raise our own forces in Viet-Nam by 45,000 men. In the next 3–4 weeks, the tax proposal will be in its most critical phase in the Congress, and I will certainly be pressed hard as to the plans that other nations may have to add to their forces in Viet-Nam, alongside the 65,000-man increase announced by the South Vietnamese themselves and our own decision. I simply cannot exaggerate the favorable effect it would have here if we were able to tell the Congress within the next month that your Government had reached a firm decision along the lines I have suggested above.

As to the impact of the British decision concerning Singapore and Malaysia, you and I have shared our thoughts fully on this subject, and I realize that you will be at the center of discussions on new arrangements that may be required over the next few years to pick up the slack that British reductions, and eventual withdrawal at a later time, may leave. I realize that you face general questions of allocation and concentration arising from this situation, but I would hope that these problems need not affect a decision of the scale I have suggested above. I need hardly point out that the Malaysia/Singapore defense problem, as it may exist by 1970 or thereafter, will be vitally affected by whether we have succeeded in achieving a favorable outcome in Viet-Nam.

Your letter shows once again that you are thinking the problem through to the fullest, and I am sure you will reach a constructive and responsible decision as you have always done in the past. I do only urge that you tackle the problem as rapidly as possible in our common interest and in order to keep the pressure on in Viet-Nam at this critical time.

As to the other matters you mention, I understand that Mr. McMahonʼs representatives have had fruitful meetings with our Treasury people, and we will do all we can to reach an early answer on this difficult problem. My special thanks to you for your word of sympathy on our difficult racial violence problem, as well as your kind words on the Forrestal losses. This has been a time of sadness and concern in many respects, but I need hardly assure you that our resolve to go forward in Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia will not be affected.

Finally, Messrs. Clifford and Taylor of course discussed with you the question of a summit meeting some time this fall, a matter which you and I have gone over frequently. The consensus they found in all capitals was in the direction of a meeting, arranged at Asian initiative and in an Asian setting, at some time after the South Vietnamese elections have been held and the new government has been created.

I want to ask you frankly what your own timing factors are with respect to possible dates from late October onward. Within the past week, the Assembly elections in South Viet-Nam have been moved from October 11 to October 22, and the new government will probably have inauguration ceremonies on November 1. This seems to make it most doubtful that we could have a useful summit before November at the earliest. Marcos has elections on November 14, and at the same time we have a long-planned and important visit by Prime Minister Sato of Japan.

I therefore lean to the latter half of November. From your standpoint, I particularly wonder whether you will be affected by your senatorial elections, which I understand come in early December. Are there dates that would be more or less convenient, or even impossible, for you from the standpoint of these domestic factors?

With my warm regards, and again my thanks for your full and frank letter.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson”

2. Signed original being pouched.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The text of this message was received from the White House.

2 See footnote 2, Document 27.

29. Memorandum of Conversation 29. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 9, 1967.

SUBJECT

Minister Hasluckʼs Appointment with Secretary Rusk

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. P.M.C. Hasluck, Minister of External Affairs, Australia

Ambassador Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Secretary Rusk

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary/EA

1. Cambodia. Hasluck referred briefly to Australiaʼs difficulties with Cambodia, and the Secretary mentioned Mrs. Kennedyʼs forthcoming visit. There was no discussion in depth, but the Secretary did remark that it would be a major coup if Sihanouk were to change his position—much like a top-level defection from the Viet Cong side.

2. Future Planning for Malaysia and Singapore. Hasluck went into this subject at great length, making the following points. a. They were hoping that there could be an early meeting of all five nations, including the British. However, Wilson appeared doubtful, and it might boil down to just the four—Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, and New Zealand.

b. His thinking was to divide the problem into the short term and the long term, defining the latter as roughly beyond the next 5–6 years. One could not say at this point whether Vietnam would end before British withdrawal, or the reverse, so that there were difficult variables.

c. In the short term, he did not see any serious threats to Malaysia and Singapore. Nonetheless, it seemed clear that the Australians and New Zealanders should maintain their presence. This was the hope and expectation of Malaysia and Singapore, it was important to their morale, it provided a base from which Australia and New Zealand could help develop the self-defense capacity of the two nations, and above all, there was the factor that if Australia and New Zealand pulled out, it would be very difficult to go back later.

d. For the long term, the security of Malaysia and Singapore must be seen as a part of the security of the whole of Southeast Asia, and could be greatly affected by the over-all situation. Subject to this comment, Hasluck raised the following questions: (1) Australiaʼs role was clearly important, but Australia was not in a position to assume the full burden the British had taken. What was the true Australian/New Zealand role?

(2) Australia had just made the decision to extend $20 million in military aid. What else could be expected of the British? Hasluck said they hoped to find out. At any rate, the objective should be to develop effective self-defense by the two countries as soon as possible.

(3) The present Australia/New Zealand presence was a battalion, a battery, and naval patrol vessels on the Australian side, but the New Zealanders were reducing their battalion to make their Vietnam contribution and might go as low as a company. These totals might be enough for now, but it was possible that M/S would question them.

(4) If a significant build-up were ever required, where would the logistic support come from? Hasluck noted that they were now depend-ent on the British, and by implication he seemed to be raising the possibility of future logistic ties with us.

(5) Continued deployment of Australian and New Zealand forces necessarily involved a US factor in that the ANZUS Treaty covered forces of the parties in the Treaty area, which included Malaysia and Singapore. ANZUS must be kept alive, but the fact that the Treaty did apply should not be hammered in public. They were searching for a formula that would indicate that continued deployments were undertaken “in consultation and with the full understanding of the US.” This might be enough to persuade Australians that ANZUS had not been overlooked, but would not be so blunt as to raise question in our Senate. The Secretary noted the problem without attempting to come to grips with the precise formula required.

(6) The Australians and New Zealanders must have freedom to move, re-deploy, or even withdraw their forces.

(7) Indonesia was showing itself sensitive.

(8) The integrity of SEATO must be maintained.

3. The Secretaryʼs Response. The Secretary responded that the subject seemed to call for quiet talks between the Australians and ourselves, which we would welcome. He noted that there were several questions that might be added. For example, what was the “real time” requirement for decision-making? The British had insisted on making some decisions well before they seemed to be required. Secondly, what was the actual British schedule for reduction and withdrawal? Moreover, was there merit in urging the British at some point to maintain a commitment in the area even though their forces were physically withdrawn?

Thirdly, what were the real threats against which one was acting? We must in any event do all we could to bring ASEAN along and make the Indonesian threat less likely. If China was regarded as the threat, then SEATO was the first line of defense.

Fourthly, the Secretary noted that we ourselves had no thought of changing the existing treaty structure in the area. The possibility might arise if the Asians sought a consolidation of our existing commitments, but he was very skeptical that the Congress would react favorably to anything new or different. As to ANZUS, he agreed with Hasluck that it applied to Australian and New Zealand forces, but hoped that this would not be mentioned in so many words.

4. Hasluck concluded by saying that they faced an immediate decision whether to indicate that they were in fact staying. He thought they should do so. The Secretary concurred, noting that the decision should be couched in terms of staying “with the British” and under existing arrangements.” Hasluck appeared to agree.

Secondly, Hasluck thought they must go ahead with the kind of meeting that the Tunku wanted—with all five nations if possible but without the British if necessary. The Secretary suggested the possibility of meeting the Indonesian concerns by actually inviting an Indonesian observer. Hasluck said he would like to think that one over, since it was very important to keep up the picture that the invitation came from the Tunku. He thought it might be possible to talk to the Indonesians and tell them they would be kept informed.

The conversation then adjourned for lunch, and the topic was not further pursued in substance.2 However, Hasluck said he would shortly give us a memorandum on the problem,3 to serve as the basis for quiet talks by Ambassador Waller with us in Washington.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by John P. Walsh, Deputy Executive Secretary, on October 12. Hasluck was attending the UN General Assembly session in New York and visited Washington from there.

2  Hasluck also met with Under Secretary Katzenbach on October 12, and they discussed Vietnam. (Memorandum of conversation, October 12; ibid., POL 7 AUSTL)

3 See the attachment to Document 32.

30. Memorandum of Conversation 30. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10, 1967, 3:45–4:45 p.m.

I–26102/67

SUBJECT

Visit of Australian Minister of External Affairs, Paul Hasluck

PARTICIPANTS

United States Side Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—Paul Warnke

Staff Officer for Southwest Pacific (ISA)—Donald Nuechterlein

Australian Side Minister of External Affairs—Paul Hasluck

Ambassador to the United States—Keith Waller

1. Australian Forces in Malaysia/Singapore: Mr. Hasluck gave the Secretary a copy of a memorandum he had presented to Secretary Rusk on 9 October concerning an Australian Cabinet discussion of the status of Australian forces in Malaysia and Singapore, following the British withdrawal of their forces.2 Prime Minister Holt plans to make a public announcement during the next two months of the GOAʼs decision, he said, and the U.S. attitude on this matter is an important factor in the decision. Mr. Hasluck added that this was a very sensitive matter and requested that it be “closely held.”

After reading the memorandum, the Secretary commented that it raised a number of complicated questions which would have to be considered carefully within the USG.

Mr. Hasluck elaborated on the contents of the memorandum, stating that a key question is whether the ANZUS commitment would apply to Australian troops stationed in Malaysia and Singapore, if they remained after the British withdraw. His government needed to know whether the U.S. would consider these troops to be covered by ANZUS, were they ever to get into difficulties there. It will be particularly important to know the USG position before Australia discusses defense arrangements with its Commonwealth partners early next year. Australia will also need to determine whether, and on what conditions, Singapore and Malaysia would permit Australian forces to remain on their territory, and particularly whether they could be used in support of SEATO commitments, such as Vietnam.

An understanding with the U.S. is more important for the longer term than in the short run. Mr. Hasluck assumed that the U.S. would maintain a military capability in Thailand after the Vietnam war ended and he did not, therefore, anticipate a threat of attack from the North. However, there is the possibility that insurgency may occur again in Malaysia. There is also the possibility that Indonesia may again become a threat to Malaysiaʼs or Singaporeʼs security, and this contingency requires some planning. Mr. Hasluck did not consider this a strong possibility nor did he want to antagonize the Indonesian Government in any way; but he felt that this question must be taken into account if Australia is to assume a long-term commitment to remain in Malaysia/Singapore, after the British depart. He mentioned that Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore would be in Washington the following week and probably would like to know what are U.S. intentions. He assumed that neither the U.S. nor Singapore would want to make any defense commitments, but he thought that the U.S. and Australia should consult and work out some arrangement that would be satisfactory to all concerned.

Secretary McNamara replied that he had two major questions about this matter: 1. What are the intentions of the governments of Malaysia and Singapore regarding the withdrawal of British forces? Neither government seems to be worried about this prospect, he said, and neither has approached the U.S. on the matter. 2. How do the British plan to fulfill their SEATO commitments after they pull out their forces? Where will they base their F–111s in the future? The Secretary felt it would be very helpful if Australia and New Zealand could get answers to these questions in the five-power talks that are scheduled for early next year and let us know. In the meantime, we can study the matter within the USG and see what our own position might be. In response to Mr. Hasluckʼs point that the British prefer not to participate in five-nation talks, Mr. McNamara said perhaps it was possible for Australia to have the discussions in two stages, first with the governments of Malaysia and Singapore, and then with the British. However these talks are arranged, it is clear that the U.S. will need to have a better idea than we now have about how the Commonwealth nations themselves wish to proceed on future security arrangements for Malaysia/Singapore.

Mr. Hasluck said that Ambassador Waller had been designated to follow up on these matters and he hoped that we would be able to provide some guidance regarding the U.S. position before Prime Minister Holt makes his public announcement, in four to eight weeks, about the GOAʼs position in Malaysia/Singapore.

The Secretary said we would be glad to talk with the Ambassador further about this matter.

Mr. McNamara asked Mr. Hasluck what he thought about future use of commercial ship and aircraft repair facilities in Singapore. Mr. Hasluck said this matter had not been discussed by his government.

2. Additional Forces for Vietnam: The Secretary said he was delighted at the Cabinetʼs decision to send additional ground forces to SVN and asked when the announcement would be made. The Foreign Minister expected the Prime Minister to make a statement in parliament on 17 October. (The size of the additional force was not mentioned.) He added that nearly all available Australian ground troops would have to be used to carry out this additional commitment, but the Cabinet felt it could be done without calling up reserves. Mr. Hasluck mentioned that he understood Mr. McMahon (Treasurer) had discussed Australian financial problems with the Secretary last week.3 Mr. McNamara indicated that he appreciated the GOAʼs financial situation and the problem of its defense budget; he thought it might be necessary to defer expenditures on ships and aircraft, in order to provide for the additional ground forces. In response to Mr. Hasluckʼs query regarding the reaction of other governments to the Presidentʼs appeal for additional forces, the Secretary said we were hopeful that Thailand would make an announcement in the next two to three weeks and that Korea would be able to do so later on. The Secretary felt that additional forces from the Australians, Thais and Koreans would have a very beneficial impact in the U.S.

3. Summit Conference: Mr. Hasluck asked about the prospects for a new summit conference among the troop-contributing nations. The Secretary replied that there was nothing definite so far as he knew, but that this was a matter for the Secretary of State to handle. His personal feeling was that such a conference should be held only if it would be clearly productive. He felt that the public impact in the U.S. would be an important factor to take into account.

4. Situation in Vietnam: The Australian Foreign Minister asked about the outlook in Vietnam. Secretary McNamara said it was about the same as last April when Mr. Hasluck last visited him, although he felt there was good progress on the military side. The North Vietnamese had committed a large force to battle along the DMZ, perhaps because it wished to shorten its supply lines, and the enemy had suffered heavy casualties. Its forces had withdrawn within the past ten days, but it was not clear why or for how long. The U.S. plans to put more troops into this area, he said, to insure the security of the northern provinces. Pacification is going very slowly, however. The Secretary felt that enough progress was being made in Vietnam so that, given time, the war would be brought to a successful conclusion. The big question, he said, was whether there was sufficient patience and firmness at home to see the situation through.

Mr. Hasluck asked about the barrier along the DMZ, and the Secretary gave him a detailed explanation of the deployment and nature of the detection system. He indicated that the first part of the plan would become operational in January 1968.

5. U.S. Public Reactions: Mr. Hasluck asked about the pressures in the U.S. to stop the bombing. The Secretary cited pressures on both sides—for more bombing, and for less or no bombing. He said there is no question that the bombing is hurting North Vietnam, but it does not appear that it can force Hanoi to negotiate an end to the war. He noted that if the bombing were stopped and nothing concrete happened as a result, it might be very difficult to resume the bombing.

Mr. Hasluck said his government supported the present level of bombing and believed there should be no halt in it until we had a clear indication that something concrete would result from Hanoi. He then asked whether U.S. public pressures would change our policy. Mr. McNamara said this question was best answered by the President, but that it was clear the war was becoming increasingly unpopular with the U.S. public. The big question was whether the President could keep enough support in an election year to see the war through to a successful conclusion. He indicated that it would not be necessary to call up reserves and that, from a financial point of view, the U.S. could well afford to continue the war without significant strains on its economy.

6. Soviet Reactions: The Australian Minister wondered whether the build-up of U.S. forces in Southeast Asia, the large investment in installations and the excellent experience U.S. forces were getting would cause the Soviets to worry about an alteration in the balance of power in Asia. The Secretary replied that we had no indication the Russians were worried about their own security, that they probably understood that the increasing U.S. power was directed against Peking, not against them. He felt we had a far greater capability to cope with any military contingency in the Far East now than we had two years ago. In answer to Mr. Hasluckʼs question as to whether Congress would be willing to have the U.S. forces pull out of the bases we had built on the mainland, the Secretary said Congress would have no problem about withdrawing from installations; Congress would not, however, be willing to have South Vietnam turned over to the Communists. Hanoi may not believe that the U.S. seriously intends to withdraw its forces from the South, he said, but this is our policy, if we can insure that the South will not be taken over by the North.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, Australia, 333. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Nuechterlein on October 26 and approved by Warnke on October 23. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office.

2 See the attachment to Document 32.

3 As recorded in an October 3 memorandum of conversation, I–26044/67. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, Australia, 333)

31. Memorandum of Conversation 31. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10, 1967.

SUBJECT

Call Upon the President by Australian Foreign Minister

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Robert W. Barnett, Deputy Assistant Secretary (EA)

Paul Hasluck, Australian Foreign Minister

John K. Waller, Australian Ambassador

The President said to Mr. Hasluck that he was running into some real difficulties on Viet-Nam. Recent developments in the Senate made it impossible for him to just go ahead on the present basis. He had received Prime Minister Holtʼs message on Malaysia and Viet-Nam,2 but what Canberra envisaged doing was not enough. The President observed that the U.S. was three times as far from the Viet-Nam battlefront as was Australia and was only fifteen times its size. If our effort in Viet-Nam was proportional to the present Australian commitment, we would have no more than 100,000 men there. In the Senate and elsewhere there is an increasingly strong insistence that threatened countries in the area, including Australia, must do much more if we are to consider justifiable a situation in which 600,000 of our boys are in the battle area and we are devoting $30 billion to their support. The President outlined what he believes should be the goals for increase in contributions by Australia, Thailand, Korea, the Philippines and others. He spoke of the inadequacy of Malaysian performance even in the field of the kinds of training that the Tunku had told him Malaysia could offer.

Mr. Hasluck observed that the U.S. commitment of resources to Viet-Nam could only be understood if it was acknowledged that great people were obliged to bear great responsibilities. He said that Prime Minister Holtʼs offer of additional military help was the maximum possible without new legislation, including that legislation needed to amend the National Service Act. The Prime Minister wanted to do something promptly and effectively within present national capabilities and had done so.

The President stated his belief that Prime Minister Holt, Sir Robert Menzies and Foreign Minister Hasluck himself should consider how they could go to the people in Europe, in the United Nations and elsewhere with answers to the question “Why Viet-Nam?” The President said that answers to questions revolving around the central issue were easy for him to provide. We are in Viet-Nam to stop naked aggression and make it possible for people to live, free. We support the military government in Saigon confident that democracy was making progress there, and that in no time in history had so much progress been made as over the past year towards establishment of democratic institutions and processes. The South Vietnamese were doing their share of the fighting. Their combat forces are suffering high casualties. We were prepared to stop the bombing when the North Vietnamese show any evidence of readiness to reciprocate. North Vietnamese mortars are raining destruction from the DMZ and bombing is a way to stop it. As to our readiness to negotiate, Thieu, Prime Minister Holt and the U.S. Government have all said and continue saying that we will meet tomorrow anywhere if we can have a real discussion. We are ready to respect and to return to compliance with the Geneva Accords. The President said that all countries in the line of forward march of the Communist aggressors should understand these points. But these points could not be made too often. Mr. Hasluck said that he intended to say almost all of this next Friday when he addressed the United Nations, and, in addition, he would draw some analogies between Viet-Nam and the issue at stake when aggression was not stopped in Europe.

The President and Mr. Hasluck exchanged views about the forthcoming Senate elections in Australia and their possible implications for the ability of the government to pursue present policies.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret. Drafted by Barnett and approved by the White House on October 17. The meeting lasted from 6:04 to 6:50 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) Executive Secretary Read sent Rostow an October 9 briefing memorandum for the Presidentʼs meeting with Hasluck, which had as attachments suggested talking points and a position paper on U.K. withdrawal from Malaysia/Singapore. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL)

2 According to the October 9 briefing memorandum from Read to Rostow, Holt informed Johnson in an October 6 letter that Australia would augment its forces in Vietnam by 1,700 men before the end of the year. The forces would include an extra infantry battalion with helicopter support, a tank squadron, extra helicopters and pilots, extra engineer capacity, ten Skyhawk pilots and Skyhawk maintenance personnel. Holt planned to announce these plans to the Australian Parliament on October 17. (Ibid.)

32. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 32. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Washington, October 13, 1967.

I–36036/67

SUBJECT

Australian Request for Consultations Regarding Future Security Arrangements in Malaysia/Singapore

On 10 October 1967 the Australian Minister for External Affairs, Paul Hasluck, called on the Secretary of Defense2 and presented him with a paper entitled “Memorandum on the Defence of Malaysia” (copy enclosed). This document has also been given to the Secretary of State. Mr. Hasluck stated that Prime Minister Holt wished to make a statement in Parliament during the next four to eight weeks on his governmentʼs intentions regarding Australian forces in Malaysia and Singapore, following the British withdrawal. Prime Minister Holt desires to know, before making this statement, to what extent the United States would be prepared to support Australia if it decides to retain its military presence in this area after the British depart.

In order that the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense may be in a position to respond to the Australian Governmentʼs request for consultations on this matter, it is requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff provide the Secretary of Defense with their views and recommendations concerning strategic/military implications of the Australian Foreign Ministerʼs memorandum. In formulating these recommendations, it is requested that attention be given to the following additional questions: 1. What is the strategic importance of the Malacca Strait area to the United States?

2. What are the principal advantages and disadvantages, from a military point of view, of the U.S. encouraging Australia and New Zealand to assume primary responsibility for the security of Malaysia and Singapore after the British withdraw?

3. To what extent could the U.S. military services make use of military facilities in Singapore and Malaysia, if these facilities were under Australian/New Zealand control, following the British withdrawal, and if it were determined to be in the U.S. interest to make use of such facilities?

In view of the Australian Ministerʼs request to the Secretary that this matter be “closely held”, it is requested that special care be taken to restrict dissemination of the enclosed memorandum. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are desired by 6 November 1967.

Paul C. Warnke 3

Attachment

Washington, October 9, 1967.

Memorandum on the Defence of Malaysia by the Australian Minister for External Affairs

A

Regional security needs to be a total security stretching from Korea to the Indian Ocean. Hitherto the United Statesʼ guarantees have formed a line as far as Thailand and the British have guaranteed the security of Malaysia and Singapore.

The new situation with which we have to deal has two different timetables: (a) Before and after the total British withdrawal in the mid-seventies.

(b) Before and after the end of hostilities in Vietnam.

We do not know whether these two timetables will coincide or whether we have to make suppositions about further variations on them.

Broadly, we can talk of the “short-term” problem and the “long-term” problem in Malaysia and Singapore but these phrases at present can mean little more than “in the next few years” (say four, five or six) and “afterwards”.

B

In the short-term the military need in Malaysia and Singapore may not be great and no immediate threat from outside (except possibly insurgency from the Communist remnant in southern Thailand) can be seen. But the argument for a continuing Australian presence in Malaysia is strong.

(a) Malaysia and Singapore expect something from us.

(b) Morale, both in these countries and surrounding countries, needs to be maintained.

(c) A continuing presence may assist the effective development of self-defence capacity by Malaysia and Singapore.

(d) Once we went out we would probably be out for good and it would certainly be harder to get back in the event of an emergency.

C

In the long-term the general case for maintaining a presence in Malaysia is the same as the case for maintaining a guaranteed security in other parts of the region and the one cannot be separated from the other. It would be hard for us to stay in Malaysia as the only white-faced troops on the mainland and it would be equally hard for the United States to stay in other parts of Asia, even though the need existed, if we had pulled out of Malaysia.

The decisions both our governments make on any phase of regional security are intertwined. At this stage we seek consultation. We need understanding rather than commitments but, without these necessary understandings at this stage, difficulties could arise.

D

Among the questions we raise for discussion are the following: 1. Australia believes it is important for us to stay in Malaysia, but we certainly are unable to take over British responsibility or to replace Britain. We can only develop our own role (side by side, we hope, with New Zealand) up to the limits of our capacity, having regard to other commitments. What is to be that role? Does the United States agree that we should develop such a role?

2. Australia has already decided and announced a decision to give defence aid of $20 million (Australian) to encourage the development of Malaysian and Singapore defence over the next three years ($16 million to Malaysia and $4 million to Singapore). What else will be available (e.g. from Britain) either for economic assistance or for defence?

3. Australia has not yet made a final decision on its own military presence but the scale of this support will probably be of the same order as the present forces (a battalion, plus an A/A battery, plus some aircraft and a naval presence). New Zealand also has not made a decision but the indications are that their battalion, which has already been drawn upon for the Vietnam contingent, may be further reduced. In the short-term is this sufficient?

4. In the event of the need for any build-up of forces or movement and supply of larger numbers of forces, problems of logistic support may arise. Hitherto there has been some dependence on the British. Will there be a need for other logistic support?

5. In the event of hostilities or (in prospect of an increased threat) in the event of building up and movement of forces to meet such a threat, the question of the ANZUS commitment will arise. It has been our tacit understanding that Australia should not place herself in positions in which the ANZUS commitment might be involved without consulting the United States and that the United States will indicate its own views of how the commitment applies. Do we need to have further understandings about the ANZUS commitment if Australia and New Zealand stay in Malaysia? Both of our countries have political difficulties to face. When the Australian Prime Minister announced an intention to stay in Malaysia he would be likely to meet questions about the position under ANZUS. On the other hand, at the present juncture, there would be difficulties for the United States Administration in Congress if it were to declare another commitment overseas. Can we consult on finding a suitable formula to express our understanding? The Australian Government would want to be able to reassure Parliament that in entering into commitments we had full understanding from the United States Government.

6. The Malaysians and the Singaporeans may seek some assurance or guarantees from us or set conditions on our continued presence in their territory. Our presence there now is only covered by a letter from the Australian Government associating itself with the Anglo-Malaysian Defence Agreement. (This will give a legal basis to our presence there until about 1970.) At present, with most of our own forces engaged in Vietnam, it would be hard for Australia to give any assurances or guarantees that relied for performance on our own resources.

7. In any arrangement made with Malaysia and Singapore for retaining our forces there we would certainly hope to be able to commit the same forces to SEATO plans in Thailand without forfeiting the right to return.

8. The matters mentioned in paragraphs 6 and 7 have been brought under notice at this stage because they may be raised in the five-power (or four-power) talks the Tunku has proposed to the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. The Australian Government is still examining questions that will arise if any proposal is made for a defence agreement with us, but one consideration that weighs with us is that, at this stage, while we want to stay in Malaysia we should keep open our options for the future. Has the United States any comments to make on such a subject?

9. In all matters relating to defence aid to Malaysia we have the current diplomatic problem of handling Indonesia. We want to maintain good relations; we do not want to alarm them or give an impression that we are arming Malaysia against them; and we hope that they would see any decision as a necessary part of the answer to Chinese expansion. We would also wish to build a road towards future co-operation with Indonesia for mutual security, even though the realisation of that hope may at present seem remote. If our hopes that Indonesia will follow peaceful courses are not realised we need to have some defensive or deterrent capacity.

In summary we want: (a) As much British defence effort in the East as can be contrived—but we are not optimistic.

(b) Effective Malaysian and Singaporean self-defence, as early as possible. This [portion of text missing] Malaysia and Singapore. Our confidence is qualified by many doubts.

(c) To maintain the credibility of SEATO (i) to reassure Thailand;

(ii) to give U.S. President the freedom of action that a treaty gives;

(iii) to give ourselves a legal basis for being in Asia.

(d) To keep ANZUS alive as the principal guarantee of Australiaʼs own security.

Hence

(e) The closest possible understanding with U.S.A. on all matters affecting a continued American interest and presence in the region.

We need to know: (a) More details about British intentions, plans and capacity in respect of (i) the run down in Malaysia and Singapore;

(ii) aid to Malaysia and Singapore as promised;

(iii) the honouring of their commitments both under SEATO and the Anglo-Malaysian Defence Agreement.

(b) More specific information about Malaysian and Singapore proposals in respect of (i) the relationships to each other;

(ii) their self-defence preparations;

(iii) their willingness to give some sort of legal basis to our own defence and

(iv) their attitudes to the U.S.A.

(c) Further indications of American thinking both in the period before the ending of hostilities in Vietnam and after the ending of hostilities, recognising of course that what happens after that point of time depends on the way in which hostilities end.

Throughout all these discussions there arises the question of the timing of successive moves.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4919, 381 Malaysia, 1967. Top Secret. Drafted by Nuechterlein on October 12.

2 See Document 30.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Warnke signed the original.

33. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 33. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, November 8, 1967.

JCSM–614–67

SUBJECT

Australian Request for Consultations Regarding Future Security Arrangements in Malaysia/Singapore (S)

1. (S) Reference is made to a memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA), I–36036/67, dated 13 October 1967,2 which requested the views and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concerning the strategic/military implications of a memorandum furnished to you by the Australian Minister for External Affairs, dated 10 October 1967.3 In formulating their recommendations, the Joint Chiefs of Staff also gave attention to the additional questions posed in the reference.

2. (TS) The strategic importance of the Malacca Strait area derives from its controlling position with respect to passage between the Pacific and Indian Oceans and its proximity to the western approaches to Southeast Asia through Thailand. Freedom to transit the Malacca and Sunda Straits, both of which can be controlled effectively from the Malaysian/Singapore area, is axiomatic in principle and necessary in practice. Continuation of the present high volume of military and commercial transits would require circumnavigation of the Indonesian Archipelago if control of the Straits areas were denied the United States or its allies. Such a detour of over 2,000 miles would be comparable to placing an additional ocean, the size of the Atlantic, in the path of seaborne traffic.

3. (TS) The US strategic/military interests would be adversely affected if Australia, following the United Kingdom withdrawal from Malaysia/Singapore, decided not to maintain a military presence in those countries. The United States should: a. Support a continuing Australian/New Zealand presence in Malaysia and Singapore now and following the announced British withdrawal from the area and encourage Australia to develop a leading role in the area.

b. Support Australian and New Zealand participation in a regional security arrangement.

c. Reassure Australia that the terms of the ANZUS Treaty apply to Australian/New Zealand Armed Forces, public vessels, and aircraft in Malaysia/Singapore.

d. Continue to encourage the United Kingdom to retain some military forces in the Malaysia/Singapore area.

e. Not assume any of the current UK treaty commitments to Malaysia and Singapore, and avoid stationing US forces in Malaysia and Singapore.

4. (U) A detailed consideration of questions raised in the memorandum by the Australian Minister for External Affairs is contained in Appendix A.4 Answers to the additional questions contained in the memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) are in Appendix B.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
J.O. Cobb
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2467, Malaysia 381, 1967. Top Secret. A stamped note on the source text indicates that McNamaraʼs Special Assistant saw this memorandum.

2  Document 32.

3 See the enclosure to Document 32.

4 Neither appendix is printed.

34. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Holyoake 34. Notes on Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Holyoake 1

Canberra, December 21, 1967.

Notes on Conversation with Prime Minister Holyoake of New Zealand 9:30 a.m., Thursday, December 21, 1967, Canberra, Australia

1. Holyoake suggested (I think) that he would put a New Zealand frigate to work with our naval forces in Viet-nam.2

2. His major concern was whether the President intended to widen the war. Specifically, he asked about Haiphong. The President answered that he had no intention to mine Haiphong. He wished to keep the war from getting wider. Equally, he was against our pulling out. The only option was to keep pressure on roughly within recent limits.

With respect to Cambodia, President said this was a serious problem; was hopeful ICC could do more if helicopters were accepted.

Holyoake expressed himself strongly against hot pursuit, saying there was problem as to how far you go. If you penetrate shallowly, they set up camps further back. You are led on and on.

There was a little byplay about New Zealand exports, with Holyoake pointing out that U.S. exports are only 3% of GNP whereas New Zealandʼs were 25% of GNP. But Holyoake did not press the matter hard.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453, CF 253. No classification marking. The notes were taken by Rostow.

2 When Holyoakeʼs Cabinet learned of the “promise of a frigate” it took exception. Holyoake explained that he “did not ʼpromiseʼ a frigate, but only mentioned it as the kind of assistance that New Zealand might be able to give, in lieu of more troops.” Rostow informed Johnson that he suspected that Holyoake “got out ahead of his Cabinet colleagues” and was now playing the “Cabinet game of ʼfirst among equals.ʼ” Rostow stated “I think we can count on the frigate after Holyoake has taken care of his housekeeping.” (Telegram CAP 671217 from Rostow to Johnson, December 28; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (3) Allies: Troop Commitments; Other Aid)

35. Memorandum of Conversation 35. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, December 21, 1967, 11:13 a.m.

Meeting of the President With the Australian Cabinet 11:13 a.m., December 21, 1967, Cabinet Room, Canberra

Prime Minister McEwen opened by saying that he wished that we were meeting under happier circumstances.2 Nevertheless, he, the rest of the Cabinet, and all the Australian people were profoundly grateful to the President for taking this arduous journey on this occasion. It was an act of true greatness on the part of the President. He was likewise grateful to the British Prime Minister and others who had come.

The presence of the President, the Prime Minister and others was an indication that Harold Holt had made his mark on the world. He wished to note that the Presidentʼs message to Mrs. Holt and the family had comforted them greatly.

Harold Holt was a warmhearted, generous man. He was seen by his own countrymen as a “typical Australian.” There was no higher praise. His country had been proud of him. He dealt around the world with other heads of government as his peers and was accepted as such. There was more than mutural regard here. He demonstrated that, although he was a leader of a small country, he and that country were being taken to peopleʼs hearts.

Moreover, he took firm positions on the great issues of his time. Be in no doubt whatsoever: the new government will carry forward the policies that Harold Holt had initiated. They will stand with the U.S. in Vietnam right through to the end. They do not seek a crushing victory over the North Vietnamese or the VC, but we have set out to frustrate an effort to enslave a nation. We shall make sure that nation can stand on its own feet. That is the Australian attitude and policy from which they shall not be deflected. Australia shall continue to pursue the development of understanding relations with all these Asian countries. We are learning to trust them. They are learning to trust us. Thus Australia will continue to play its part along with the U.S. in the great constructive task of building a new Asia.

President Johnson. The President thanked the Prime Minister for the beauty, generosity, and eloquence of his expression. He said it meant a great deal. It was a privilege to sit at this table again.

He was here in Australia because he wanted to be here; and he simply could not be anywhere else. A representative of the television network asked him a few days before what drew the President to Harold Holt. He answered: He was drawn to him because he was an Australian—a man of character and tenacity, generosity and toughness, and a man of brotherly love.

Out of his whole experience with Australians, he must assume that there are bad Australians, but he had never met one. With Australians you never need develop a crick in your neck to see if they are behind you. They are either beside you or out in front of you. They crease their hat a little differently and have a slightly different accent, but I regard them as my people. Now the Australians are showing courage in taking sacrifice to prevent a little, independent country from being gobbled up. The Australian effort in Vietnam has our admiration and gratitude. The Australians show stability in the face of a great challenge—a great confrontation.

Even before be met Harold Holt, an Australian had represented him at Commonwealth meeting—Sir Robert Menzies. Before he went to one of these meetings, Menzies had asked what could I say on your behalf. I outlined our views. In fact, he went even further in defending our position than I had suggested.

There really is a special quality to the U.S.-Australian relationship. We do feel instinctively the same way about problems. It is reflected in the attitude of our boys in Vietnam. When they are asked where they wish to go for rest and rehabilitation, Australia emerges universally as their first preference. That was the way it was as the President himself knew during Second World War.

Our economic interests occasionally conflict. But we mange to stay reasonably close together in these matters on a live and let live basis.

His last memory of Harold Holt was of Holt stretched out in the sun at Camp David, after taking a swim, calling back to his colleagues charged with economic affairs in Canberra to work out amicably some difficult problems.

I know where you are this morning. Four years ago we faced this kind of moment when President Kennedy was killed. Permit me to say this: Now is the time for you to live together and work together by the Golden Rule. Donʼt shoot from the hip. Donʼt divide up the family firm.

I kept the Kennedy cabinet. None has been fired. Many have stayed right down to the present. In adversity a family gets together. That is why I am here.

I remember well that I once called at the hospital to see my father who was then under an oxygen tent. He said, get me my britches, I am going home. When we argued against him, he said. “I want to be home where they know when you are sick and care when you die.” That is the way it is between us.

In these days ahead you will find the U.S. will stretch a little in the face of Australian problems to make it easier for you.

I remember when Harold Holt said be would go “all the way with LBJ.” I could see that was a slogan which might get him into political trouble—it might be misunderstood or even a disaster for him. Harold simply shrugged. I tried then to interpret it as meaning that the U.S. would go all the way with Australia.

Australia is one of the principal reasons that we have committed our power so fully in this part of the world. The U.S. could probably survive even if Southeast Asia were lost to the Communists. Perhaps the others there might not be wholly necessary for U.S security interests. But, if we are going to keep our ANZUS commitments, we must keep our alliances with others.

We have taken a hundred thousand casualties in South Vietnam, including the wounded. Hundreds of dead, thousands of wounded every month. But I am convinced in the long run this is the lesser cost. We would face a bigger war. It is better to stop this aggression at the takeoff than at the landing.

The purpose of an alliance is to make sure that if dictators start going after small countries, they will face the U.S. That is the kind of commitment we have to New Zealand and Australia, the Middle East and Europe and Latin America. Whether these commitments are right or wrong, we have them. I intend to honor them. With this kind of burden, it is good to find someone to stand up beside you. I want to thank you for your help in Vietnam. I want to thank you for your sturdy position in the face of British devaluation and your assistance in defending the dollar. The protection of our international monetary system, which is based on the dollar, is a serious matter, but somehow we shall cope with it. I shall be recommending measures next week which I almost shudder to mention here. But the speculator shall not prevail.

I want to thank you also for what Australia is doing for our boys; taking them into your homes; treating them like your own. This is what you did also when I was here in the Second World War.

Whatever you do in sorting out your domestic politics—in whatever manner the people exercise their judgment, donʼt let it mix with foreign policy. Remember also that we in the U.S. are stretching out our hand in this period, not in a paternalistic way, but to be worthy of your friendship. We know that to have a friend one must be a friend.

We have been well served in this respect by Amb. Waller who was good enough to join us. It you have problems, let him know; he has the key to the front door and the back door of the White House. As for Ed and Ann Clark, I have been worried that he was going to run for political office—in Australia. He has been the best Australian Ambassador to the U.S. I have ever known—the most effective man in expressing Australian views and interests.

There are sad hours. I know that in being here I am doing what is right. I have come to pay my respects to a fallen friend. And, when the services are over, we will be able to raise our chins a bit higher knowing that no one can come between us.

The Prime Minister replied, whatever shake out there may be in the government, the President can be assured that there will be no change in the Australian attitude and policy towards the U.S. or in its foreign policy. The President should know that Australians are proud to be your friend and ally.

The President then reviewed the troop situation; the recent accelerated delivery of 10,000 men and 600 tons in 18 days. We shall have 102 of our 106 combat battalions in place by Christmas, others will come in the spring. We look forward to an extra division from Korea; an extra 10,000 from Thailand; the extra 65,000 from South Vietnam which will soon be debated in the Assembly. The enemy is building his forces in the South. We must try very hard to be ready. We may face dark days ahead.

The Prime Minister responded that they face a new situation in the light of the U.K. withdrawal and will sustain forces in Malaysia.

The President said that we will be responding to their thoughts on the problem of security in that area, but we are counting on their keeping their present forces in place. President went on to thank Australia for providing evidence to the Cambodians of Communist use of Cambodian soil. The pressure on us from that use may be more than we can put up with; although we agree with Hasluck that we must be cautious in this matter. But it is hard to see the troops forming up to re-attack; although we wish to keep the war from widening. We hope that Sihanouk will see the light. He didnʼt denounce us after we presented the evidence. Perhaps there is some room for diplomacy here. But we must constantly bear in mind that 2 more divisions from the North are coming down into South Vietnam. We must take this into account in our plans and in our thoughts.

Foreign Minister Hasluck said that the Australian policy with respect to Sihanouk was to remain quiet. Pay no attention to the unpleasant noises he might make. We were pleased to pass on information on your behalf, but thought it the part of wisdom for Australians not to be associated with it.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt W. Rostow, Australia and Round the World Trip, December 1967. Secret. Although there is no drafting information on the source text, a letter from William Bundy to Clark, December 30, indicates that this account was prepared by Rostow. (Ibid.)

2 On December 17 Prime Minister Harold Holt disappeared while swimming in the heavy surf at Portsea, Victoria. He was presumed drowned. President Johnson represented the United States at the memorial service in Melbourne on December 22. Prince Charles, accompanied by Prime Minister Wilson and Leader of the Opposition Heath, attended for Queen Elizabeth. Other foreign leaders attending were Presidents Marcos, Thieu, and Park, Prime Ministers Holyoake, Thanom, and Lee, and Deputy Prime Minister Tun Abzul Razak of Malaysia.

36. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 36. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 1

Canberra, April 6, 1968, 1200Z.

Secto 44. Eyes only for the President from the Secretary.

Following are the highlights of an extended talk I had with Prime Minister Gorton, a portion of which was attended by his Deputy Prime Minister McEwan, Foreign Minister Hasluck and Defense Minister Fairhall.

1. Gorton sent you his warm regards and expressed deep sympathy for the tragic burden thrown upon you and upon the United States by the assassination of Martin Luther King.

2. He expressed some question in his mind about whether a visit by him to Washington would be an intrusion upon you following your announcement not to be a candidate.2 I told him that I thought your announcement should not make any difference, that I knew that you were anxious to have a good talk with him and that I would discuss the matter further with you upon my return. He said that the tentative timing (sometime in the latter part of May) has been complicated somewhat by changes in the plans of Prime Minister Ghandiʼs visit to Australia.

3. I think our talk smoothed out any ruffled feathers he might have had about whether he was consulted in a timely fashion about your speech of last Sunday.3 I went into some detail about the decisions you faced about additional troops to Viet-Nam, the call-up of reserves and the need to demonstrate that Hanoi was the obstacle to peace rather than Washington. My impression is that his original irritation was due to (a) the fact that this was his first experience with a change in bombing patterns while it was at least your ninth and that the other chiefs of government have gotten used to the idea; (b) he himself was in New Zealand and was not informed until several hours after he might have been had he been in Canberra; (c) because of transmission procedures our Embassy in Canberra did not have a full official text which it could give the Prime Minister before he began hearing excerpts from it through the press, and (d) his opposition leader Whitlam tried to make the most out of the notion that the United States had adopted Whitlamʼs policy at the expense of the government.

4. Gorton made it clear that he knew that the United States was carrying the overwhelming part of the burden and that Australiaʼs contribution did not give him a license “to throw his weight around.” I think we can give special attention to bilateral consultation with the Australians that will remove any remaining shadow on that score.

5. I briefed him privately on the state of play in the Crocodile Series4 and he expressed satisfaction.

6. I raised with him the troop issue and told him that as a minimum Australia and New Zealand should put their heads together and round out their forces with additional support troops to take the place of Americans who were serving the ANZAC forces in a supporting role. Having checked with Sharp and Saigon I specifically mentioned artillery reinforcements and a truck company as examples. I pointed out that it is a serious burden for United States forces to have such a high percentage of its total manpower in Viet-Nam engaged in general logistic support to everyone elseʼs forces. He replied “I have heard what you said” but refused to make any commitment. I had already worked on the Foreign and Defense Ministers on the same point as well as on Keith Holyoake in New Zealand. Gorton thinks he has some political problems about increasing his forces but I pointed out that we all do. We will have to follow up on this further. The less said publicly about asking Australia for more troops the better chance we can get them.

7. I ran into strong reservations about the non-proliferation treaty ranging from basic misgivings about giving up the nuclear option to worries about the fear of limitations on development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.5 The general line of questioning was very similar to that we have heard from the Germans. I am taking up with the State Department the possibility of sending an expert technical man out to talk with their Atomic Energy Commission people on a good many points on which we ought to be able to satisfy them. I threw the book at them on the prospects in the event proliferation and pointed out that if Australia ever had to live next door to a nuclear armed Indonesia they would curse the day they refused to give up the nuclear option. There are elements in their Atomic Energy Commission and in their military who are raising the principal problems. Hasluck clearly thinks Australia should sign but my guess is that it will take some time before Australia gets around to that point.

8. The Australians are much preoccupied by the longer range results of the British withdrawal from Southeast Asia. Now that Harold Wilson has achieved his basic purpose of getting his own “little Englanders” to stand still for his far-reaching domestic economic measures, the Australians believe that we ought to press Wilson to back away from his announcement of withdrawal and think hard about further delays and a more significant presence than originally contemplated. I will follow up on this on my return.

9. I found Gorton helpful, friendly and staunch as reflected in Australiaʼs participation in the three conferences we held in New Zealand. But Gorton is a new Prime Minister, with a reputation as a lone wolf in political circles, and apparently inclined to reach snap judgments and personal conclusions before he has considered the full advice of his more experienced colleagues and his departments. He will take a bit of handling but sees the general situation in the Pacific and Australian national interests pretty much as did Holt.

I will have available a more detailed account of my talk with Gorton upon my return.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Rostow sent this telegram to the President on April 7 and there is an indication on the source text that the President saw the telegram. (Note from Rostow to Johnson, April 7; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Cables, 6/67–1/69.

2 In telegram 144251 to Canberra, April 9, Johnson responded that he hoped that Gorton could visit Washington in May 1968 and that Johnsonʼs recent announcement about his personal plans in no way diminished the need for close consultation. (Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US)

3 Johnson announced on March 31 that he would not be a candidate for reelection and he was limiting the bombing of North Vietnam. The text of the address is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–1969, Book I, pp. 469–476.

4 The code name for Harrimanʼs direct peace negotiations with North Vietnam.

5 Reported on more fully in Secto 43 from Canberra, April 6. (Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 68 D 182, CF 275)

37. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 37. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 25, 1968.

SUBJECT

Visit of Australian Prime Minister Gorton May 27–28

Attached is a memorandum from Secretary Rusk and the briefing book on this visit.2

I passed on to Ambassador Waller your hope that Gorton would attend the Rusk luncheon, and your intention to find a way to give the visit a tone of particular cordiality. As the schedule has shaped up, it may be rather difficult to do this. Your second meeting with Gorton is taking place at 11:30 a.m. on Tuesday. It cannot be a long visit because Gorton is due at the National Press Club at 12:15. You may have your own plan for giving the visit a public note of unusual cordiality, but if you want suggestions I have three, in ascending order of effectiveness.

1. You could “spontaneously” accompany Gorton to the luncheon at the State Department following your first meeting with him on Monday. This is not a public luncheon but your departure from the schedule would become known and attract some public comment.

2. You could “spontaneously” accompany Gorton to his speech at the National Press Club on Tuesday, introducing him with some warm words. This would, of course, get heavy press coverage.

3. If you go through with your tentative plans to go to the Ranch on Wednesday, you could have Gorton as a weekend guest. As it now stands, Gorton is due to start back to Australia on Friday afternoon after a heavy schedule in New York. He could instead fly to the Ranch, spend the weekend with you, and catch an Australian airline flight from San Francisco on Sunday, June 2, at 8:00 p.m. This, of course, would be by far the most effective way of dramatizing your special regard for Australia.

Gorton will have three main concerns: 1. Our political situation and its implications for our Asia policy. I suggest you review the situation fully, stressing that the facts do not warrant a conclusion that the U.S. is about to retreat from Asia.

2. The situation in Vietnam and Paris. He will expect a full exchange and has been very sensitive in the past about the need for full and prior consultation before we take any new departures. He will want to hear your thoughts about what to do if the talks continue to be unproductive, and your plans in regard to the bombing pause under the various contingencies.

Gorton has publicly ruled out any increases in Australian forces in Vietnam, barring some major change in the situation. (The Australians have about 8,000 men—three infantry battalions, an artillery battalion, one bomber squadron, two helicopter squadrons and a tank squadron.)

3. UK withdrawal from Malaysia-Singapore. Gorton seems to be backing away from the earlier Australian plan to maintain a force in Malaysia after the British withdrawal in 1971. He has talked publicly about the possibility of a “Fortress Australia” approach. He may press hard on the idea that Australia cannot undertake commitments in the Malaysia-Singapore area without a firm guarantee of U.S. support and protection under the ANZUS Treaty. I suggest you adhere to our previous line that: —we think a continued Australian military presence would be a valuable stabilizing factor;

—we realize questions about the application of ANZUS might arise in connection with such deployments;

—we would like to stay in close consultation about the matter;

—but we cannot give a blanket guarantee.

You should be aware that this whole problem may come to a head at the Five-Power Commonwealth meeting (UK, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, and Singapore) scheduled for Kuala Lumpur in June.

All of the above points are covered well and in more detail in Secretary Ruskʼs memo to you.

You might discuss with Gorton your plans for announcing an Ambassador to Australia.

A particular point of interest: Mrs. Gorton was born in Great Barrington, Massachusetts; grew up in Bangor, Maine; and still retains her American citizenship. She is dual national, also having Australian citizenship.

Gorton is a very different kind of fellow from Harold Holt. Rather than ruling by consensus with his Cabinet, Gorton is attempting to dominate his colleagues. He is also attempting to handle foreign and defense affairs directly from the Prime Ministerʼs office, cutting the External Affairs and Defense Ministers out. Thus it is that he is accompanied only by members of his personal staff.3

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Visit of Prime Minister Gorton, May 27–28, 1968. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw the memorandum.

2  Ruskʼs May 24 memorandum to the President is ibid., and the Department of State copy is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 AUSTL. The briefing book was attached to a May 2 memorandum from Read to Rostow, ibid.

3 The Embassy in Australia prepared an assessment of the Gorton government which concluded that it had internal problems despite its strong public support. Gorton was more likely than the late Prime Minister Holt to view issues narrowly in terms of Australiaʼs self interests. (Telegram 5576 from Canberra, May 13; ibid.; POL 15–1 AUSTL) The Embassy also prepared a list of anticipated topics for the visit. (Telegram 5575, May 13; ibid., POL 7 AUSTL)

38. Memorandum of Conversation 38. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 27, 1968, 12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Future Australian Role in Malaysia/Singapore Security

PARTICIPANTS

United States President Lyndon B. Johnson

Ambassador Angier Biddle Duke

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for East Asia and Pacific Affairs

William H. Crook, Ambassador-Designate to Australia

Samuel King, Assistant Chief of Protocol

Robert S. Lindquist, Country Director, Australia-New Zealand and Pacific Islands Affairs

Marshall Wright, National Security Council, Office of the President

Australia Prime Minister John G. Gorton

Sir Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Cyrus Hewitt, Secretary of the Prime Ministerʼs Department

The President said that in his just concluded private meeting with Prime Minister Gorton,2 the Prime Minister had raised certain questions about Australiaʼs future role in the security of the Malaysia/Singapore area in view of the projected withdrawal of U.K. military forces by 1971. The President asked Mr. Bundy to comment on this subject.

Mr. Bundy said that this problem, as we see it, divides into two time phases: (a) the period between now and December 1971, while U.K. forces remain in the area and (b) the period subsequent to December 1971, when removal of U.K. security forces will have been completed. Mr. Bundy noted that the U.K., Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand, the Commonwealth countries now participating in security arrangements for that area, will meet in Kuala Lumpur on June 10 and 11 to discuss arrangements for the future, such as the part to be played by the various countries, logistics, financial matters, etc. Our view of the period beyond December 1971 is that we do not feel that we can take on any additional commitment or responsibility for defense of the area, but we hope that Australia and New Zealand will be willing to maintain forces in the area in sufficient strength to sustain a required level of confidence in Malaysia and Singapore that will enable those countries to cooperate in greater contribution to their own defense. The situation after 1971 will depend in part, he said, on factors that are now hard to foresee with accuracy, such as the Indonesian attitude at that time and the situation to the north of Malaysia and Singapore. However, Australian willingness to maintain forces in Malaysia/Singapore will contribute very importantly to stability in that area and will be an earnest of Australian capacity to carry out its SEATO undertakings.

Prime Minister Gorton said he had assured the President that there is no question about Australian obligations in other parts of Asia. In Malaysia and Singapore, he foresaw no great difficulty in maintaining Australian forces to 1971, even though he does not expect much result from the Kuala Lumpur meeting because, as he put it, the U.K. will not lay its cards on the table. Malaysia and Singapore must increase their own efforts during this period and Australia will exert pressure on them to do this. Gorton said that it might be feasible for Australia to “maintain a presence” in Malaysia/Singapore after 1971, especially if the U.K. is prepared to enter into arrangements which will permit the continued availability of such facilities as air and naval installations. Such a “presence” might consist of air and naval units which would be mobile and easily shifted. As for ground forces, Gorton questioned what role a modest Australian ground contingent would perform. He said that Australian ground units can be deployed to the SEATO area from Australia in about the same time as from Malaysia/Singapore. He wondered if in the event of a serious contingency, such as “Indonesia going around the bend again,” Australian ground units might not be “out on a limb” without United States backing under ANZUS such as was worked out in 1963 during confrontation with Indonesia. Gorton said that an Australian ground contingent might be effective for local needs but certainly not in the case of subversion or invasion of the Viet-Nam type. In any event, he said, Australia did not want its forces involved in possible communal problems in Malaysia and Singapore.

Perhaps, Gorton speculated, it would be better for Australia to provide NCOʼs, training, etc. to Malaysia/Singapore rather than try to maintain ground units there. Resources thus saved could be used to build up defense forces in Australia which might be more effective in a larger contingency.

Mr. Bundy spoke again of the political/psychological aspect of the need, as we see it, for Australia to continue a military role after 1971. He said that this would provide a stabilizing presence and help deter any possible Indonesian adventure or prevent any threat that would invoke SEATO. It would concern us, Mr. Bundy said, if Australia were not there to carry out this stabilizing and reassuring presence. Mr. Bundy recognized the need for greater Malaysian and Singaporean contribution to their own defense and said that we have seen some signs that those governments want to increase their efforts. However, Malaysia, and to lesser extent Singapore, are in uncertain economic situations and may not be able to add substantially to their defense expenditures. This would have to be weighed carefully. Malaysia and Singapore are suspicious of each other and every effort must be made to avoid a local arms race that might take place as an excessive reaction to a prospect that Australia would not continue its security presence after 1971—an undertaking that in some respects could be termed a confidence operation.

Prime Minister Gorton said that he does not foreclose the possibility that Australia will continue a military presence in the Peninsula after 1971, but this is an option he wants to leave open for the time being.

Mr. Bundy said he believed that any Malaysian and Singaporean doubt that Australia would continue such a role would have a very negative effect. It would be a far-reaching psychological setback in the area if it were thought that Australia would pull back.

Prime Minister Gorton inquired how large a force might be necessary to maintain the desired psychological effect.

Mr. Bundy replied while this is a difficult question, a force of approximately the size of the Australian component of the present Commonwealth brigade would give evidence both of Australian ability to meet its SEATO commitment and of intent to provide greater military resources if needed.

Mr. Gorton said that the “more if needed” aspect is part of the problem as he sees it. He believes that so-called future “U.K. capability” will have little substance and he asked what value there would be in maintaining an Australian ability to reinforce its units in Malaysia/Singapore when it is well-known that the Australian capacity to reinforce is limited. Gorton asked if Prime Minister Lee would question the importance for Australia to maintain this capability. Referring to Mr. Bundyʼs mention of an arms race in the area, Gorton asked if we do not want Malaysia/Singapore to increase their own defense efforts.

Mr. Bundy responded that we believe Prime Minister Lee would consider it important for Australia to maintain the ability to send reinforcements to the area. We do wish Malaysia and Singapore to devote greater resources to defense, but we believe this should be done in consultation with each other and with others interested in security in the area, should be complementary and should be accomplished within the limits of economic ability. Without an Australian presence in the area, these objectives would be very difficult to obtain.

Prime Minister Gorton said that the U.K. has manned much of the logistic network in the region and that if Australia is to contribute significantly more to logistic arrangements after 1971, many more Australian troops will be needed to maintain a continuing level of operational effectiveness. He wondered why Malaysia/Singapore couldnʼt assume greater responsibility for logistics.

Mr. Bundy replied that this seemed a good subject to raise in the June meeting in Kuala Lumpur.

Prime Minister Gorton concluded by reiterating that Australia has no question or problem concerning its commitments and obligations outside the Malaysia/Singapore area.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret. Drafted by Robert S. Lindquist, Deputy Country Director for Australia and New Zealand, cleared by Bundy, and approved by the White House on June 3. The White House approval is indicated on the Department of State copy of this memorandum. (Department of State, Central Files, POL MALAYSIA–SINGAPORE) According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting, which was held at the White House, lasted until 1 p.m. when Gorton and Johnson went to the Oval Office for a picture-taking session. (Johnson Library)

2  Gorton and Johnson met privately in the West Hall of the White House from noon to 12:30 p.m. (Ibid., Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found.

3  Gorton joined a breakfast meeting with Johnson and his Vietnam advisors on May 28; a memorandum of this meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume VI. Johnson also met briefly with Gorton at 11:30 a.m. on May 28 (11:42 p.m. according to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, Johnson Library). During that meeting he encouraged Australia to participate in the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) based on the similarities of the economies of Australia and parts of Latin America. Australian contributions to the IADB would facilitate Latin American procurement of Australian goods. Gorton agreed to follow up on the Presidentʼs suggestion. (Memorandum of conversation; ibid., National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69)

39. Memorandum of Conversation 39. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 29, 1968, 4:30–5:45 p.m.

I–22926/68

SUBJECT

Visit of Australian Prime Minister, John G. Gorton

PARTICIPANTS

United States Side Secretary of Defense—Clark M. Clifford

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—Richard C. Steadman

Staff Officer for Southwest Pacific Affairs (ISA)—Donald E. Nuechterlein

Australian Side Prime Minister—John G. Gorton

Ambassador to United States—Sir Keith Waller

Secretary to the Prime Minister—C.L.S. Hewitt

The Prime Minister wanted to assure the Secretary, as he had the President earlier, that Australia will continue to carry out its commitments in Asia in accordance with its ANZUS and SEATO obligations. However, the question which bothered him was the future role of Australian forces in Malaysia and Singapore, which are not covered by either of these treaties. He had concluded that the British would not return to Southeast Asia under any circumstances after 1971, and he did not believe that Australia and New Zealand alone could provide a credible military force there. Australia could probably station two squadrons of fighter aircraft and some ships in Malaysia and Singapore, but only a small ground force. His government could not see the purpose of more than a token ground force in this area because Australia did not wish to become involved in communal problems within Malaysia nor in any future cross border difficulties that might arise between Singapore and Malaysia. A small ground force might be of some help in combatting minor insurgency situations, but it would be of little use in larger insurgencies, particularly if supported from the outside. The Prime Minister said he was not asking for anything specific from the United States but was seeking to determine the importance the U.S. placed upon future Australian policy in Malaysia/Singapore.

Secretary Clifford responded by recalling the trip that he and General Taylor made to Asia in the Summer of 1967 to seek additional support from our allies for the Vietnam war. He said such support was essential in order that the President could show the Congress and the American public that the U.S. was not alone in sending additional forces to Vietnam. He felt that this symbolic support from our allies was also essential to our own continued involvement in Southeast Asia and that it was important that there be no appearance of a withdrawal of Australian military forces from the area in the near future. This is an important year insofar as U.S. public opinion is concerned, because of the presidential elections, and it would be a very serious matter if the word got around that a “power vacuum” was developing in Malaysia/Singapore area which the U.S. would be expected to fill. It was not the U.S. commitment to help defend Southeast Asia that is in question in this country but rather the extent of that commitment. The U.S. public had been willing to support the current level of involvement in Vietnam and Thailand, he said, but would not accept broadening our responsibility in the area. In particular, it would be very difficult for the American public to understand a withdrawal from the area—such as a pullback from Malaysia and Singapore by any of our allies, who actually are closer to the area than we are. They would ask: If Southeast Asia is not important to our allies, why should it be to us?

In answer to a question by the Prime Minister, the Secretary gave it as his personal view that the U.S. involvement in Singapore and Malaysia is now so deeply rooted that the American public would not permit simply writing it off.2 In answer to the Prime Ministerʼs question on whether there might be a “paper-over” agreement at Paris, the Secretary said “no.” He added that he felt there was an area of agreement between the two sides that eventually will bring about a settlement. In the meantime, the U.S. will gradually phase-down its military activities as the South Vietnamese increase their own role. The Secretary felt that American opinion accepted the current level of U.S. involvement but that it would have an “exceedingly important” impact in the U.S. if the impression were created that our allies were wavering in their support of the effort in Southeast Asia. The U.S. therefore believes that an Australian presence there is very important.

The Prime Minister replied that the problem for Australia is not the immediate future but rather the period after 1971, when the British have left the area. He thought it might be possible to leave Air Force and Navy units in Malaysia and Singapore after the British departed, but he was not convinced about ground forces. Also, his government would have to address the question whether, in the post Vietnam period, it would be more important to build up its armed forces, including a larger army, or to expend larger amounts on economic development of Australiaʼs large untapped resources. Within the defense budget that is finally agreed upon, Australia had to decide how best to spend its defense dollar—whether more ships and planes, or more battalions. He was inclined to believe that, given Australiaʼs geographical position, it was more important to provide for a strong Navy and Air Force in peacetime. He asked for the Secretaryʼs views on this matter.

Mr. Clifford reiterated his view that it would be very damaging in the U.S. if Australia announced its intention to withdraw any or all of its forces from Malaysia and Singapore. However, he conceded that the political situation in Southeast Asia could change significantly by 1971 and that it might not be necessary in the 1970ʼs to station large forces on the mainland of Asia. He thought there was a good possibility that some new regional organization of Asian states might evolve that could take over some of the security responsibilities presently shouldered by outside powers. He assumed that by 1971 the Vietnam war would be ended and speculated that the large amounts of equipment we presently have in Vietnam could be made available to support a regional security force. The Secretary said that he would welcome talks with the Australian Government over the next several years concerning the changing conditions in Southeast Asia and our plans for dealing with them.

The Prime Minister assured the Secretary that Australia would make no announcement about withdrawing from Malaysia and Singapore by 1971, but he thought it possible that Australia would state at the forthcoming 5-power talks in Kuala Lumpur that it would re-evaluate its position in 1971 to determine its future course. The Secretary expressed a hope that this would not leave the implication that 1971 might be the end of Australiaʼs involvement in the area.

The Prime Minister asked whether the Secretary felt that an Australian presence in Malaysia and Singapore was essentially a public relations rather than a military problem. Mr. Clifford replied that the presence of some Australian forces in this area is significant in U.S. public willingness to remain in Southeast Asia. He added that it was his personal opinion that the cost of these limited forces was far outweighed by the repercussions on Australiaʼs long-range defense interests which would result if these forces were withdrawn or if an intention to do so were announced in the near future.

The Prime Minister asserted that keeping forces in Malaysia and Singapore was a political, not an economic, problem for Australia. However, as Australia is a developing country, many Australians wondered if the funds could not better be spent by providing a stronger defense at home. He agreed with the Secretary that a developing country needs a shield behind which to continue its development and that ANZUS provided such a shield to Australia.

Mr. Gorton asked Mr. Hewitt if he had anything further to add. Mr. Hewitt spoke briefly on the question of possible DOD purchases in Australia, noting the large amounts of equipment that Australia is buying from the U.S. Mr. Hewitt outlined the resultant balance of payments problem and cited the recent U.S. agreements to procure sugar and ammunition from Australia as examples of purchases that were of great help to the Australian economy. Secretary Clifford mentioned the recently increased R&R program in Australia as another significant means of providing dollars to Australia. The Prime Minister said he did not wish to press this matter but wanted the Secretary to know that it was an area in which his government was deeply interested. He hoped the Defense Department could give some thought to buying additional items in Australia.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Australia 091.112. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Nuechterlein and approved by Steadman. The meeting was held in Cliffordʼs office at the Pentagon.

2  Gorton also received similar assurance from Under Secretary of State Katzenbach who added that none of the candidates for President would consider changing the basic U.S.-Australian relationship. This was particularly true of Senator Robert Kennedy whom Katzenbach knew well. (Memorandum of conversation, May 28; Department of State, Central Files, POL MALAYSIA–SINGAPORE)

40. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 40. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, July 13, 1968.

SUBJECT

The Performance of Prime Minister Gorton

The attached Airgram2 is a pastiche of memoranda of conversation with knowledgeable Australians about Prime Minister Gortonʼs performance. If you have the time, I think you will find it interesting reading.

What it amounts to is this: (1) Gorton is having an open and bitter feud with the civil servants.

(2) His difficulties with his Cabinet (principally Paul Hasluck) are getting worse, not better.

(3) Gortonʼs personal performance is a subject of increasing criticism among knowledgeable circles.

(4) His standing with the party has deteriorated sharply, and Hasluckʼs popularity has risen.

Balanced against all this is the fact that the opposition, the Labor Party, is in total disarray. The Liberal Party Government, therefore, seems in no danger. But unless Gorton begins to take hold better than he has thus far, there might grow up a real challenge to Gortonʼs leadership of that Government.

Marshall

1 Source: Johnson Library, National, Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/67–1/69. Secret; Limdis. Rostow sent this memorandum and its attachment to the President under cover of a note which suggested that, if he had the time and interest, he might read about the “vicissitudes of Gorton who has clearly not settled down yet.” An indication on Rostowʼs note reveals that the President saw it and its attachments. (Ibid.)

2 Attached, but not printed was airgram A–615 from Canberra, July 7. The Department of State copy is in Central Files, POL 15–1 AUSTL.

41. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State 41. Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff of the Department of State1

Washington, July 30, 1968.

ABSTRACT

Australia is about to take a major decision which will affect her role in Southeast Asia for years to come. The choice is likely to be among three alternative strategies: one, continental and off-shore defense; two, Australian forward involvement solely in support of U.S. commitments and presence; three, becoming more involved regionally, independently of the U.S. presence, in political, economic and military terms.

Each of these strategies now commands considerable support in Australian official and governmental circles. The best alternative from the U.S. standpoint is Strategy Three: It would see Australia taking greater responsibility in Southeast Asia and filling a part of the vacuum caused by the British withdrawal after 1971. The United States cannot influence Australian interests, but she can make Strategy Three a more attractive alternative for Australia by: —responding positively to an Australian request to clarify the application of ANZUS to Australian forces in Malaysia and Singapore;

—setting up more frequent periodic consultations with Australia on Pacific security and foreign policy problems;

—taking financial and economic steps which would ease Australian balance of payments difficulties over the next few years, such as increasing U.S. offshore procurement in Australia, reducing barriers to Australian exports to the U.S., and increasing the authorization for Export-Import Bank loans beyond the currently authorized $25 million.

[Here follow a table of contents, “I. Introduction, II. Australian Alternative Strategies, III. Evaluation of Alternative Strategies, IV. Implementation of Preferred Strategy, V. Conclusion,” and an Annex entitled “Model Language for Up-Dating of ANZUS Understanding of October 1963.”]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Australia, Vol. III, Cables, 6/67–1/69. Secret. There is no indication on the source text as to who drafted it.

42. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 42. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the Prime Minister of New Zealand2

Holyoake will have three main concerns: The U.S. presidential election and what it means for our policy in Asia.

The Viet-Nam situation and negotiations.

U.S.-New Zealand economic relations.

A. U.S. Presidential Election and Asia Policy

Unlike his colleague, Australian Prime Minister Gorton, Holyoake is an experienced and cautious man who has avoided jumping to conclusions or speculating about the possibility of a return to U.S. “isolationism” under your successor. He is nevertheless keenly interested in the U.S. political situation and its implications for future U.S. policy in Asia, to which New Zealandʼs own policy is closely linked. This visit gives him a chance to make a first-hand assessment, and gives us an opportunity to help him get a clear picture and influence his thinking in a helpful direction.

Suggest you

—Discuss the election and the candidates fully and frankly with Holyoake.

—Emphasize that the U.S. will continue to stand by its commitments in Asia no matter who wins the election.

—Stress that your successor, like you, will look to the free nations of Asia to show increasing initiative and leadership in working out regional solutions to their problems. We will always be ready to cooperate.

B. Viet-Nam

While New Zealandʼs military contribution to Viet-Nam is small (550 men), Holyoake has been a firm, consistent and articulate supporter of allied policy. He is anxious for close consultations with you on the current phase of the war and negotiations.

Suggest you

—Review the military and political situation in Viet-Nam.

—Express appreciation for New Zealandʼs contribution.

—Review the Paris talks and the outlook.

—Assure Holyoake that our position will be based on the Manila Communique and the 14 Points, and that we stand on effective implementation of the Geneva Accords on Laos and Viet-Nam, and for free choice under the “one-man, one-vote” principle in South Viet-Nam.

—Promise to continue to keep in close touch on developments.

C. U.S.-New Zealand Economic Relations

The New Zealand economic situation, while showing some signs of improvement, is still unfavorable to the Government, which must face an election next year. The outcome of the election may depend upon economic conditions then prevailing. If Holyoakeʼs party loses, the Labor opposition (which officially advocates withdrawal from Viet-Nam) will come to power. The GNZ has recently asked us to review our economic relations with an eye to improving them.

Since early 1967, Holyoakeʼs government has had to impose unpopular austerity measures to deal with serious balance of payments difficulties. Its efforts have been complicated by subsidized European exports of dairy surpluses and U.S. import restrictions against New Zealand meat and dairy products, which are resented in New Zealand. New Zealand has, through a U.S. importer of New Zealand dairy products, filed with Treasury a request for imposition of countervailing duties on subsidized European Community exports of dairy products to the U.S. Unless this request is withdrawn, Treasury will eventually have to act on it, and the Community could well retaliate against a substantial volume of subsidized U.S. exports.

Suggest you

—Tell Holyoake that at his Governmentʼs request we have completed a careful study of our economic relations. Our conclusions are as follows: 1. We regret there is little we can do to meet New Zealandʼs desire for increased access to the U.S. market for its meat.

2. We are aware of New Zealandʼs problems in finding overseas markets for its products and particularly for its dairy products. We are prepared to help by providing increased market opportunities in the U.S. for some dairy products. We cannot do so, however, unless New Zealand will withdraw its request for countervailing duties against European Community dairy products. You understand that this matter is now under discussion.

3. Other areas in which we feel we could be helpful are: (a) facilitation of private U.S. investment in New Zealand;

(b) working closely with the GNZ to identify logical areas for Eximbank financing to assist New Zealandʼs economic development;

(c) provision of every possible opportunity to New Zealand firms to compete for contracts let by the Department of Defense.

We are ready to proceed at once with detailed discussions on all of these subjects.

These are the high points. Additional talking points are enclosed.3

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Visit Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. No date appears on the source text, but Document 43 indicates it was dated October 7. There is no drafting information on the source text, although a supplementary memorandum (see Document 43) and a covering memorandum to Katzenbach recommending that it be sent to the President were drafted by Carleton C. Brower, the Officer in charge of New Zealand Affairs, suggesting that he was the likely drafter of this memorandum. Brower also prepared a scope paper, September 16, for this visit. (Department of State, S/S-Visit Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A)

2 Prime Minister Holyoake made an official visit to Washington October 9–10 where he also attended the ANZUS Council meeting on October 10. Holyoake met alone with Johnson on October 9 from 12:18 to 1 p.m., although they were joined briefly by Rusk and Tom Johnson from 12:25 to 12:30 p.m. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found.

3 Attached, but not printed.

43. Supplementary Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 43. Supplementary Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 8, 1967.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the Prime Minister of New Zealand

In addition to the points mentioned in my memorandum of October 7,2 I recommend you tell Prime Minister Holyoake the following with respect to DOD procurement: 1. We are prepared to discuss the purchase of up to $500,000 worth of New Zealand lamb for use by our armed forces.

2. We are planning to overhaul in New Zealand aircraft and vehicles used by the Navyʼs Antarctic operation, and also to procure more supplies and equipment for this operation in New Zealand. This could involve up to $200,000 during the balance of fiscal year 1969.

3. The DOD Procurement Information Officer stationed in Australia will continue to pay visits to New Zealand at three-month intervals. We look forward to the day when enough procurement business has developed to enable us to meet the GNZʼs request to station a procurement representative in New Zealand permanently.

The foregoing points are derived from the conclusions of a study completed by DOD on the possibilities of expanding procurement in New Zealand. The attached discussion is drawn from a DOD memorandum approved October 8 by the Deputy Secretary of Defense.3 You will note that the main objection to the lamb purchase is the likelihood of an adverse reaction in Congress, as was the case with the 1966 purchase. However, we concur with DOD that this smaller purchase could be justified.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Visits Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. Drafted by Brower with concurrences from Brown, Commander Kuhn of DOD/ISA, and Fred H. Sanderson, Director of the Office of Food Policy and Program, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State. On the covering memorandum from Bundy to Katzenbach, recommending that the Acting Secretary sign this memorandum, Bundy wrote the following note: “ʼHʼ does not concur in recommendation #1 [U.S. Army lamb purchases from New Zealand].This is likely to cause a real storm in Congress. More importantly, we would be going back on our commitment that last time was to be a one-time exercise. Therefore I do not think we should make this recommendation to the President. However, if you think otherwise, I believe that this memo to the President is well worded in that it states the facts frankly [?] to him. WPB.”

2  Document 42.

3 Attached, but not printed.

44. Memorandum of Conversation 44. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 10, 1968, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

U.S.-New Zealand Relations

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Ambassador Winthrop G. Brown, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Robert W. Moore, Country Director, Australia-New Zealand Affairs

New Zealand Keith J. Holyoake, Prime Minister of New Zealand

George Laking, Permanent Secretary, Department of External Affairs

Frank H. Corner, New Zealand Ambassador

Jack Shepherd, Minister of the Embassy

The Secretary asked how Mr. Holyoakeʼs meeting with the Secretary of Agriculture had gone the day before.2 The Prime Minister said he had made no real headway on the basic problem of securing for New Zealand greater access to and competitive opportunity in the U.S. market for dairy products. Ambassador Corner said they had received a “dusty answer” from Secretary Freeman. (Note: This remark had reference to discussions with Secretary Freeman on the subject of the cheese quota; the GNZ had asked for an additional 15 million pounds and Secretary Freeman reportedly told Holyoake that 7.5 million pounds was our maximum counter offer. Secretary Freeman also was unable to accede to the Prime Ministerʼs desire to publicize the fact that New Zealand has been offered an additional quota, since publicity must await issuance of Tariff Commission findings on the subject.)

Holyoake said that the GNZ accepts U.S. restrictions on meat temporarily, in recognition of the “political situation” in the U.S. bearing on the question of meat imports. He said U.S. trade policy was disillusioning, however, since he had always thought of the U.S. as the citadel of free enterprise. The Secretary observed that free enterprise also means competition. The PM replied that he does not fear competition in view of New Zealandʼs competitive efficiency in products such as meat and dairy products.

Ambassador Corner described the history of the rapidly growing meat trade, highlighting New Zealandʼs hopes for it as an avenue of diversification out of wool and dairy products. Now New Zealanders “shudder” as an apparent ceiling on meat exports to the U.S. is approached. He and the Prime Minister explained that lean meat from New Zealand complements the fatter beef produced in the U.S., rather than competing with it, and the Prime Minister noted that it sells for less than half the price of U.S. beef.

Ambassador Corner commented on the lamb trade. He said it had been running about $7–8 million a year but seemed now to be on the verge of substantial growth. New Zealand hopes that the U.S. will not move to block lamb imports (on which there are no present quantitative restrictions). The Secretary said in this regard that it would be advisable to avoid a sudden upsurge in imports, as distinguished from gradual growth. Holyoake remarked that even gradual growth in the beef and veal trade had precipitated restrictions.

Holyoake said that New Zealand could cope with the meat problem after a fashion by turning to other, albeit less profitable, markets, but in the case of dairy products there was no place to turn. He said New Zealandʼs dairy exports to the U.S. amounted to only about $14 million a year—not much by U.S. standards but significant to New Zealand. He said New Zealandʼs quantitative quota had been cut back about 15 million pounds (cheese equivalent) by Presidential action in 1967, in an action designed to curb the inflow of subsidized dairy products from Europe. Thus blameless New Zealand, which does not subsidize, suffered along with the guilty.

Ambassador Corner added that in now making a request for an increase of 15 million pounds in the New Zealand quota, the GNZ is merely asking for restoration of its pre-1967 position. Holyoake said the dairy trade problem with the U.S. had created a “really bad political situation” in New Zealand. Even the usually restrained and realistic leaders of the Dairy Board were now openly accusing the U.S. of “not playing the game” fairly with New Zealand.

Ambassador Corner launched into an eloquent appeal for the U.S. to give special consideration to New Zealand. He said the destinies of the two countries are linked. But, he added, the U.S. has only a small “constituency” in New Zealand of persons with a direct interest in close relations between the two countries. The generalized good will towards the U.S. which is undoubtedly widespread in New Zealand must be made more specific if the alliance is to flourish. Continued friendly feelings on the part of New Zealanders towards the U.S. cannot be taken for granted. There is perceptible anti-American feeling already and it will grow if the political alliance is not given some solid underpinning—most logically in terms of expanded economic relations. Without this, New Zealand could “drift away” from the alliance with the U.S. He alluded to New Zealandʼs traditional economic/political relationship with the U.K. in the “old Commonwealth” as an example of the kind of alliance the U.S. should now be trying to forge with New Zealand (and Australia).

The Secretary asked about New Zealandʼs trade with Japan. Ambassador Corner said it was important and was growing. He then asserted that (unidentified) officials in the Department of State sometimes suggested to him that New Zealand should desist from its efforts to obtain a special trading relationship with the U.S. and develop its trade with Japan, its natural trading partner. Ambassador Corner said his answer to this was that it would be in neither New Zealandʼs nor Americanʼs political interest if New Zealand became an economic satellite of Japan. Moreover, if New Zealand became extensively dependent on the Japanese market she would have to make concessions to Japanese manufactured goods, to the detriment of U.S. trade with New Zealand. Holyoake and Laking echoed Ambassador Corner on this point.

The Secretary asked if New Zealand devoted much of its agricultural production to foreign aid. Holyoake said it was relatively little, adding that most of New Zealandʼs foreign aid was in the form of cash grants or technical assistance. Ambassador Corner said that New Zealand, unlike the U.S., produced no agricultural surpluses.

Ambassador Corner turned to the question of Defense procurement. He suggested that the U.S. should be more “imaginative” in this area, should conduct procurement in New Zealand in such a way as to build up New Zealand industry and thus strengthen an ally. As an example, he mentioned the desirability of our utilizing New Zealand facilities for the overhaul and maintenance of Deepfreeze vehicles and equipment. The Secretary asked how much DOD spends in New Zealand now. Ambassador Corner said it was about $3 million annually but Mr. Moore said the total would be more like $5–6 million.

In any case neither figure is large, Ambassador Corner pointed out. He went on to say (echoed by the PM) that the amounts the U.S. would spend in meeting GNZ pleas would not be large to the U.S. The Secretary said that the small figure had to be “multiplied by a thousand” in contemplating U.S. action however, since many nations approach us in this way seeking special economic treatment. Ambassador Corner said this only meant that the U.S. had to make choices, had to decide which of its allies were most useful and dependable. The U.S. could not be everything to everybody. The Secretary said he heard this same argument from every Latin American Foreign Minister who visited him.

Pursuing his argument that it is in the U.S. interest to give special treatment to a good and loyal ally like New Zealand, and the corollary argument that the U.S. has been indifferent to New Zealand, Ambassador Corner said he had from time to time asked U.S. officials to tell him what the U.S. had done for New Zealand during the 25 years since World War II. They had been able to cite practically nothing, he said.

Ambassador Brown suggested that this was an oversimplification He noted that the U.S. was committed to New Zealandʼs defense. He pointed out that, notwithstanding certain trade restrictions, New Zealand exports to the U.S. have grown steadily and the U.S. is now New Zealandʼs second customer.

The Secretary asked what percentage of New Zealandʼs GNP is devoted to defense. Holyoake said it was a small percentage. Then, the Secretary said, New Zealand is in effect being subsidized so far as defense is concerned.

In a sense this is true, Ambassador Corner admitted, but he said there are New Zealanders who would and do argue that small remote New Zealand needs no defense, is in no danger, that if she is in danger of attack it is only because of her association with the U.S. Ambassador Corner said that this kind of thinking is of course rejected by the GNZ. It is deceptively plausible, however, and is making significant inroads among intellectuals. It can spread unless the U.S. takes deliberate steps to create closer bonds between the two countries (mainly, he implied, through a special economic relationship).

The Secretary remarked that this fallacious line of argument—to the effect that if we just stay at home and mind our own business we have nothing to worry about—is heard in the U.S. also and has greater seeming validity here because of independent defensive capability. (Note: At a lunch he gave for Holyoake the day before, October 9, the Secretary had emphasized the importance of continuing to adhere to the concept of collective security. He told the Prime Minister that the U.S. was entering on a great public debate in which that concept would be set against a philosophy of reduced engagement in world affairs. He said the outcome of that debate would be influenced by the actions of other countries. The American people would want to see that others, too, were committed to collective security; they would not want to feel that the U.S. was expected to carry the burden of maintaining peace by itself. That is why the Australian and New Zealand contributions to the common cause in Viet-Nam are so important. That is why American public attitudes towards the war might be much different were the British with us in Viet-Nam—even with so little as a brigade.)3

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Visits Files: Lot 70 D 418, V 70A. Secret. Drafted by Moore and approved in S on October 15. Bundy sent Rusk a briefing memorandum for this meeting on October 5. (Ibid). The meeting was held at Blair House and lasted until approximately noon. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

2 No other record of this meeting has been found.

3  Holyoake met with Deputy Secretary of Defense Nitze at the Pentagon on October 8 from 4:50 to 6:50 p.m. They discussed the war in Vietnam, increased U.S. defense procurement in New Zealand, the political situation in New Zealand, and the role that economic considerations were likely to play in New Zealand general elections in 1969. (Memorandum of conversation, October 9; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1498, New Zealand 000.1 (333 New Zealand))

45. Record of Meeting 45. Record of Meeting1

Washington, October 10, 1968.

SUBJECT

Record of Eighteenth ANZUS Council Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

United States Dean Rusk, Secretary of State

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Amb. Winthrop G. Brown, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Richard C. Steadman, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Robert W. Moore, Country Director, Australia-New Zealand and Pacific Islands Affairs

Australia Paul Hasluck, Minister for External Affairs

Sir James Plimsoll, Secretary, Department of External Affairs

Sir Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Robert Furlonger, Minister of the Embassy

New Zealand Keith J. Holyoake, Prime Minister

George Laking, Secretary, Department of External Affairs

Frank Corner, New Zealand Ambassador

Jack Shepherd, Minister of the Embassy

[Here follows a table of contents.]

EIGHTEENTH ANZUS COUNCIL MEETING

Washington, D.C.

October 10, 1968

Secretary Rusk served as chairman. He proposed that the first order of business be review of the draft communiqué, which was approved with a few minor changes and issued at the close of the meeting.2

Discussion then proceeded on specific agenda items, as follows:

A. Southeast Asian Security

1. General—Prime Minister Holyoake said he had been asked by a New Zealand newspaper editor whether the U.S. would continue to maintain its presence, interest and commitments in the area. The Secretary said it was strange that anyone should ask this question in view of the efforts and sacrifices the U.S. has made and is making to ensure Southeast Asian security. He said the U.S. has definite commitments to Thailand, Laos and Viet-Nam. Hasluck observed that if those countries are secure then the whole region is secure. (Somewhat later in the discussion, Hasluck reverted to this topic to say that Australia sought no further formal assurances of U.S. intentions in Southeast Asia. Deeds speak louder than words; what the U.S. is doing is sufficient indicator of U.S. intentions and determination. In its own interest, Australia can and wishes to contribute in its modest way to the larger security enterprise in which the U.S. is engaged. Australia sees involvement of demonstrable U.S. interest in Southeast Asia as the ultimate guarantee of a continued U.S. role there.)

2. Malaysia/Singapore—Holyoake asked what had been done about an earlier proposal that the U.S. might help to keep the Singapore naval dockyard going by utilizing its facilities. Mr. Bundy said the U.S. was making some use of the dockyard, on an essentially commercial, small scale basis, as a convenience.

Commenting on the five-power security talks in June, Hasluck said the British had been more forthcoming than expected. They had acknowledged some continuing responsibility in the area and had formally—in the communiqué—admitted to a continuing “interest.” Although everyone must recognize Britainʼs reduced capability to play a role in Southeast Asia, Hasluck said, it is encouraging that there are elements in Britain (he mentioned specifically the armed forces, “technical” elements and the Conservative Party) in favor of a continued British role. He noted that the British had participated in joint naval exercises with Australia and New Zealand, just completed, and that they will participate in a larger exercise involving Malaysia and Singapore as well in 1970.

The Secretary asked whether Britain was maintaining its defense agreement with Malaysia/Singapore. Hasluck said yes, and described that as the best arrangement from Australiaʼs point of view. Australia was not in a position to undertake a bilateral guarantee in the area, he said, but preferred to continue its loose adherence to the Anglo-Malaysian agreement. Holyoake agreed, and said that Malaysia and Singapore wish it that way also.

Holyoake said he assumed that the 1970 exercise would provide a test of Britainʼs ability effectively to deploy forces to the area by air from home bases. The Secretary asked if the British would have a problem getting overflight clearances to move forces to Malaysia/Singapore. Hasluck said he understood they would have some difficulties and were planning on using roundabout routes. Laking said that the exercise would be a partial test of Britainʼs post-1971 deployment capability, since the British would be deploying only troops, not equipment and supplies, since in 1970 these would still be in place and would not have to be ferried out.

[Here follows discussion of “3. Role of India in Southeast Asia, 4. Sabah Dispute, 5. Indonesia, 6. Vietnam,” “B. Implications of Soviet Intervention in Czechoslovakia,” and “C. Japanʼs Role in East Asian Security.”]

D. ANZUS Security Consultations

Hasluck said the GOA welcomes the forthcoming (November 18–19) consultations at the official level,3 but felt that the group should not attempt to go too far in “reaching conclusions.” He said that the GOA would be skittish about having officials engaged in talks involving policy making at a time when the government is embarked on a basic review of foreign and defense policy. Moreover, it would be unfair to the officials concerned, Hasluck said, to ask them to “stick their necks out” on policy questions at such a time.

He suggested that the consultative group confine itself to identifying and describing situations and problems that the governments should be thinking about. This concept was accepted by the Secretary and Holyoake.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS. Secret. Drafted by Moore and approved in S on October 24. The meeting took place in the Secretaryʼs conference room and, according to Ruskʼs Appointment Book, lasted from 4:45 p.m. to 6:15 p.m. including time for a photo session in the Diplomatic Room. (Johnson Library)

2 The Joint Statement was attached, but is not printed. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 28, 1968, pp. 447–448.

3 A substantive record of these consultations, chaired by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Brown and including Deputy Assistant Secretaries of Defense Steadman and Morton Halperin, Ambassadors Waller of Australia and Larking of New Zealand, and 20 other participants is in a memorandum drafted November 19. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 ANZUS)

The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and President Johnsonʼs Plan for Economic Development of Southeast AsiaThe Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and President Johnsonʼs Plan for Economic Development of Southeast Asia

46. Memorandum of Conversation

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Confidential. Drafted by Askew and approved by S on April 16. Rusk attended the SEATO Council meeting in Manila, April 13–15.

47. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State

Manila, April 14, 1964, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

48. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State

Manila, April 14, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis.

49. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State

Manila, April 15, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 PHIL (MA). Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, Paris, London, and Vientiane and passed to the White House.

50. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, John McCone Memoranda of Meetings with the President, 4/3/64–5/20/64. No classification marking. The memorandum was dictated by McCone and transcribed by his secretary.

51. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 25, 1964, 12:25–12:38 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs Daily Diary. (Ibid.) On May 23, Rusk sent the President a briefing memorandum for Konthiʼs courtesy call. (Ibid.)

52. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Senator Richard Russell

Washington, May 27, 1964, 10:55 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recording and Transcripts, Telephone Conversation between the President and Russell, Tape F64.27, Side B PNO 121 and F 64.28, Side A PNO 1. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared in the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

53. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 27, 1964, 11:24 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a telephone conversation between the President and McGeorge Bundy, Tape 64.28 PNO 111. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

54. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, March 30, 1965, 6:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Mendenhall and Manhard; cleared by Green, Bundy, Assistant Secretaries of State for European Affairs Wiliam R. Tyler and Congressional Relations Douglas MacArthur II; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok.

55. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2498. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared by Salans, Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for European Affairs Robert C. Creel and Near Eastern Affairs William J. Hadley. The attached Scope Paper was drafted by Mendenhall on March 26.

56. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development Program, Vol. I, 1965. Confidential.

57. Paper Prepared by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff for the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, SE Asia Regional Development. Confidential.

58. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, April 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. IX. Secret.

59. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, April 5, 1965, 8:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

60. Editorial Note

61. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson)

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Southeast Asia. Confidential.

62. National Security Action Memorandum No. 329

Washington, April 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAMs. Confidential.

63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, April 28, 1965, 7:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Confidential. Drafted by Thomas C. Niblock and Richard A. Watters, respectively the Director and the regional affairs officer of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs of AID, and by Mendenhall; cleared by Poats and Trueheart; and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Canberra, Karachi, London for Ambassador Martin, Manila, Paris, Wellington, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 29, 1965, 7:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 UK (LO). Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared with Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Richard Davis and Under Secretary Ballʼs Special Assistant Robert Anderson, and approved by Bundy. Also sent to Canberra and Wellington and repeated to Bangkok, Karachi, Manila, Paris, Saigon, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

65. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson

Washington, May 11, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. X, 4/5/65–5/31/65. Confidential. Bundy sent this memorandum to the President under a memorandum of May 11 in which Bundy stated that Tex Goldschmidt had subsequently reported that the Mekong Valley Development meeting in Bangkok was going well and that the Asian Development Bank planned a meeting June 28–29, which Black would attend. Bundy suggested that Goodwin include a sentence or two on the effort in Johnsonʼs speech of May 13. (Ibid.) On another copy of the covering memorandum there is an indication that Johnson saw it. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development, Vol. I, 1965) For text of the speech, “The Challenge of Human Need in Viet-Nam,” see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 522–526.

66. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic and Other Posts

Washington, May 19, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Mendenhall; cleared in draft with Salans, Martin, Special Assistant Frank A. Sieverts of P, and with Admiral Blouin of DOD/ISA; and approved by Bundy. Sent to Bangkok, Canberra, Djakarta, Karachi, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, New Delhi, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, Wellington, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

67. Memorandum From Francis M. Bator of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, June 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson, Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. I, 1965. Confidential.

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State

Vientiane, November 1, 1965, 0532Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-USSR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Moscow, London, Saigon, Paris, Tokyo, New Delhi, Hong Kong, USUN, and CINCPAC. McGeorge Bundy had this telegram retyped and sent it to President Johnson who saw it. Bundy described it as an “extremely thoughtful telegram from Bill Sullivan suggesting a shift of Soviet Policy in Southeast Asia.” Bundy summarized Sullivanʼs argument as “the Soviets may be moving with some confidence back into Southeast Asia with the double purpose of expanding their own influence in the East and containing the Chinese.” Bundy stated that he shared “Sullivanʼs implied feeling that if this happens, we can probably make a little money on it.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Laos, Vol. XV, Cables, 4/65–1/66)1

69. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs (Toon) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 4, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-USSR. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by J. Stapleton Roy and Vladimir I. Toumanoff of EUR/SOV.

70. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson

Washington, November 18, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast, Asian Development, Vol. I, 1965. No classification marking. Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler sent this memorandum to the President under a covering memorandum of November 18 indicating that he concurred with all three points made by Barr and “should particularly like to emphasize the importance of his balance of payments argument.” (Ibid.)

71. Letter From the Presidentʼs Special Adviser on Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson

Washington, April 8, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was received at the Johnson Ranch in Texas at 3:10 p.m. on April 10.

72. Memorandum of Conversation

London, June 10, 1966, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 ASIA SE. Secret; Limit Distribution. Part II of three memoranda comprising the entire discussion. Drafted by Ronald I. Spiers and approved in S on June 20. Rusk was visiting London after attending the NATO Ministerial Council Meeting in Brussels, June 7–8. The meeting took place at 10 Downing Street.

73. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, June 22, 1966.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 48. Confidential. Drafted by Bacon with concurrences from Poats and Barnett.

74. Memorandum From Donald W. Ropa of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, June 23, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential.

75. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 305, CF 49. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Approved in S on July 19. The memorandum is part I of VII. The meeting was held at the Ambassadorʼs residence.

76. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Canberra, July 1, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. No time of transmission appears on the source text.

77. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 20, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 Asia SE. Confidential. Drafted by Paul H. Kreisburg of FE/ACA with the concurrence of Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Douglas A. MacArthur. Read sent this memorandum to Rostow on August 8.

78. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, August 15, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 ASIA SE. Limited Official Use. Drafted by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, H.G. Tolbert, Jr., with the concurrence of Paul H. Kreisberg of FE/ACA.

79. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 11, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Confidential.

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator of the Agency for International Development, Far East (Poats) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 22, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret; Exdis.

81. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, November 23, 1966, 8:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Sisco and Barnett; cleared with Poats and Walter M. Kotschnig, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Security Affairs; and approved by Sisco.

82. Memorandum of Conversation

Tokyo, December 6, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Zurhellen and approved in S on December 22. The meeting took place at the Japanese Prime Ministerʼs official residence.

83. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 9, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Secret.

84. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 12, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Flowerree.

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, January 12, 1967, 1218Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret; Exdis.

86. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 20, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret.

87. Action Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 24, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Salans with concurrences from Manhard, Heyward Isham, Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group, and Marshall H. Noble of P.

88. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting

Washington, April 4, 1967.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 170. Secret. Drafted by Wilber W. Hitchcox of EA/RA, cleared by Rusk and representatives of 15 relevant bureaus and offices in the Department of State and AID.

89. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, April 19, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential.

90. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, April 20, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Secret. Drafted by Jorden on April 20.

91. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)

Washington, April 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Drafted by Thomas C. Niblock, Director, Far Eastern Development Office of AID, and Ewing, cleared by Barnett and in draft with Gaud and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations John P. White.

92. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson

Washington, September 5, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking.

93. Memorandum of Conversation

Wellington, April 1, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 8–3. Secret. Drafted by Unger and approved in S on April 4. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs Suite at White Heron Lodge.

94. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting

Washington, April 2, 1968.

Source: Department of State, S/S-International Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 276. Secret. Drafted by Peter W. Colm of EA/RA and Bacon, cleared by Rusk and 16 relevant bureaus and offices of the Department of State, AID, and Department of Defense.

95. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, September 30, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking.

96. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific (Holdridge) to the Director for Intelligence and Research (Hughes)

Washington, November 11, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/ERA Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 50–68. Secret. Drafted by Sarris.

46. Memorandum of Conversation 46. Memorandum of Conversation1

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5 p.m.

US/MC–3

UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE NINTH COUNCIL MEETING OF THE SOUTHEAST ASIA TREATY ORGANIZATION

Manila, April 13–15, 1964

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary of State

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Ambassador Graham Martin, SEATO Council Representative for the United States

Laurin B. Askew, U.S. Embassy, Bangkok

SEATO Mr. Konthi Suphamongkhon, Secretary General

SUBJECT

SEATO Matters

The Secretary General expressed his deep appreciation for the Secretaryʼs support for his appointment as Secretary General of SEATO. He noted he was in the process of consulting the SEATO Council Members concerning the question of the Vietnamese observer at the Council meeting. He described in some detail his recent call on French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville following the latterʼs arrival at Manila. Konthi and French Council Representative Achille Clarac had thereupon explained that observers had been present at almost every Council meeting except the last one in Paris. They went on to describe to Couve the courtesies extended in the past to observers; namely, attendance at the public opening session, participation in social functions, briefing by the host government, and private calls on each of the Council Members. Konthi explained that since the Foreign Minister of Viet-Nam was coming as observer (Konthi had not at that time learned of the substitution of Lien for Quat), the question had been raised whether the Foreign Minister should not be extended the additional privilege of making a statement to the Council. Couve objected vigorously to any such procedure. According to Konthi, Couve said that at the public opening session the Vietnamese observer could be treated just as any other guest, but that he was opposed to having the Vietnamese speak.

Konthi said Couve had observed that Viet-Nam officially was a neutral country under the 1954 Geneva Accord. Konthi rebutted by noting that South Viet-Nam had been made a protocol state of SEATO later that same year, and, in fact, at French request.

Konthi told the Secretary that in discussing this subject with British Council Representative MacDermot the latter had suggested the possibility of a special private meeting of the Council Members to hear the Vietnamese observer, such a meeting not to be part of the regular Council schedule. Ambassador Martin noted that this might run the risk of giving impetus to a “rump” SEATO, and Konthi said Couve could refuse to attend. The Secretary remarked that possibly the Philippine Secretary of Foreign Affairs could arrange such a meeting quietly.

Konthi observed that New Zealand Prime Minister Holyoake appeared to have no serious objection to a statement by the Vietnamese but Holyoake had felt the point should not be pressed if one of the Member Countries were violently opposed.

The Secretary said that he had no objection at all to a statement by the Vietnamese to the Council, but that for the time being it might be best to proceed with arrangements for the participation of the Vietnamese observer in the public opening session in accordance with normal past practice. The Secretary mentioned that Foreign Minister Quat probably would leave the public session immediately after the address by the President of the Philippines. Mr. Bundy noted that the Vietnamese observer group was circulating two memoranda to the SEATO Delegations in Manila and that they appeared not to contain any seriously controversial points. Konthi said he had not yet seen the Vietnamese memos.

The Secretary suggested Konthi explain to Foreign Minister Quat that there was no precedent for an observer to address the Council but that of course Quat should go ahead and see the Members bilaterally. Moreover, the memos had served as an expression of Vietnamese views.

Konthi said the French Foreign Minister also had objected to Konthiʼs classified report to the Council.

The Secretary observed there had been some press speculation on the possibility that Viet-Nam and Malaysia might seek membership in SEATO. Konthi said he had been asked that question by reporters and had replied that application for membership was at the initiative of the applicant not of the Treaty Organization. He told the Secretary he had no reliable indication Malaysia was interested in membership, although some political parties in Malaysia had introduced the issue into the election campaign. Konthi said he doubted Viet-Nam would ask formally for SEATO military assistance.

Konthi also described briefly a conversation he had had with Admiral Evenou, French Military Advisor, who had stated that France was unable to commit forces to SEATO defense plans because of large outlays required in Algeria and for the French nuclear program. Konthi said he asked Evenou why France insisted on a nuclear program when there was little hope it could ever amount to much in relation to American nuclear power. Evenou replied that France could not rely on U.S. assistance in time, to which Konthi replied that the United States already had saved France in two world wars without any advance commitment whereas France now had a strong American defense commitment in the form of NATO. To Mr. Bundyʼs comment that Konthi apparently had gotten his revenge for the AFP story, Konthi responded that he had been “terribly misquoted” and went on to describe that AFP had taken his statements out of context and otherwise distorted their meaning. Mr. Bundy assured him that the other press services had reported the statement correctly and that Foreign Minister Quat had indicated he understood the situation.

Konthi said he had not had an opportunity to see Thai Foreign Minister Thanat recently, had heard that Thanat initially proposed not to attend the Manila Council meeting for fear of causing trouble with the French, but that Prime Minister Thanom has instructed Thanat to attend and not be afraid of tangling with Couve.

Returning to the question of observers, the Secretary expressed the hope that suitable arrangements could be worked out quietly in advance and asked Konthi to let him know if there were any serious problems. The Secretary noted that Foreign Secretary Lopez as host could play a useful role. Konthi replied that he could not see how Couve could object to following past practice.

The Secretary said he was looking forward to Konthiʼs prospective visit to Washington and confirmed that President Johnson would be happy to receive the Secretary General at the White House on May 25.

In response to the Secretaryʼs query concerning the state of affairs in Thailand, Konthi said that, unfortunately, there had been considerable publicity over the private affairs of the late Prime Minister. This, he continued, had absorbed a good deal of public attention but the Thai were still very concerned over Laos, Cambodia and Viet-Nam. Konthi said there continued to be evidence of Communist activities in the northeast, and mentioned that the Mobile Development Unit program was going forward and being extended to the south of the country. Ambassador Martin observed that owing to recent Indonesian infiltrations in South Thailand where remnants of the Malayan CTʼs were still at large, Thai Deputy Defense Minister Dawee had visited Kuala Lumpur and revived the Thai-Malayan border cooperation arrangement.

The Secretary commended Konthi for his report to the Council noting that it would surely stimulate discussion. Konthi said that this had been his purpose since he felt there had been too little discussion in SEATO of serious issues affecting the Treaty Area. He asked the Secretary if he did not also feel that such matters as the French neutralization proposal should be discussed by the Council. The Secretary agreed, noting, however, that the French initiative was still a phrase, rather than a policy, and that he hoped in the course of discussions to find out what it meant.

Konthi observed that Couve had told him the French neutralization proposal applied to Laos, Cambodia and South Viet-Nam. In response to the Secretaryʼs query, Konthi said he was quite sure Couve had said “South Viet-Nam” and had made no reference to North Viet-Nam. Mr. Bundy observed that in Tokyo French Premier Pompidou had stated the proposal applied also to North Viet-Nam, and Konthi observed that this might have been said because of “our” reactions to the initial French initiative. Konthi went on to recall that when he cited the case of Laos as a rather poor example of the results of neutralization, Couve affirmed that he favored real neutrality in Laos and that this meant General Phoumi Nosavan would have to go. Konthi noted he had previously asked Ambassador Martin whether the French were acting against the United States and Thailand in Laos. Ambassador Martin explained we had no confirmation that information gained in the SEATO Military Planning Office was being used by the French in Laos against us. Konthi said Prime Minister Thanom had received reports that the French were actively working to eradicate U.S. and Thai influence in Laos.

The Secretary said he proposed to explore with the French these various problems in some detail while in Manila. He added that he was not at all discouraged about the situation in Southeast Asia and felt that if all free countries having a commitment in the area would pull together there would be no serious problem.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Confidential. Drafted by Askew and approved by S on April 16. Rusk attended the SEATO Council meeting in Manila, April 13–15.

47. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 47. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 1

Manila, April 14, 1964, noon.

Secto 17. For the President and Acting Secretary. We are still punching a feather bed in trying to find out what French really have in mind about South Vietnam. It seems quite clear that Couve does not intend to present any plan or detailed suggestions about neutralization. He apparently believes, as we have known before, that present course in Vietnam cannot succeed and that real choice lies between larger war (which, contrary to Alphand interpretation, he does not seem to recommend or view hopefully) or some sort of political solution. The missing piece is of course full French effort to give present line best chance of success as better alternative to grim choices which failure would pose.

We cannot yet be sure on basis of first dayʼs discussion whether we shall have a confrontation over handling of South Vietnam in communiqué. My present impression is that French may not push in such a way as to underscore still further their isolation within SEATO. There is no disposition among others, however, to let France set the tone. Will keep you informed.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

48. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 48. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 1

Manila, April 14, 1964, 7 p.m.

Secto 26. For Acting Secretary from Secretary. Restricted session today found Couve immovable on even going so far as to express outright support of effort in South Vietnam despite his clearly stated belief it will not succeed. In view of this, now seems highly likely we face real crusher on communiqué, which now strongly worded not only to condemn North Vietnamese aggression but to express satisfaction with Khanh program and confidence it will succeed.

Would therefore like to have teletype discussion with you plus Johnson and Tyler at 11 (eleven) pm tonight Manila time (ten am your time).2 You may wish discuss issues with President prior to conversation or set up concurrent telephone link with him.

Alternatives appear to be as follows: A. communiqué under SEATO label but in which any differing country speaks own view.3 I think French would reject this.

B. communiqué under SEATO label with best wording obtainable from French. In light Couve reaction and firm front of others, with possible exception of Pakistan, I believe others would not accept this course even if we did and that it might itself break up SEATO.

C. No communiqué with SEATO label but statements by members in whatever groupings appear. Believe we could get at least six and possibly Pakistan as well, leaving French isolated.

My preliminary view is that we should try Alternative A first but if French refuse to accept should turn to Alternative C. Despite lack of SEATO label, statement of six or seven countries would still have great force and perhaps gain because we refused to weaken in order to get unanimity.

A possible fourth alternative would be putting it bluntly to French they should withdraw. However, I think this is undesirable and that any initiative on their withdrawal should come from them. Alternative C might itself trigger such withdrawal, although this seems unlikely.

Above written without having results afternoon session on communique. These may provide further indications and will be available before teletype.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Nodis.

2 Not found.

3 For text of the communiqué, in which the French Council memberʼs dissent is noted, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 834–839.

49. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 49. Telegram From the Delegation to the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization Council Meeting to the Department of State 1

Manila, April 15, 1964, 7 p.m.

Secto 49. For Acting Secretary from Secretary.

1. As expected, communiqué presented main issue. Text key paragraphs concerning Viet-nam and Laos being transmitted septel.2 As you will see, all members except French finally supported strong paragraphs on Viet-nam, with French submitting separate paragraph expressing their sympathy for Viet-nam effort but saying they did not think it wise to join in declaration made by others.

2. Believe this result best we could have achieved in circumstances and at least heartening evidence of solidarity other SEATO members. Couve had resisted stoutly all efforts produce more forthcoming French statement of support during restricted session yesterday, and had simply gone on repeating that since French believed effort in Viet-nam doomed to failure they considered political solution must be explored. Incidentally, in discussing escalation possibility in restricted session, Couve said that if French were consulted they would probably be “rather against” extending the war to the north, which in his view would have to include hostilities with China. This seems to clarify French thinking this point and to negate Alphandʼs contrary interpretation. At same time, Couve said there certainly was no assurance Chinese Communists in fact would accept a neutral Viet-nam (even with US forces withdrawn, which he had made clear in private conversation was what French envisaged). Comment on this position seems superfluous, but at least we are a shade clearer where French stand and they were at least willing to express their sympathy for Vietnamese effort.

3. As to impact on French-Vietnamese relations, Quat seemed both satisfied with strength of declarations by other members and even somewhat pleased that French had finally ended up with some affirmative however mild. Couve and Quat have also had two conversations here, of which second was reported by Quat to be cordial and Quat considers door now open for French to initiate discussions that could include economic issues as well as restoration of Ambassadors. I will want to discuss this more fully in Saigon to assess what our next move and position with Khan should be.

4. As communiqué shows, all others remained solid throughout although Pakistanis said little and Lopez made abortive effort find common group between our strong position and that of French. Thanat, as expected, particularly firm. Essentially French were isolated in restricted session but were not publicly pilloried except by Thanat in opening public session, which Couve did resent. Otherwise, he probably content with result and had no latitude to go further. In this morningʼs session on communiqué he quickly suggested solution along lines ultimately reached.

5. What French future in SEATO is or should be is a matter we should consider on my return, but there no indication here French plan withdrawal. On contrary, given probable rigidity De Gaulleʼs instructions, Couve seemed to be going to some length to avoid confrontation.

6. As to greater individual contributions to Viet-nam, I have obtained no specific promises of material significance but believe communiqué and atmosphere here have prepared way for us to keep pressure on.

7. In Laos discussion, French proposed text that would have blamed “factions” impartially but yielded to final text which refers “particularly” to Communist violations.

8. Other communiqué issues revolved around Pakistani effort to invoke SEATO support as between member states and non-member states, meaning of course India, and brief British effort express concern on Malaysia. We stayed out of Pakistani fight, partly in order to avoid disturbing Pakistanis and possibly upsetting their support for Vietnamese paragraphs. Believe result innocuous.

9. In sum, meeting closed on fairly high note, considering adamant French position.3

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 PHIL (MA). Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, Paris, London, and Vientiane and passed to the White House.

2 See footnote 3, Document 48.

3 Verbatim records of the 1964 Council Meeting are in Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2384E.

50. Memorandum for the Record 50. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, April 27, 1964.

SUBJECT

Breakfast Meeting at the White House—22 April 1964

ATTENDED BY

The President, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Mr. McCone, Mr. Bundy, Senators Mansfield, Humphrey, Dirksen, Kuchel, Speaker McCormack, Boggs, Halleck, Arends, and one or two others

1. The President spoke at some length on the South Vietnamese policies, reading a letter of President Eisenhower to presumably Diem in October, 1954, indicating present policy was identical with that outlined by Eisenhower. There was some criticism on the part of Halleck, Dirksen and several other Senators because of complaints received from their constituents and American guests. The President then spoke of the proposed cutback in the special nuclear materials and turned the meeting over to Rusk who then reported on his trip as follows:

2. Rusk summarized the SEATO meeting, emphasizing unanimity with the exception of Franceʼs dissension and the communiqué2 which condemned North Vietnam for their aggression. He felt the SEATO meeting had gone very well, that France would not withdraw from SEATO.3 Rusk then described in detail his impressions of South Vietnam, his confidence in Khanh, his feeling that the tide had turned, and that he was confident that actions taken by Khanh since the McNamara visit are now being felt and we could expect better news in the future. He spoke briefly of the Laotian situation. He did not touch on his talks with Chiang Kai-shek.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Southeast Asia.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, John McCone Memoranda of Meetings with the President, 4/3/64–5/20/64. No classification marking. The memorandum was dictated by McCone and transcribed by his secretary.

2 See footnote 3, Document 48.

3 A report on the Ninth SEATO Council session, April 13–15, which reflects in more detail this optimistic view of the meeting, is in circular airgram CA–11512, May 6. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO)

51. Memorandum of Conversation 51. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 25, 1964, 12:25–12:38 p.m.

SUBJECT

SEATO and the Situation in Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

The President

H.E. Konthi Suphamongkhon, Secretary General of SEATO

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Mr. Laurence G. Pickering, Officer-in-Charge, Thai Affairs, Department of State

After congratulating Konthi on his appointment as Secretary General, the President asked for Konthiʼs evaluation of what SEATO was prepared to do in Laos and Viet-Nam in case of need. Konthi replied that much depended on the situation, noting first that SEATO could act in either of those countries only on the basis of a request for action from them, and secondly that there would no doubt be lack of agreement among the members of SEATO about the need for action. In the latter case, he made clear, individual members of the Organization could still act because of the interpretation of SEATO obligations contained in the Rusk-Thanat communiqué of March, 1962,2 which had been accepted by most of the members. The President then asked for a rundown of the likely response of the individual member countries to a call for action. Konthi said that in his judgment all would respond in accordance with their capabilities except France and Pakistan.

The President laid great stress on the importance of all nations and international organizations joining in the effort to keep the peace in Southeast Asia. If that effort fails, he concluded, the SEATO nations will have to be prepared to move in and do the job.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential. The meeting was held at the White House. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs Daily Diary. (Ibid.) On May 23, Rusk sent the President a briefing memorandum for Konthiʼs courtesy call. (Ibid.)

2 For text of the Rusk-Thanat communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

3  Konthi also met with Secretary Rusk, Harriman, and William Bundy on May 25. They discussed plans for continuing funding for the SEATO Graduate School of Engineering, SEATO support for a feeder road system in northern Thailand, and the non-SEATO issue of continuation of U.S. consumable assistance to Thailand. (Memorandum of conversation, May 25; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO) According to Ruskʼs Appointment Book, Rusk and the other Americans met Konthi for lunch at the Department of State beginning at 1:07 p.m. (Johnson Library)

52. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Senator Richard Russell 52. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Senator Richard Russell 1

Washington, May 27, 1964, 10:55 p.m.

Senator Russell: Pretty Good. How are you Mr. President?

President Johnson: Oh, Iʼve got lots of trouble. I want to see what you…

Russell: Well, we all have those.

Johnson: What do you think about this Vietnam thing? Iʼd like to hear you talk a little bit.

Russell: Well, frankly, Mr. President, if you were to tell me that I was authorized to settle as I saw fit, I would respectfully decline to undertake it. Itʼs the damn worse mess that I ever saw, and I donʼt like to brag and I never have been right many times in my life, but I knew that we were gone to get into this sort of mess when we went in there. And I donʼt see how weʼre ever going to get out of it without fighting a major war with the Chinese and all of them down there in those rice paddies and jungles. I just donʼt see it. I just donʼt know what to do.

Johnson: Well, thatʼs the way I have been feeling for six months.

Russell: Our position is deteriorating and it looks like the more we try to do for them, the less they are willing to do for themselves. Itʼs just a sad situation. There is no sense of responsibility there on the part of any of their leaders apparently. It is all just through generations or even centuries that they have just thought about the individual and glorified the individual. Thatʼs the only utilization of power, just to glorify the individual and not to save the state or help other people. And they just canʼt shed themselves of that complex. Itʼs a hell of a situation. It is a mess, and itʼs going to get worse, and I donʼt know how or what to do. I donʼt think the American people are quite ready for us to send our troops in there to do the fighting. If it came down to an option of just sending the Americans in there to do the fighting, which will, of course, eventually end in a ground war and a conventional war with China, and we do them a favor every time we kill a coolie, whereas when one of our people got killed it would be a loss to us, and if it got down to that—of just pulling out—Iʼd get out. But then I donʼt know. There is undoubtedly some middle ground somewhere. If I was going to get out, Iʼd get the same crowd that got rid of old Diem to get rid of these people and to get some fellow in there that said we wish to hell we would get out. That would give us a good excuse for getting out. I see no terminal date, boy oh boy, any part of that in there.

Johnson: How important is it to us?

Russell: It isnʼt important a damn bit for all this new missile stuff.

Johnson: I guess it is important.

Russell: From a psychological standpoint.

Johnson: I mean, yes, and from the standpoint that we are a party to a treaty. And if we donʼt pay any attention to this treaty I donʼt guess that they think paying attention to any of them.

Russell: Yeah, but we are the only ones paying attention to it.

Johnson: Yeah, I think that is right.

Russell: You see the other people are just as bound to that treaty as we are.

Johnson: Yes, thatʼs right.

Russell: I think there are some twelve or fourteen other countries.

Johnson: Thatʼs right. Yeah, there are fourteen of them.

Russell: I donʼt know much about the foreign policy but it seems to me that there were several of them that were parties to it. And other than the question of our word and saving face, thatʼs the reason that I said that I donʼt think that anybody would expect us to stay in there. Some old freebooter down in there, Iʼve forgotten his name, I havenʼt heard about him lately, but he is still there, sort of a hellraiser and he donʼt know exactly what he wants, but I think he is the most dangerous thing to the present regime. I think that if he were to take over, he would ask us to get out. And, of course, if he did, with our theory of standing by self-determination of people, I donʼt think how we could say we not going to go if he is in charge of the government. Itʼs going to be a headache to anybody that tries to fool with it. Youʼve got all the brains in the country, Mr. President, you better get a hold of them. I donʼt know what to do about this. I saw it all coming on, but that donʼt do any good now, thatʼs water over the dam and under the bridge. And we are there.

Johnson: Well, youʼve got…

Russell: Well, you got McNamara over there. He was up here yesterday testifying before the committee. I didnʼt want to have him up here, but Howard Cannon and some of them wanted to have him up here. So I set up the hearing for 8:30 before I started the Appropriations hearings. Heʼs got, well, rather kicked around so Iʼm not sure he is objective as he ought to be in surveying the conditions out there. He feels like it is sort of up to him personally to see that the thing goes through, and heʼs a can-do-fellow, but Iʼm not too sure that he understands the history and background of those people out there as fully as he should. But even from his picture, the damn thing ainʼt getting any better, it is just getting worse, putting more and more in there and itʼs taking more and more away from the people weʼre trying to help, that we give them. I donʼt know, you better get some brains from somewhere to apply to this thing up. Because I donʼt know what to do with it.

Johnson: Well, I spend all my days with Rusk and McNamara and Bundy and Harriman and Vance, and all those folks that are dealing with it and I would say that it pretty well adds up to them now that we have got show some power and some force and that they do not—they are kind of like MacArthur in Korea—they donʼt believe that the Chinese Communists will come into this thing. But they donʼt know, and nobody can really be sure, but their feeling is that they wonʼt, and in any event, we havenʼt got much choice. That we are treaty bound, that we are there, this will be a domino that will kick off a whole list of others, and that we have just got to prepare for the worst. Now I have avoided that for a few days. I donʼt think the American people are for it. I donʼt agree with Morse and all that he says, but …

Russell: Neither do I, but he is voicing the sentiment of a hell of a lot of people.

Johnson: Iʼm afraid thatʼs right. Iʼm afraid thatʼs right. I donʼt think the people of this country know much about Vietnam, and I donʼt think that they care a hell of a lot less.

Russell: Yeah, I know, but you go sending a whole lot of our boys out there theyʼll care something about it.

Johnson: Yeah, thatʼs exactly right. Thatʼs what Iʼm talking about. You get a few killed. We had 35 killed. Hell, we got enough of them killed—over 35 this year.

Russell: There is more than that been killed in Atlanta, Georgia, in automobile accidents.

Johnson: Yeah, thatʼs right, and 83 went down in one crash on a 707 in one day, but that doesnʼt make any difference.

Russell: Thatʼs the way these folks under stand it, they donʼt understand that thing over there now.

Johnson: The Republicans going to make a political issue out of it, every one of them, even Dirksen.

Russell: Itʼs the only issue theyʼve got.

Johnson: I talked to Dirksen the other day, Friday, and he suggested that I have three of Armed Services, three from Appropriations, and all of them from Foreign Relations down. So I told him all right and invited them. And yesterday before they came he gave out a big statement that we had to get us a program and go after them. And Hickenlooper said that they just had to stand and show our force and put our men in there and let come what may come, and nobody disagreed with him. Now Mansfield, he just wants to pull up and get out, and Morse wants to get out, and Gruening wants to get out. And thatʼs about where it stops. I donʼt know.

Russell: And thereʼs others here that want to get out, but they havenʼt said much about it, but Frank Church told me two or three times that he doesnʼt want to make a speech on it, but he just wished to God that we could get out of there. I donʼt know whether he has told you that or not?

Johnson: No, I havenʼt talked to him.

Russell: But I just use that as an illustration cause he has mentioned it to me more than once.

Johnson: Who are the best people that we have, that you know of, to talk about this thing? I donʼt want to do anything on the basis of just the information that I have got now.

Russell: I donʼt know who, Mr. President. Ah.

Johnson: I talked to Eisenhower a little bit.

Russell: I think that the people that you have named have all formed a hard opinion on it, I think.

Johnson: Rusk has tried to pull back, he has tried to hold back on everything, but he has about come to the conclusion now that Laos is crumbling and Vietnam is wobbly.

Russell: Laos, Laos, hell, it ainʼt worth a damn! Theyʼve been talking about all these battles down there, and I tried to get the best information I could from the CIA and from Defense both about all this fierce fighting on the Plain of Jars and all, and the highest estimate to the casualties is 150. That Laotian thing is absolutely impossible, itʼs a whole lot worse than Vietnam. There are some of these Vietnamese after they beat them over the head they will go in there and fight, but Laos is an impossible situation. Thatʼs just a rathole there. I donʼt know, but before I took any drastic action, I think I would get somebody like old Omar Bradley and one or two, perhaps senior people who had had government experience, not necessarily the military. If he wasnʼt scared to death of McNamara, this fellow Adams who is the head of Strike [Strike Command] would be a top flight man to send out there with them. Let them go out there, fool around for a few days and smell the air and get the atmosphere, and then come back in a few days and tell you what they think, cause they are new in it and would not have a great many preconceived ideas in approaching it.

Johnson: One of our big problems there, Dick, the biggest, between us and I donʼt want this repeated to anybody, is Lodge.

Russell: I know it.

Johnson: He ainʼt worth a damn.

Russell: Why, of course.

Johnson: And he canʼt work with anybody. He wonʼt let anybody else work. We get the best USIA man to put all on all the radios and try to get them to be loyal to the government and to be fighting and quit deserting.

Russell: He thinks heʼs the emperor out there.

Johnson: And he calls in USIA and says: “I handle the newspapers and the magazines and radio myself, so hell with you.” So that knocks that guy out. So then we send out the best CIA man weʼve got and he says, “I handle intelligence, to hell with you.” Then he wants a new Deputy Chief of Mission and we get him to give us some names, and we pick one, the best one weʼve got, send him out there to run the damn war, and he gets where he [Lodge] wonʼt speak to the Deputy Chief of Mission. Then we get General Harkins out there, we thought he was a pretty good man, and he gets where he canʼt work with him. So we send Westmoreland out there. Itʼs just a hell of a mess. You canʼt do anything with Lodge, and that is where McNamara gets so frustrated. They go out and get agreements and issue orders, and sends his stuff in there, and then Lodge takes charge of it himself, and he is not a take-charge man. And he just gets stacked up.

Russell: He never has followed anything through to a conclusion since Iʼve known him, and Iʼve known him for 20 odd years. He never has. I went out with him around the world in ʼ43, the only committee that went out during the war, we went everywhere. And Lodge was on there, heʼs a bright fellow, intelligent fellow, but he is not a man that persists. And he thinks he is dealing with barbarian tribes out there, and that heʼs the emperor, and he is going to tell them what to do. And there isnʼt any doubt in my mind that he had old Diem killed out there, himself, so he could.

Johnson: That was a tragic mistake.

Russell: Oh, it was horrible, awful.

Johnson: And weʼve lost ever since.

Russell: You have to go get someone thatʼs more pliant than Lodge, that would do exactly as he said right quick. Heʼs living up on cloud nine, itʼs a bad mistake. I donʼt know but the best thing you could do is ask Lodge if he donʼt think itʼs about time that he coming home?

Johnson: Well, heʼd be home campaigning against us on this issue every day.

Russell: Well, God Almighty, heʼs goinʼ to come back anyway, when time comes. Iʼd give him a reason for doing it. He is going to come back. If you bring him back now, everybody going to say, “hell, heʼs coming back cause Johnson removed him from out there.” MacArthur with all his power couldnʼt hurt Truman because everybody would said, well, hell, he just mad cause he got removed, though millions sympathized with him in it. And you neednʼt worry. Lodge will be in here, in my judgment, heʼll be on that ticket some way. I donʼt think theyʼll nominate him for President, but they may put him on there for Vice President. But whether they do or donʼt, heʼll be back here campaigning before that campaignʼs over. I donʼt know, I best take that back. This thing is so hopeless for the Republicans. He has certainly got enough critical sense to know that and not get his head chopped off. It would be foolish.

Johnson: Has Clay got any judgment on a thing like this?

Russell: Yeah, he has, even though he inclined …

Johnson: Heʼs off in another part of the world, mostly, isnʼt he.

Russell: I think Clay knows. Iʼd take his judgment on most anything if he separates himself from his predilections. And he donʼt have any out there in that part of the world. I think that people generally have a good deal of respect for Clayʼs judgment too. And thereʼs a great deal of affection and respect for old man Bradley, heʼs not in his dotage yet by a hell of a lot. I had him up here the other day getting some advice on some matters and I found him very alert. Heʼs so humble, I donʼt know, he could tend to be a doormat for Lodge out there. But heʼs an intelligent man. Now Clay wouldnʼt. Clay would stand up to anybody if he felt he had support from high up places. I just donʼt know, itʼs a tragic situation, itʼs one of those places were you just canʼt win. Anything you do is wrong.

Johnson: Well, think about it and call me.

Russell: All right, sir. I have thought about it and worried about it and prayed about it.

Johnson: I donʼt believe that we can do anything that—

Russell: I have religiously because itʼs something that frightens me cause itʼs my country that is involved over there and if we get in there on any considerable scale, there is no doubt in my mind that what the Chinese will be in there and we will be fightinʼ a dang conventional war against our secondary potential threat. And itʼll be Korea on a much bigger scale. And on a worse scale because of the peculiar physical configuration of Korea made extensive guerrilla fighting virtually impossible, but thatʼs not true over in there. You go from Laos and Cambodia, into Vietnam, and bring North Vietnam into it too, itʼs the damnedest mess on earth. The French lost 250,000 men and spent a couple billion of their money and two billion of ours down in there. Just got the hell whipped out of them. And they got the best troops they had. In fact, they had a crack division of German troopers who were serving and the French Foreign Legion went down there.

Johnson: You donʼt have any doubt but if we go in there and get them up against the wall, the Chinese Communists is going to come in?

Russell: No doubt at all.

Johnson: Thatʼs my judgment, and my people donʼt think so.

Russell: Thereʼs no doubt in my mind about it. Youʼll find Chinese volunteers in there as soon as, very shortly, after we have active combat units engaged.

Johnson: Now Mike writes me a memo and all he says is that we continue to support the Vietnamese, and thatʼs number one, and “end to the reflex of pique and face saving of every essay of DeGaulleʼs.” Well, weʼre not piqued, we just asked DeGaulle to give us a blueprint, and he donʼt have it, he just says neutralization. But there ainʼt nobody wants to agree to neutralization. We ask him who would agree to go with old Ben Milam,2 weʼre ready, but he just says, well, we have to continue to maintain our strength and get in a position. But heʼs got no blueprint. “Three, realistic facing of the fact that we are in this situation without reliable military allies.” Well, hell, I know that. “Four, an exploration of the possibility of the United Nations or some other arrangement.” Well.

Russell: Who is this?

Johnson: This is Mike Mansfield. They [the United Nations] wonʼt do a damn thing even on the Cambodian border, and hell, we canʼt get a majority vote in the Security Council. “Our willingness to entertain any reasonable proposals for international conferences.” Well, we are ready to confer with anybody, anytime, but, that conferences ainʼt going to do a damn bit of good. They ainʼt going to take back and behave. We tell them every week, we tell Khrushchev, send China, Hanoi, and all of them word that we would get out of there and stay out of there if they just quit raiding their neighbors, and they just say, screw you.

Russell: Thatʼs right.

Johnson: So the conferences wonʼt do it. Now the whole question as I see it, do we, is it more dangerous for us to let things go as they are going now, deteriorating every day?

Russell: I donʼt think we can let it go, Mr. President, indefinitely.

Johnson: Than it would be for us to move in?

Russell: Well, either we move in or move out.

Johnson: Thatʼs about what it is.

Russell: You can make a tremendous case for moving out, but a good for moving in?

Johnson: Well, now Nixon and Rockefeller.

Russell: But it would be more consistent with their attitude of the American people and their general reactions to go in. They could understand it. But getting out, even after we go in, getting bogged down with the war with China, and itʼs going to be a hell of a mess, it be worse than the one now to some extent, and thatʼs what makes it so difficult. And donʼt forget that old Ben Milam was the only man that got killed. Old Ben was a hell of a hero, but he got killed.

Johnson: Thatʼs right.

Russell: And old Ben was killed. And so if they start off with Ben Milam, which they ainʼt going to do with any inside degree, theyʼll get out and Ben will be killed. Itʼs just a hell of a come on. I donʼt know, I donʼt know how much Russia—they want to cause us all the trouble as they can. But, ah, if there is any truth in the theory that they are really at odds with China, and really is a cleavage there?

Johnson: They are, but they would go with them as soon as the fighting started. They wouldnʼt forsake that China, that Communist bloc.

Russell: I was talking about that. We might get them to take an active part in getting the thing straightened out.

Johnson: We are doing all that we can on that, but she doesnʼt show any signs of contributing.

Russell: Well, theyʼd be foolish to one extent because we just continue to pour money in there and get nothing back out of it. We donʼt even get good will back out of that. I donʼt know, I donʼt know where to go for advice, I just donʼt know where to go for it. McNamara is the smartest fellow any of us know, but he is opinionated as hell and heʼs made up his mind on this. I donʼt think it …

Johnson: Well, Iʼll tell you, Dick, what he has done. I think he is a pretty flexible fellow. He has gone out there and got Khanh to agree that we cannot launch a counter offensive or hit the North until he gets more stabilized and better set in the South. And thought he was buying us time and we could get by until November. But these politicians got to raising hell, and Scripps Howard writing these stories, and all the Senators, and Nixon, and Rockefeller, and Goldwater all saying letʼs move, letʼs go in the North.

Russell: That was a devastating piece that Lucas had in that little old paper.

Johnson: Thatʼs right.

Russell: That paper donʼt cover much of the country, but if it got out everywhere, that would raise a lot of hell.

Johnson: Thatʼs right, and they can always get an isolated example of bad things McNamara says, but thatʼs not generally true that they had too many damn people being killed every day. And that they are flying the sorties and they even get some result and theyʼre killing thousands of their people, but weʼre losing more, I mean weʼre losing ground. And he was hoping that we could avoid moving into the North, and thereby provoking the Chinese, for a few months.

Russell: Hell, you know we tried that from an infiltration guerrilla war standpoint with disastrous results.

Johnson: Lodge, Nixon, Rockefeller, Goldwater all say move. Eisenhower—

Russell: Well, and bomb the North, get a whole mess of women and children killed and infuriate everybody?

Johnson: No, no, they say pick out an oil plant or pick out a refinery, or something like that, take selected targets, watch this trail theyʼre coming down, and try to bomb them out when theyʼre coming in

Russell: Oh, hell, it ainʼt worth it a hoot. Thatʼs just impossible.

Johnson: McNamara said yesterday that in Korea LeMay and all of them were going to stop all of those tanks, and there were 90 of them coming through, and they turned the Air Force loose on them and they got one. Eighty-nine came on through.

Russell: We tried it in Korea. We even got out a lot of old B–29s to increase the bombing load, and sent them over there and just dropped millions and millions of pounds of bombs day and night. And in the morning, weʼd knock out the road at night, in the morning the damn people be back traveling over it. Thatʼs true on that railroad over there on the north coast. We used the Navy with these 14 inch rifles [guns] and knocked a mountain down on it, shelled it, and knocked down this mountain and covered up the railroad tracks. And everybody said, “by God, weʼve got them now.” And in the next morning, the trains were running like the devil right over that track. We shot up several million dollars worth of shells thinking we had closed it. We never could actually interdict all their lines of communication in Korea even though we had absolute control of the seas and the air. And we never did stop them. And you ainʼt going to stop these people either.

Johnson: Well, theyʼd impeach a president, though, that would run out, wouldnʼt they?

Russell: I donʼt think they would.

Johnson: I just donʼt believe that outside of Morse, everybody that Iʼve talked to says that you got to go in, including Hickenlooper, including all the Republicans, nobody disagreed with him yesterday when he made the statement that we had to stand. And I donʼt know how in hell youʼre going to get out, unless they tell you to get out.

Russell: If we had a man over there running the government, that we told to get out, we could should do it

Johnson: Thatʼs right, but you canʼt do that.

Russell: I donʼt know if we could get somebody else. I donʼt remember that fellowʼs name, some sort of a maverick, thatʼs got a bit of a following in below Saigon and then all our people hate him because heʼs always against the government. And heʼs not fighting them and all, but heʼs a very powerful man in Vietnam, and everybody who takes over the government gives him as an excuse for their repressions and suppressions. And if he were to get and say, “now you damn Yankees get out of here, Iʼm running the government now.”

Johnson: Wouldnʼt that pretty well fix us in the eyes of the world and make us look mighty bad?

Russell: Well, I donʼt know, we donʼt look too good right now. And course, youʼd look pretty good, I guess, going in there with all the troops, sending them all in there, but Iʼll tell you itʼll be the most expensive adventure this country ever went into.

Johnson: Iʼve got a little old sergeant that works for me over at the house and heʼs got six children. And I just put him up as the United States Army and Air Force and Navy every time I think about making this decision. I think about sending that father of those six kids in there, and what the hell are we going to get out of his doing in? It just makes the chills run up my back.

Russell: It does me.

Johnson: I havenʼt the nerve to do it, but I donʼt see any other way out of it.

Russell: It doesnʼt make much sense to do it. Itʼs one of these things, heads I win, tails you lose.

Johnson: Well, think about it, and Iʼll talk to you again. I hate to bother you.

Russell: I feel for you, God knows I do. Itʼs a terrific quandary that weʼre in over there. Weʼre in the quicksands up to our very neck, and I just donʼt know what the hell the best way to do about it.

Johnson: I love you, and Iʼll be calling you.

Russell: Iʼll see you, sir.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recording and Transcripts, Telephone Conversation between the President and Russell, Tape F64.27, Side B PNO 121 and F 64.28, Side A PNO 1. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared in the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

2 Ben Milam was a hero of the war of Texas independence.

53. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 53. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 27, 1964, 11:24 a.m.

[Here follows discussion of the Seaborn mission to Hanoi and plans for Ambassador Stevenson to meet with the President.]

Johnson: I will tell you the more, I just stayed awake last night thinking of this thing, and the more that I think of it I donʼt know what in the hell, it looks like to me that weʼre getting into another Korea. It just worries the hell out of me. I donʼt see what we can ever hope to get out of there with once weʼre committed. I believe the Chinese Communists are coming into it. I donʼt think that we can fight them 10,000 miles away from home and ever get anywhere in that area. I donʼt think itʼs worth fighting for and I donʼt think we can get out. And itʼs just the biggest damn mess that I ever saw.

Bundy: It is an awful mess.

Johnson: And we just got to think about it. Iʼm looking at this Sergeant of mine this morning and heʼs got 6 little old kids over there, and heʼs getting out my things, and bringing me in my night reading, and all that kind of stuff, and I just thought about ordering all those kids in there. And what in the hell am I ordering them out there for? What in the hell is Vietnam worth to me? What is Laos worth to me? What is it worth to this country? Weʼve got a treaty but hell, everybody else has got a treaty out there, and theyʼre not doing a thing about it.

Bundy: Yeah, yeah.

Johnson: Of course, if you start running from the Communists, they may just chase you right into your own kitchen.

Bundy: Yeah, thatʼs the trouble. And that is what the rest of that half of the world is going to think if this thing comes apart on us. Thatʼs the dilemma, thatʼs exactly the dilemma.

Johnson: But everybody that I talk to thatʼs got any sense now they just says Oh, my God, please give us thought. Of course I was reading Mansfieldʼs stuff this morning, and it is just Milquetoast as it can be. Heʼs got no spine at all.

Bundy: Yeah.

Johnson: But this is a terrible thing that weʼre getting ready to do.

Bundy: Mr. President, I just think it figure it is really the only big decision in one sense, this is the one that we have to either reach up and get it, or we let it go by. And Iʼm not telling you today what Iʼd do in your position. I just think that the most that we have to do with it is pray with it for another while.

Johnson: Anybody else that we got that can advise with, that might have any judgement on this question, that might be fresh, that might have some new approach. Would Bradley be any good? Would Clay be any good?

Bundy: No, Bradley would be no good. I do not think Clay would add. I think youʼre constantly searching, if I understand you correctly, for some means of stiffening this thing that does not have this escalating aspect to it, and Iʼve been up and down this with Bob McNamara, and I have up and down it again with Mike Forrestal. And I think that there are some marginal things that we can do, … but I think, also, Mr. President, you can do, what I think Kennedy did at least once which is to make the threat without having made your own internal decision that you would actually carry it through. Now I think that the risk in that is that we have, at least, it seemed to do it about once or twice before. And thereʼs another dilemma in here, which is the difficulty your own people have in. Iʼm not talking about Dean Rusk or Bob McNamara or me, but people who are at second removed, who just find it very hard to be firm, if theyʼre not absolutely clear what your decision is. And yet you must safeguard that decision and keep your …

Johnson: What does Bill think that we ought to do?

Bundy: Heʼs in favor of touching things up, but you ought to talk to him about it. Iʼve got an extremely good memorandum from Forrestal 2 that Iʼm just getting ready for you that shows what he thinks about it.

Johnson: What does he think?

Bundy: He thinks that we ought to be ready to move a little bit, a little bit. And mainly the Vietnamese. On the other hand, a readiness to do more. He believes really thatʼs the best way of galvanizing the South, that if they feel that we are prepared to take a little action against the center of this infection, that thatʼs the best way …

Johnson: What action do we take, though?

Bundy: Well, I think that we really do need to do some target fodder work, Mr. President, that shows precisely what we do and donʼt mean here. The main object is to kill as few people as possible, while creating an environment in which the incentive to react is as low as possible. But I canʼt say to you that this is a small matter. Thereʼs one other thing that Iʼve thought about, Iʼve only just thought overnight, and itʼs on this same matter of saying to a guy, you go to Korea, or you go to Vietnam, and you fight in the rice paddies. I would love to know what happened if we were to say in this same speech, and from now on, nobody goes on this task who doesnʼt volunteer. I think that we might turn around the atmosphere of our own people out there, if it were a volunteer enterprise. I suspect that the Joints Chiefs wonʼt agree to that, but Iʼd like to know what would happen. If we really dramatized this as Americans against terror and Americans keeping their commitment, and Americans who have only peace as their object, and only Americans who want to go have to go, you might change the temper of it some.

Johnson: Well, you wouldnʼt have a Corporalsʼ Guard would you?

Bundy: I just donʼt know, I just donʼt know. If thatʼs true, then Iʼm not sure that weʼre the country to do this job.

Johnson: I donʼt think that itʼs just Morse and Russell, and Gruening, I think itʼs …

Bundy: I know it isnʼt. I know it Mr. President, it is 90% of the people that donʼt want any part of it.

Johnson: Did you see the poll this morning? 65% of them donʼt know anything about it, and of those that do, the majority think that weʼre mishandling it. But they donʼt know what to do, that Gallup.

Bundy: Yeah, yeah.

Johnson: Itʼs damn easy to get into a war, but if itʼs going to be awful hard to ever extricate yourself if you get in.

Bundy: Very easy. Iʼm very sensitive to the fact that the people who are having trouble with the intransigent problem find it very easy to come and say to the President of the United States, go and be tough.

Johnson: What does Lippmann think that you ought to do?

Bundy: Well, Iʼm going to talk with him at greater length, but what he really thinks is that you should provide a diplomatic structure within which the thing can go under the control of Hanoi, and walk away from it. I donʼt think thatʼs an unfair statement, but I will ask him.

Johnson: You mean that he thinks that Hanoi ought to take South Vietnam?

Bundy: Yes sir, diplomatically.

Johnson: Uh, huh.

Bundy: Maybe by calling it a neutralization and removing American force and letting it slip away the way that Laos did, would if we didnʼt do anything, and will if we donʼt do anything. We would guarantee the neutrality in some sort of a treaty that we would write. I think, Iʼm sorry, Iʼm not sure that Iʼm the best person to describe Lippmannʼs views, because I donʼt agree with them.

Johnson: Who, who, who, who has he been talking to besides you? Has he talked to Rusk on any of this? Has he talked to McNamara?

Bundy: Heʼs talked to George Ball. And heʼs talked to, I donʼt think that heʼs talked to Rusk, and I donʼt think heʼs talked to McNamara.

Johnson: Wouldnʼt it be good for he and McNamara to sit down?

Bundy: I think that it would be very good, but I donʼt think, I think, I had planned to have lunch with Walter on Monday, because I couldnʼt find a workable time before for that, but I can do it sooner, if youʼd like me to.

Johnson: I wish you would.

Bundy: I will.

Johnson: Iʼd try to get his ideas a little more concrete before I leave here. And Iʼd like to have him talk to McNamara. I might, I might just have the three of you in this afternoon sometime.

Bundy: All right.

Johnson: Walter, McNamara and him [Ball?]. Iʼd like to hear Walter and McNamara debate.

Bundy: Debate it?3

Johnson: Yeah.

[Here follows discussion of a possible time that afternoon for the President to meet with McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Ball, and Walter Lippmann.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a telephone conversation between the President and McGeorge Bundy, Tape 64.28 PNO 111. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

2 Apparent reference to a memorandum from Forrestal to Bundy, May 26, printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Document 178.

3 According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the President met with McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Ball, and Lippmann from 4:30 p.m. to approximately 5 p.m. (Johnson Library) Ball wrote Rusk an account of the meeting, noting that Lippmann “made his usual argument for neutralization.” Ball reported that when he pressed, Lippmann admitted that he assumed Southeast Asia was “destined inevitably to become a zone of Chinese Communist control” and the best U.S. course was to slow that expansionism and “make it less brutal.” Ball did not think the President “bought Lippmannʼs thesis,” but Johnson was impressed with Lippmannʼs view that the United States was losing the battle of international public relations. After the President left, the group debated Southeast Asia and Vietnam for another hour. (Letter from Ball to Rusk, May 31; Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam (Ballʼs Memos))

54. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 54. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 1

Washington, March 30, 1965, 6:15 p.m.

5052. Paris 5450.2 Prior receipt reftel we had been considering what we might do about French attitude toward SEATO. We had developed major pros and cons in regard to French withdrawal from SEATO.

We see these advantages: First, withdrawal of France (and perhaps Pakistan as well) would make it possible for SEATO to play a more active role in Vietnam including if desired initiation of collective SEATO action. If this results in substantial commitments from other SEATO members, result might be to correct impression in some quarters that Vietnam is just a US war and might help with US Congressional opinion. Second, French withdrawal might increase deterrent against aggressive Communist move by demonstrating a revitalization of SEATO. Third, by French withdrawal we could signify politically that we have no intention of accepting French political approach to Vietnam and SEA.

Principal disadvantages appear to be: First, actions causing France to publicize further formal policy disagreement with US over SEA might play into both Chicom and Soviet hands. In Asia and Europe this might encourage Peiping and Moscow to push us further and might induce France and USSR to work harder to harmonize their policies, e.g., some sort of bilateral understanding on Germany. Second, forcing the issue with France on SEATO at this time might stir De Gaulle to take some unwelcome initiative in regard to NATO.

We had come to the conclusion that French participation in SEATO likely to pose serious and unavoidable problem for them and for us. We were nevertheless reluctant to move directly against the French in SEATO and in interest of maintaining at least correct relations we doubted that a suitable opportunity could be found to approach French Government to this end.

Couveʼs proposal now seems to represent change in the problem and Couve at least seems to see the French problem in SEATO very much as we do. Therefore we think we might simply let nature take its course and if France sends only an observer to meeting in May would offer no objection.

Would appreciate your comments on above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Mendenhall and Manhard; cleared by Green, Bundy, Assistant Secretaries of State for European Affairs Wiliam R. Tyler and Congressional Relations Douglas MacArthur II; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok.

2 In telegram 5450 from Paris, March 26, Bohlen reported that French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville had told him that he would not attend the upcoming SEATO Council in London. The last meeting had been “disagreeable,” and Couve was thinking of sending an observer instead. Asked by Bohlen if this meant France was leaving SEATO, Couve said that was not the present intention but it was impossible to foresee the future. (Ibid.)

55. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 55. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

SEATO Council Meeting

We believe that our main objectives at the SEATO Council Meeting in London, May 3–5, should be related to Viet-Nam. We suggest the meeting be used: 1. To obtain solid SEATO support for South Viet-Nam, including an endorsement of the air strikes against North Viet-Nam.

2. To demonstrate that the U.S. does have allies (like Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines) who are firmly lined up with us on Viet-Nam.

3. To give the Vietnamese Government through an open presentation by its observer at the meeting the opportunity to get its case across better in Europe.

This approach on Viet-Nam will not be welcomed by the French and perhaps by the Pakistani. They may sit quietly by without endorsing it, or they may seek to register objection by absenting themselves from certain sessions or by taking exception in the communiqué. The French are unlikely to react more strongly in view of the indication that they will probably be represented by an “observer” only.

We suggest that we move ahead with determination on the Viet-Nam issue at the meeting. We may be able to devise procedures that could get around any obstacles the French or Pakistani might interpose. We would propose lining up prior support from other friendly delegations.

Recommendation:

That you approve the attached Scope Paper for the SEATO Council Meeting which reflects the approach described above.2

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

London, May 3–5, 1965

SCOPE PAPER

U.S. Objectives

1. To obtain solid SEATO support for the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam in its struggle against Communist aggression from North Viet-Nam.

2. To take advantage of the fact that the meeting is in London and demonstrate to European governments and public opinion that the South Vietnamese Government and people strongly resist the Communist effort to control them, and that this is not simply a civil war within South Viet-Nam.

3. To demonstrate also to world public opinion that the Vietnamese and U.S. Governments have the firm political support of both Asian (e.g., Thailand and Philippines) and non-Asian (e.g., Australia, New Zealand, United Kingdom) allies.

4. To reassure Thailand of firm SEATO backing against the incipient signs of externally-instigated Communist insurgency.

5. To keep SEATOʼs focus on Communist threats by diverting to bilateral discussion any Pakistan or Philippine efforts to raise the Indian and Indonesian threats.

Means of Attaining Objectives

1. By developing a strong U.S. statement for the opening public session.

2. By inducing Thailand, Philippines, Australia and New Zealand to make similar substantive opening statements.

3. By seeking to have the Vietnamese observer address the opening public session in order to get the Vietnamese case across to European opinion.

4. By adoption of a vigorously worded communiqué which includes specific endorsement of the air action being undertaken against North Viet-Nam.

5. By inclusion in the communiqué of praise for contributions to the support of Viet-Nam by both SEATO members and non-members, with specific reference to the military personnel furnished by the Republic of Korea. The communiqué should also appeal for further assistance to Viet-Nam by Free World nations, both SEATO members and non-members.

6. By making it publicly clear that Thailand has now been designated by the Communists as their next target in Southeast Asia after Viet-Nam, and that SEATO members will fully abide by their commitments to Thailand.

Possible Obstacles

1. The U.K. may be concerned that a vigorous approach could produce fireworks. We should seek to persuade the U.K. that this is the only approach which has real political value against the Communists in Southeast Asia.

2. France may object strenuously both to inviting the Vietnamese observer to address the Council and to the type of communiqué we propose. We should let the French know in advance that we intend to move ahead as indicated. We should also line up prior support for the U.S. position by friendly delegations.

3. Pakistan may side with France in its objections to the proposed treatment of the Viet-Nam issue. Prior to the Council Meeting we should let Pakistan know in general terms about our proposed approach since Pakistan might then choose to be represented at a level lower than Foreign Minister Bhutto as a means of muting its opposition.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2498. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared by Salans, Deputy Assistant Secretaries of State for European Affairs Robert C. Creel and Near Eastern Affairs William J. Hadley. The attached Scope Paper was drafted by Mendenhall on March 26.

2  Rusk initialed his approval of the Scope Paper.

56. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 56. Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman of the Policy Planning Staff (Rostow) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asian Development Scenario

In response to your telephone call of this morning concerning a scenario for the Southeast Asia development track, herewith my observations.

1. Present Staff Work. I discovered that thoughtful staff work was already underway under the direction of Mr. Rutherford Poats of AID. His draft outline of March 27, 1965, is attached.2 Some observations on his proposal are included herewith.

2. Setting the Plan in Motion. On page 7 of the attached memorandum it is suggested that we conduct confidential consultations with UN Secretary [General] U Thant and possibly ECAFE Secretary General U Nyun, suggesting that U Thant adopt the Presidentʼs proposal as his own and call for a special ECAFE meeting to consider it. This is the proper direction for an initial move. A principal advantage of attaching the organization to the UN would be to detach it from U.S. South Viet Nam policy. It may be wiser, however, to suggest that U Thant or, possibly, U Nyun appoint a small Asian Wisemenʼs committee to come up with concrete proposals which could then be considered at an ECAFE meeting some months hence. The function of the committee would be to recommend organization and procedures for expanding the Southeast Asian development effort, including its external financing, on a regional basis. Our experience with the Alliance for Progress suggests that governments do better if they react to concrete proposals rather than try to generate them around the table. Moreover, an Asian Wisemen exercise would give us an opportunity to feed in quietly our own substantive ideas.

3. A Fall Back. Obviously, a maximum effort should be made to persuade U Thant to seize this idea and make himself the Ernie Bevin of the exercise. If this proves impossible, we should persuade Thailand or the Philippines to sponsor an Asian Wisemenʼs exercise. First-rate people should be drawn from Thailand, the Philippines, Japan, and Australia. (By way of illustration, the following are some possible names of men of serious repute in the development business: Fuey Ungphakorn, Governor of the Bank of Thailand; Sixto Roxas, formerly chief planner in the Philippines, now in private business; and Okita Saburo, Japanʼs top professional economist recently retired from the staff of Japanʼs economic planning agency.) In this fall-back track, the sponsoring government would put the Wisemenʼs plan into discussion at a future special ECAFE session, or to a meeting of Asian nations especially called for the purpose. The proposed Southeast Asia Development Association could be independent of ECAFE, but its most desirable linkage would be with that organization, although operating with a certain autonomy.

4. Further Internal Staff Work. The attached draft should be brought to completion within Washington and then, as suggested, circulated to our Asian Embassies for more detailed comment. As noted above, we would already have set U Thant (hopefully) in motion. The purpose of our staff work and field comments would be to have something of substance to feed the Wisemen.

5. Some General Observations. a. Having launched the concept in the context of the South Viet Nam crisis, we should seek now (via U Thant or otherwise) to detach it operationally from the crisis so that it may go forward on a parallel track with the widest possible Asian and Free World support.

b. We should set it in motion as fast as the realities permit, while the war proceeds. It will serve our political purposes best if it is an operation in being rather than something to be hoped for when the crisis in Southeast Asia is settled.

c. Its major political purposes should be conceived of as: (1) a way to dramatize the seriousness of our long-term commitment to Asian development in forms which enlarge the role of Asian leadership and which strengthen Asian unity; and (2) a way to dramatize in Hanoi that our South Viet Nam policy is not isolating us from the mainstream of Asian political and economic life. It may be that, in the end, Hanoi will be willing to associate itself with this kind of enterprise; but we should not count on the hope of future economic assistance to Hanoi as a major factor in determining its posture over coming weeks and months in the Southeast Asia confrontation.

6. Some Specific Comments. The attached draft plan needs, in my view, sharpening and clarification in at least three respects: a. It implies that Hanoi might benefit from the Southeast Asia Development Association, but it does not indicate how regional membership for North Viet Nam (page 5) could be brought about in light of the fact that North Viet Nam is not a member of the UN or of ECAFE. It has always been assumed that North Viet Nam would have nothing to do with a UN organization. My own feeling is that any economic carrot to North Viet Nam, relevant to a settlement or immediate post-settlement circumstances, should be direct and ad hoc, in the first instance. Eventually, of course, Hanoi might be folded into more systematic regional arrangements.

b. The function of the Southeast Asia Development Association in reviewing national plans is not sufficiently emphasized. It is essential for our purposes that, as with CIAP, the proposed association screen plans carefully in terms of the adequacy of self-help measures.

c. At some stage, as with the Alliance for Progress, we shall have to hold out somewhat enlarged external assistance, and dramatize our assistance intentions by advancing a large over-all figure for total external support. External capital from all sources flowing into the countries included in the proposed regional members, excepting North Viet-Nam, is of the rough order of magnitude of $530 million, of which about $370 million represents AID, EXIM, and PL 480 funds; $60 million, IBRD (average of last three years); $100 million, other governmental assistance (1963 latest year available). Private investment figures, not immediately available, are believed to be relatively small. A figure of $6.4 billion for a ten year period would represent a 20% increase over present levels, and constitute a useful carrot. If to this we add, hopefully, some diversion of military aid expenditures ($310 million for FY 1964) and make some allowance for an expansion of private investment, we come to a figure of, say, $8 billion for the ten year period.3 Presented in this global fashion (as at Punta del Este in 1961), it does not nail us down to a specific AID increase, giving us scope to see what can be generated from IBRD, Japan, Europe, the Asian Development Bank, private investment, etc. If we set in motion a Wisemenʼs exercise, we shall have time to sort out our statistics and produce a more rational and realistic target figure.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development Program, Vol. I, 1965. Confidential.

2 This outline, which was not attached, was sent by Poats to Cooper on March 27. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia, Vol. IV, Memos 8/64–8/65)

3 This is similar to the figure of $4.5 billion for five years in the attached memorandum. For purposes of rough comparison, our external resources goal set at Punta del Este was $20 billion for ten years, for a population of about 200 million Latin Americans. Omitting Indonesia and North Viet Nam, the population of the Southeast Asian region, as defined, is 120 million. Thus, the proposed per capita external assistance target is low by the Alliance for Progress standard—very low if we assume Indonesia joins the club along the way. If Indonesia is included, the population of the region comes to about 220 million. [Footnote in the source text.]

57. Paper Prepared by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff for the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 57. Paper Prepared by Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff for the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

A Regional Development Proposal for Southeast Asia

A. The Proposition

We should make immediately available to U Thant the idea of forming a new regional institution, The Southeast Asia Development Association. This will be a coordinating and consultative organization. It will have a permanent staff to conduct regional surveys, program reviews, technical studies, etc. It will also have an executive agent (e.g. the IBRD or the proposed Asia Development Bank) for the management of multi-national capital projects. Although the Association itself will finance some joint projects, much of the funds for development will continue to come from bilateral arrangements.

Note: 1) “Regional Membership” will be open to any country of Southeast Asia ready to meet minimum self-help criteria, to permit free access to staff and executive agent personnel, to engage in joint planning and to comply with any other standards the membership itself might establish.

2) “Non Regional Membership” will include certain ECAFE countries outside Southeast Asia.

3) The Association will coordinate its planning with ECAFE for such ongoing regional programs as the Mekong River projects and the ECAFE highway.

B. The Philosophy and the Purpose

This must be more than a political slogan or gimmick; it must not be conceived of as simply one more device to “stop Communism” or “contain China”; it must not be regarded or treated as a creature or special client of the U.S. This means that to the maximum extent possible, the concept must appear to be an Asian initiative and be Asian in character.

Its purpose is to launch a coordinated regional attack on poverty and insecurity in Southeast Asia and, through joint effort and planning, to maximize the regionʼs potential for economic and social development. It is designed to give substance to “Point 5” of the Presidentʼs cabinet statement and to provide a more explicit U.S. commitment.2

Note: While the Association, hopefully, will provide over the long term an incentive and an opportunity for Hanoi to choose the path of cooperation rather than aggression, it should not be regarded as directly tied to the war in Vietnam. Any program designed to induce Hanoi to forsake its present military course would involve such specific political and, to a lesser extent, economic inducements as to distort the broad regional purpose of the Development Association. Such political and economic inducements require early consideration in a separate (albeit related) program.

C. The Scenario

1. Immediately upon approval of this concept by highest authority, U Thant should be approached in confidence and at a high level with the object of having him advance the plan as his own idea.

2. U Thant should be encouraged to appoint a committee of “Asian Wise Men” to block out concrete organizational proposals, some major planning tasks and a few development suggestions over the next ninety days. He should also be encouraged to invite the U.S. and Soviet Governments and the IBRD to send consultants to meet with him.

3. U Thantʼs initiative should be followed at once by a Presidential statement endorsing U Thantʼs proposal as an appropriate follow-up to “Point 5.” The congressional leadership should be briefed at this juncture in order to assure Hill support.

4. The President should let it be known that Governor Harriman will be his Special Representative for the planning of the Association.

5. After consultations with U Thant, Governor Harriman will consult with the Soviet Union, the UK, Japan and appropriate countries of the region to discuss the proposal and generate support for it. (The Governor will have to offer some concrete U.S. commitments at about this point.)

6. The U.S. should take an occasion to indicate that it is favorably disposed to the Asian Regional Bank.

7. After the necessary staff work and congressional consultation, the U.S. should announce, at least in general terms, the amount of money and technical personnel it is prepared to commit to this project.

8. During the period between the early announcements and the report of the Wise Men the form if not the reality of momentum must be maintained. This can be done in a variety of ways—a New York Times Sunday magazine article by, say, Galbraith, a conference of regional specialists at the East-West Center, etc.

D. The Mechanics of Organization

An organizational device must be conceived that will: a. Have a clear Asian cast.

b. Be under the UN umbrella.

c. Not prejudice the eligibility or attitudes of non-UN members should they wish to join.

d. Not imply early UN membership to non-UN members.

ECAFE meets enough of these requirements (and in addition includes such key countries as the USSR, Australia, New Zealand and Japan) to serve as the parent body. The UN membership issue can be dealt with by creating an ECAFE Development subsidiary which would permit countries of Southeast Asia, regardless of their UN stature, to be full participants.

E. The Problems

1. A fall-back position should be prepared in the event U Thant turns down our suggestion. Several possibilities suggest themselves: a country in the region could take the initiative (The Philippines), the formation of an Asian Regional Bank could be expedited and the proposal could be submitted to it, or we could proceed on a bilateral basis.

2. Southeast Asia has important limitations as a Development Region (political animosities, current military confrontations, language differences, a paucity of skills, a bare minimum of complementary economies.) But it has a relatively favorable land-food-population ratio (except for Java). If “Development” is defined broadly, if our tolerance is high and our expectation low, we canʼt lose much, and we may gain a fair amount.

3. Efforts and resources committed to Southeast Asia may divert attention and funds from the urgent problems of the Indian sub-continent. This must not happen.

4. The concept outlined above anticipates eventual U.S. aid to and cooperation with such unpleasant and unpopular folk as Sihanouk, Sukarno and even Ho Chi Minh. This will take some skillful handling within the U.S. and especially on Capitol Hill.

C

[Here follows a list of ECAFE members, associate members, observers, suggested regional and non-regional new members.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, SE Asia Regional Development. Confidential.

2 Reference is to a statement on Vietnam and potential Asian economic development made to the Cabinet on March 25. For the text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, p. 319.

58. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 58. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia Economic Development Planning

I wonʼt bore you with the long papers that have been worked up in staff sessions this week. Their essence is as follows: 1. There is great advantage in continuing US leadership to get a regional Southeast Asia development operation going.

1. For this purpose, we can well blow a second and somewhat louder blast enlarging the general proposition you set forth in your statement on Vietnam at the Cabinet meeting last week.2

3. We should not at this stage give a precise description of the form of the development organization or a commitment in dollar terms. There are two disadvantages in such a course now: a. A long forward pass would probably be incomplete, if we do not line up some receivers down-field. This could make us look silly.

b. Quite soon we will want to separate Southeast Asia development planning from the Vietnamese crisis, in operating terms. We want the real political effect of an effort for regional economic development, but we can get that effect better if we do not tie the two issues too tightly together. We do not want it thought that we are interested in economic development only because we are trying somehow to get out of our mess in Vietnam. The Marshall Plan was helpful in dealing with Soviet pressure on Europe, but it was not designed or presented to the Europeans in those terms.

These considerations lead us to suggest that we should use language like Goodwinʼs in your next statement on Vietnam. But right after that, we should separate the regional economic problem from the Vietnamese problem in day-to-day operations.

We think we should try to get U Thant to pick up the ball and organize some Asian responses. We also think the project should be given to Harriman to work on, both with U Thant and in relevant Asian capitals. This will give it visibility and standing because of his history as a Marshall Plan leader, his international prestige and his position as a liberal.

After we get some Asian responses and perhaps the skeleton of a new Southeast Asia development organization, we should expect to consider a contingent US commitment like our Alliance for Progress commitments of four years ago. A scenario of this kind will allow plenty of time for Congressional consultation in advance of any such US pledge.

These are the essential elements of a quite complex and difficult enterprise. This plan has been reviewed with Tex Goldschmidt, as well as the bureaucrats, and it has his warm support.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. IX. Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 57.

59. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 59. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 1

New York, April 5, 1965, 8:45 p.m.

3936. For Cleveland from Plimpton.2 Regional development in Southeast Asia: discussion with UN SYG.

In response to Deptel 2383,3 Jackson and I this afternoon discussed informally with UN SYG and Bunche possibility of SYG taking initiative in proposing major new international development program in SEA. I mentioned point five of Presʼs statement and Canadian interest as expressed by Pearson. I emphasized US interested in cooperative program in area which would be directed to overcoming poverty, ignorance and disease. US envisaged program not directed against any particular ideology or country but one which was pro people of SEA. We had in mind very substantial resources being available. I said we believed there would be many advantages if SYG felt he could take lead in initiating such a program. I therefore wanted talk with him informally at this stage to see if he felt an initiative on his part might be appropriate. If so, we could discuss more detailed possibilities with him within few days.

U Thant spoke with genuine warmth of Pres Johnsonʼs initiative in point five of his statement and said he had been giving great deal of thought to what might be done. It was clear he appreciated opportunity to talk informally about possibilities. He indicated he thought UN economic commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) should be used in any new cooperative effort. He said he had not as yet received report on their recent mtg at Wellington. If he found no report on that mtg had reached NY, he would cable immediately for word of any relevant discussions.

He apparently envisages any initiative by him as moving on from the report as perhaps a take-off point. SYG said he would like now to consult promptly with his associates.

I mentioned possibility North Vietnamese participation in regional development effort, and spoke of Sov membership in ECAFE as providing opportunity ascertain extent their interest. SYG did not express reservation on either point, saying only that regional economic development was one of things he had had in mind earlier as subject for useful negotiation. SYG said he would not take any initiative until had talked further with US about detailed possibilities. I have impression from discussion that SYG open to taking lead if he can find line of approach which has some possibility of getting Hanoi on board. He made no commitment but is obviously genuinely interested.

As mtg ended I mentioned that our reply to the Seventeen was still being worked on and said I believed we would soon be able give him copy.

Following the mtg SYG, Jackson and Pedersen talked informally with Narasimhan and Goldschmidt. Discussion followed same general line as with SYG except focus was on seeking counsel of Narasimhan and Goldschmidt on best means getting cooperation of countries of SEA and building on UNʼs development experience in the area. Both UN officials believed ECAFE best framework. Narasimhan thought North Viet “initiative” to obtain membership ECAFE would be essential. He speculated whether North Viet could join ECAFE without North Korea also being admitted. He also doubted whether World Bank could be used as executive agent for multi-national projects if Sovs decided contribute. He favored new program being built around present Mekong River arrangements. Narasimhan referred in passing to idea of UN guard forces for development projects in the area and indicated UN remained interested in such possibilities. Narasimhan, as former exec secy of ECAFE, and Goldschmidt, as UN Mekong desk man, expressed appreciation for opportunity for timely informal consultation.

Plimpton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 Francis T.P. Plimpton, Deputy U.S Representative to the United Nations.

3 Dated April 4. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

60. Editorial Note 60. Editorial Note

On April 7, 1965, President Johnson outlined in an address to the faculty and students of John Hopkins University a plan for a cooperative effort for development of Asia. Johnson stated his intention of asking the United States Congress to “join in billion dollar American investment in this effort as soon as it is underway.” The President envisioned the Mekong River providing “food, water, and power on a scale to dwarf even our own TVA,” modern medicine in Asiaʼs villages, schools to train potential managers, and U.S. farm surpluses feeding Asiaʼs needy. He announced his intention of naming Eugene Black, former President of the World Bank, to head the effort. The text of the speech is in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pages 394–399.

61. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson) 61. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) and the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson)1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia Development Scheme

The attached talking notes for your meeting with Eugene Black 2 represent the tentative views of the Department of State and AID on the purpose, sponsorship, scope, organizational arrangements, aid requirements and prospects of a Southeast Asia Development Association. These notes include answers to your questions of this morning. Further discussion among interested specialists and with Mr. Black will be required to firm up these preliminary views.

Thomas C. Mann 3

David E. Bell

Attachment4

TALKING NOTES: SOUTHEAST ASIA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME

Purpose:

To bring together the peoples and governments of Southeast Asia in a constructive association for economic development action, in cooperation with each other and with the advanced nations; to build regional political unit and reduce tensions; to commit the advanced countries and the United Nations to a deeper interest in the development and, indirectly, the security of this vulnerable region; to bring the Soviet Union and North Korea, as well as the neutral counties of the area, into this relation of positive coexistence, offering North Vietnam a chance to change its policies.

Sponsorship:

To achieve these political aims even moderately, the Association must be all-inclusive, limited only by the willingness of countries to subscribe to the Associationʼs principles.

Suspicion that this scheme is a new try at western imperialism will kill it.

Soviet and North Vietnamese participation, or at least initial tolerance of the plan, appears to be essential. Consequently, Asian initiative from here out is crucial. The United States should try to work in the background in the formative stages, giving U Thant the lead.

A tie with the United Nations and with the U.N. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East would provide the best auspices.

Scope:

The broader the participation of Southeast Asian countries the better will be its chances of achieving both the developmental, trade and political purposes. Our interests would be served by the participation of effective democracies—the Philippines and Malaysia—and the strongest countries of Southeast Asia, Thailand.

We cannot dictate the exclusion of any country of the area. We should not, however, commit ourselves to providing direct U.S. aid to any participant, nor indicate that we expect to force our aid on those who have rejected it, i.e., Cambodia and Indonesia.

We should agree to contribute to consortia managed by the Associationʼs executive agent which would undertake projects in or benefiting any member country, regardless of whether that country is recognized by or directly assisted by the United States.

Possible Organization:

The Association would have regional (recipient) and non-regional (donor) members.

It would have a permanent headquarters in the area, with a staff composed largely of Asians for secretariat-type functions, including data collection.

It would have an executive agent, preferably provided by the World Bank, to organize and manage the financing, construction and in some cases operation of regional projects serving more than one country, such as Mekong River projects, international transportation and communications projects, regional educational institutions (medical, dental, engineering, fisheries, agriculture, public administration and other types of colleges serving all countries of the region), etc.

The Association would be loosely associated with, and report to, ECAFE.

It would assist countries of the region to prepare their national development plans and might conduct regular examination of the membersʼ economic policies and problems, in the manner of the CIAP system in the Alliance for Progress.

It also might conduct trade and tariff consultations and discuss complementary industrial investment. Its role in coordinating bilateral aid terms has not been thought out.

Aid Requirements:

Under the best of circumstances, the region (including Indonesia) could use effectively at least $1 billion per year in all forms of foreign economic assistance for development, plus at least $200 million annually in foreign private investment.

We cannot expect these favorable circumstances in all countries of the area soon. Human resources are poorly developed, and training or experiences takes time. The public and private institutions and the basic infrastructure of development are inadequate. Domestic savings essential to economic growth will probably rise slowly. Furthermore, communist threats and aggression are forcing a tragic diversion of resources to military budgets. It is unlikely that there can be an immediate massive reduction of these expenditures.

Consequently, we believe that in the next few years, even with an early cessation of hostilities, the region can absorb no more than $700 to $800 million annually in long-term developmental aid (other than private investment) from all sources.

The United States ideally should not provide more than about half of this total. A dominant U.S. role would run counter to our political purposes and erode Congressional support for the effort over the years. Japan, Western Europe and the IBRD should be pressed to increase greatly their aid commitments to the region.

In addition to our contributions to long-term development, we will continue to have some bilateral aid obligation for economic assistance of a non-developmental character in South Vietnam and Laos, related to their distorted wartime economies or in support of temporarily inflated military forces.

Present and Future U.S. Aid Requirements:

U.S. economic aid to the potential membership of the Southeast Asia Development Association currently runs at about $385 million per year. This includes about $275 million from AID (largely grants), $95 million from PL 480 sales and grants, and nearly $15 million from the Export-Import Bank.

About half of this total, or $200 million, might be called long-term development aid.

A doubling of this U.S. developmental effort to about $400 million annually appears to be a reasonable goal.

This would not require a $200 million increase in the annual AID and PL 480 requirements. Some transfers from emergency-type supporting assistance and military assistance should be possible. Some increase in Ex-Im Bank loans can be expected. To the extent we can stimulate private U.S. investment, with guaranties and loans, we can reduce the need for U.S. Government aid. It may be possible to do our share with a net increase of only $100 million annually in the AID budget request to Congress.

The current U.S. Military Assistance Programs in these countries total $330 million.

An approximate monthly average MAP expenditure for Vietnam is $20 million, of which ammunition represents some $6 or $7 million. Direct U.S. military costs in Vietnam (outside the MAP budget) are roughly estimated as about $20 million per month.

In Laos, the monthly MAP cost is about $3.5 million, of which ammunition accounts for $1.5 million. Direct U.S. air operations have not been accurately estimated on a monthly average basis.

(See attached tables.)5

Private Investment:

Over the past two years, private foreign investment in Southeast Asia, including the Philippines, averaged some $70 million. Thailand got $73 million, Indonesia $12 million, Malaysia $40 million in 1963. There was a net withdrawal of private investment totaling $30 million from the Philippines, $14 million from Burma and $4 million from Cambodia during 1963.

With improvements in security and political climate, financial stability, assurance of profit-repatriation and a generally improved atmos-phere of foreign confidence in the region, this flow of resources and know-how into the region might be doubled.

The climate in the Philippines presently is worsening seriously.

The countries of the area can stimulate greater foreign (and domestic) investment by providing tax exemptions, liberal repatriation rights, permission to own land and bring in foreign technicians, establishing industrial parks, publicizing investment opportunities, etc.

The capital-exporting countries can stimulate private investment in the area by extending their guaranty programs to cover political risks (as we do), offering tax incentives to foreign investors, undertaking studies of investment opportunities, sector surveys and other technical assistance.

Urgent Needs:

A. Rural development, across the board—agricultural production and marketing expansion, potable water and irrigation, rural health and sanitation, village level schools, local roads and other transportation, community leadership training and motivation, etc.

B. Middle and higher education. Example: In Laos, there are only 80 high school graduates a year.

C. Industrial expansion, keyed to stimulation of agriculture, reduction of dependence on imports, and exploitation of labor cost differentials. Examples: Grain processing and packaging, fish canning and freezing, cotton and synthetic textile mills, paper, cement, light iron and steel shapes, cooking utensils.

D. Basic infrastructure: Electric power generation and distribution, especially to small towns for potential new local industries; highways and feeder road construction and improvement; railway expansion, particularly international links; telecommunications.

E. Health services, for cities as well as rural areas, including. 1. In preventive and curative medicines— a) Malaria eradication.

b) Communicable disease control, including particularly: Enteric disease, e.g., dysentery, typhoid fever.

Respiratory disease, e.g., tuberculosis and pneumonia.

Diseases of childhood, e.g., measles, whooping cough.

Leprosy.

Diseases which reach seasonal epidemic proportions, e.g., cholera, small pox.

(c) Control and treatment of diseases of the eye such as trachoma and glaucoma.

d) Control and treatment of nutritional diseases and malnutrition.

2. In public health, expand village health and sanitation by water and sewage disposal and well drilling.

3. In direct health services, develop local and provincial medical facilities and provide surgical and medical teams.

4. Medical education.

Multilateral Projects:

The purpose of achieving greater regional unity can be advanced by giving great weight in project-selection to activities which knit these countries together. Such multi-national projects could be turned over to an Association consortium under World Bank management. These include:

The Mekong Riverʼs exploitation offers this opportunity, but this is a very long-term undertaking of enormous cost. Major, main-stream dams do not appear economically justifiable (in relation to costs in excess of $500 million for a single dam project) for some years. However, tributary dams which may produce electricity for neighboring countries may be feasible in the nearer future.

International highways and railways may be feasible in the near term. The French-built roads linking Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos are in bad disrepair.

A regional airline would make more sense than the present, deficit-ridden national lines. All the cities of the area need airport improvements and airways communications.

Expansion of the regional telecommunications system, which we have developed in Thailand and partially in Vietnam and Laos, is an attractive possibility.

Regional educational institutions, with different specialty schools established in different countries of the region, would serve twin purposes of development and regional political unification.

Some types of disease-eradication campaigns are most effective if they cut across national boundaries.

The regional experts will undoubtedly propose other schemes. A disadvantage of such multilateral projects is the difficulty of tying U.S. contributions to U.S. procurement, i.e., the gold drain issue.

1 Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Southeast Asia. Confidential.

2 President Johnson, accompanied by Ball, Mann, Cleveland, Bell, Poats, Secretary of Agriculture Orville H. Freeman, Secretary of Commerce John T. Conner, Director of the Budget Kermit Gordon, McGeorge Bundy, Bator, Komer, and Cooper, met with Black from 5:50 to 7:20 p.m. on April 8 in the Cabinet room of the White House. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other record of this meeting has been found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

4 Drafted by Poats on April 8.

5 Attached, but not printed.

62. National Security Action Memorandum No. 329 62. National Security Action Memorandum No. 3291

Washington, April 9, 1965.

TO

Secretary of State

Secretary of the Treasury

Secretary of Agriculture

Secretary of Commerce

Administrator, Agency for International Development

Director, Bureau of the Budget

Chairman, Export-Import Bank

SUBJECT

Task Force on Southeast Asian Economic and Social Development

I herewith direct my Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, Mr. McGeorge Bundy, to establish a task force on Southeast Asian economic and social development. I request each of you to designate a senior official or officials to work with Mr. Bundy in this task force. I hope that you yourself will take a direct interest in this matter, and I am asking Mr. Bundy to review all recommendations of the task force with you before they are brought to me for approval.

The task force will prepare plans and recommendations for me and for Mr. Eugene Black with respect to the positions the United States should take for the support of the broad policy announced in my statement to the Cabinet of March 252 and my speech at Johns Hopkins on April 7.3 The work of the task force will be conducted in conformity with my desire that our position be that of readiness to respond to the plans and proposals of Asian leaders. In particular, it is my desire that this work be conducted in such a way as to give the largest possible opportunity for leadership and initiative by the Secretary General of the United Nations.

By the close of business Thursday, April 15, I wish to have a first report from the task force.4 This report should deal with the following topics: 1. An assessment of the most desirable form of regional arrangement for Southeast Asian development. This assessment should include an examination of the conditions that will be necessary to make U.S. contributions effective and to ensure public confidence in their effectiveness.

2. A preliminary assessment of the size and shape of the assistance which could be effectively used within an appropriate regional framework of development. This assessment should examine the possibilities both under conditions of continuing conflict in Vietnam and under conditions of peaceful settlement. It should consider how much of the input could effectively be in the form of surplus commodities, and how much of it might be medical and other technical assistance.

3. An estimate of the contributions we should look for from other industrialized nations, both now and in the event of a peaceful settlement in Vietnam. There should also be recommendations on ways of making these contributions as large as possible.

4. The steps that can be taken to encourage additional private investment by industrialized countries in Southeast Asia.

5. A review of the pros and cons of an immediate increase in U.S. assistance to Southeast Asia even before the establishment of a new regional development program. In particular this review should examine the possibilities for an immediate increase of the input of surplus commodities into the region in ways which will contribute effectively to the broad purpose I have stated.

The Special Assistant for National Security Affairs is authorized to call on the appropriate Departments and Agencies for necessary staff support for this task force.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAMs. Confidential.

2 See footnote 2, Document 57.

3 See Document 60.

4 The report was made on May 11; see Document 65.

63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, April 28, 1965, 7:51 p.m.

1808. Joint State/AID message. SEATO: Economic and Countersubversion Activities. Ref: Deptel 1623 to Bangkok, and Bangkokʼs 1607 and 1637.2

1. We have reviewed suggestion your 1607 to consider how SEATO might be used with greater effectiveness in the crucial period. Believe your suggestion based on two assumptions: (a) SEATO is one suitable avenue for channeling economic assistance proposed in the Presidentʼs Johns Hopkins address; (b) the continued strength SEATO dependent on revitalization its economic and social side.

2. We believe use of SEATO as channel for accelerated SEA economic assistance counter to concepts outlined Presidentʼs speech. He specifically stressed need for SEA countries to associate themselves in cooperative effort which he hoped would involve North Viet-Nam and USSR. We believe use of SEATO surest way not to get support of neutral nations SEA or North Viet-Nam and USSR. We convinced it crucial to success of Presidentʼs Asian economic initiative that question of expansion SEATO economic projects not be identified with Presidentʼs proposal.

3. We also question whether SEATOʼs vitality is dependent today or in foreseeable future on expanded program of economic and social activities. In view of threats now confronting Treaty Area, which likely increase as Communist China moves into nuclear field, it should be clear to Thailand and other Asian members that SEATO is required more than ever for security reasons which led to its establishment. We believe therefore that security sphere should continue as primary focus of SEATO and its activities, and this plus projects related to security should be sufficient to maintain interest of organization and keep it alive and kicking.

4. Therefore, as stated our 1623, we prepared consider proposals for multilateral SEATO nonmilitary projects, both in countersubversion filed directly and economic and social projects serving countersubversion or other security purposes. To be multilateral, such projects should be multinational either as to sources of financing or as to benefits.

5. Application of these criteria to projects proposed your 1637 leads us to following conclusions: (a) Certain port improvement and telecommunications projects in Thailand may be related to security situation and therefore might be considered under SEATO. However, these also on tentative list for broader regional program. To enable further consideration, would appreciate your view as to whether they represent a security requirement and specific information on which affirmative view based.

(b) Do not see how SEATO Graduate School of Engineering could serve broader SEA area until SEATO removed from name of school. As we understand it, this is precisely one of reasons for Expert Study Groupʼs recommendations that action be initiated to remove school from SEATO aegis.

(c) Market research, resource assessment and industrial consultant proposals do not seem have any security aspects, and should therefore be considered either under bilateral programs or in context Presidentʼs SEA development initiative.

(d) Hill tribe research program is already identified as SEATO project in SecGen Report (pp 42–44 of SG/65/REP–C)3 apparently on basis of UK and Australian assistance. We are interested moving ahead in response to Thai request for SEATO assistance for project (SCR/63/D–116). We note that report of technical team which investigated radio broadcasting in NE Thailand last October recommended against moving 50 KW portable transmitter now at Khon Kaen to Chiengmai. Nonetheless, would appreciate Embassyʼs comments on feasibility of moving portable 50 KW transmitter to Chiengmai after Australian transmitter installed rather than wait for resolution of Project Teak negotiations which may or may not result in permanently installed 50 KW transmitter in Northern Thailand some time in future.

(e) We also stated in 1623 that construction projects in NE Thailand (particularly village roadbuilding), rural medical operations and military research offer good potentialities as possible SEATO projects in view their security aspects and provided of course they are multinational in financing. Would welcome firm proposals to enable further consideration.

6. We would like however move slowly in inaugurating any new SEATO economic or social projects over next few weeks until we see how reaction to Presidentʼs economic assistance initiative develops. We would be concerned that new SEATO projects of this type might be misinterpreted during this period as indicating that SEATO is a channel for carrying out Presidentʼs initiative.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 4 SEATO. Confidential. Drafted by Thomas C. Niblock and Richard A. Watters, respectively the Director and the regional affairs officer of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs of AID, and by Mendenhall; cleared by Poats and Trueheart; and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Canberra, Karachi, London for Ambassador Martin, Manila, Paris, Wellington, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Dated April 2, 21, and 25. (All ibid.)

3 Not found.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, April 29, 1965, 7:52 p.m.

6914. Following summary conversation with Under Secretary is based on uncleared Memo of Conversation. Summary is FYI and Noforn.

SEATO: Council Treatment of Viet-Nam

Londonʼs 5202.2

1. On instructions British Ambassador called on Under Secretary April 29 to express Stewartʼs strong objection to proposal we had submitted for treatment Viet-Nam at Council Meeting. He stated Stewart considers our proposal ill-advised because it might (a) wreck UK status as Cochairman with Russians and endanger Cambodian Conference, (b) give impression US might not want carry on in Viet-Nam unless aided by others, (c) strain unity of SEATO because of opposition by France and Pakistan, and (d) induce Pakistan call for similar action by SEATO against India. Also noted British forces already fully committed in Malaysia and, if any others could be found, UK would want to send them to Borneo where Indonesian threat increasing.

2. We presented following alternative communiqué language on Viet-Nam3 aimed at trying to meet British problems:

“The Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam requested the Council members to take action under the Treaty to meet the aggression from North Viet-Nam. In light of the Protocol to the Treaty which designates South Viet-Nam as a protected State, the Governments of Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Thailand, the United Kingdom and the United States agreed that, pursuant to their Treaty obligations and within their capabilities, including their commitments elsewhere, they will take concerted action under the Treaty to meet the Communist aggression in South Viet-Nam. For this purpose they will continue and, wherever possible, intensify actions of the type they have been taking.”

3. Under Secretary pointed to fact that last yearʼs Council communiqué had already committed SEATO members to further action “in fulfillment of their obligations under the Treaty.” We cannot retrogress from this Council recognition that SEATO members have Treaty obligation in Viet-Nam crisis. If Viet-Nam problem not dealt with forthrightly by Council, public impression will be created that US is fairly isolated on this issue.

4. Under Secretary made clear we do not envisage that UK will take action of type different from that it now following in Viet-Nam. There should be no problem between us over implication of troop commitment because we would not expect troops from UK or Thailand and possibly not from Philippines. We have tried accommodate Stewartʼs concern on this score by language added to our earlier proposal.

5. Under Secretary stated we could not see that France would pre-sent problem in view status it has decided to assume at Council Meeting. We recognize Pakistan may be more of problem but even there we should have no real difficulties since our proposal exceeds only in rhetoric and not in substance what Council stated last year. Bundy also pointed out that formal understanding which we incorporated into SEATO Treaty would cover us with respect to any Pakistan effort to call for SEATO action in present crisis with India.

6. We stressed that we also have Congressional problem re SEATO and Viet-Nam. We are not pressing for collective action by SEATO as an organization but feel that for Congressional purposes it is essential that SEATO communique appear stronger than last yearʼs, particularly in view of fact that in intervening year several SEATO members have sent troop contingents to Viet-Nam.

7. Bundy said we also attach importance to British Cochairman role. We would think however UK position in support of GVN already made so clear that strong Council statement would not further infringe upon British impartiality. When British representative reiterated concern over effect of proposed communiqué language on Russians at this delicate juncture of Cambodian Conference negotiations, we made point that Soviets with their military assistance to North Viet-Nam appear much less impartial to world in their Cochairman role than UK does.

8. Under Secretary concluded that we regard our proposal as very serious. If SEATO cannot meet Viet-Nam crisis, question rises as to what purpose organization serves. He referred to fact that SEATO Treaty constitutes part of juridical base for Congressional Resolution of last August on Southeast Asia. Both US press and Congress will be watching this Council Meeting more closely than earlier ones to see if SEATO measures up.

9. British Ambassador expressed view that our revised proposal would probably still be considered too strong by Stewart. He thought that reference to Treaty obligations and action within capabilities would be acceptable since these ideas embodied in last yearʼs communiqué, but was doubtful whether his Government could accept “concerted” concept.

10. Under Secretary stated that we would now want to consult with other governments, particularly Australia and New Zealand. We indicated we would have Ambassador Martin consult with his UK colleague from Bangkok, as well as with Australian and New Zealand representatives in effort work out acceptable position. This might then be subject to further discussion at May 2 dinner session which US and Australian Foreign Ministers and New Zealand Defense Minister having with Stewart. British Ambassador thought this reasonable way to proceed. Instructions for Martin being sent separately.

11. For Canberra and Wellington: You should contact EXTAFF at highest possible level to explain our proposal. State that we will be discussing it further with their representatives in London and will welcome their reaction to language proposed in para 2 above. You should treat our exchange with British as NoForn at this stage.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 UK (LO). Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared with Acting Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs Richard Davis and Under Secretary Ballʼs Special Assistant Robert Anderson, and approved by Bundy. Also sent to Canberra and Wellington and repeated to Bangkok, Karachi, Manila, Paris, Saigon, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 5202, April 28, contains a report of Ambassador David Bruceʼs discussion with Stewart in which the British Foreign Minister opposed any communiqué at the upcoming SEATO Council meeting obligating members to undertake collective action to meet “communist aggression in South Vietnam.” Bruce concluded this telegram with the view that “it would be impossible this evening, and will continue to be, to secure British approval of any language which even by implication could be construed as committing them to supply military forces in Vietnam.” (Ibid.)

3 For the communiqué as issued on May 5 at the end of the SEATO Council Meeting, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 709–712.

65. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson 65. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 11, 1965.

SUBJECT

U.S. Initiatives in Southeast Asian Development

Since your April 7 address in Baltimore,2 the Task Force on South-east Asian Economic and Social Development has taken a series of measures to implement your proposal for an expanded cooperative effort for development in Southeast Asia. In keeping with your expressed desire, we are encouraging the Asians and other interested countries and institutions to take the initiative. At the same time, however, the Task Force has taken the necessary steps (a) to assure that the U.S. can respond quickly and effectively to specific Asian proposals, (b) to encourage the Asians to make acceptable proposals, and (c) to initiate programs ourselves where desirable. These steps include: 1. At the request of the UN/ECAFE I have sent an observer to the Special Mekong Committee meeting on May 10–11. He will: (a) Encourage building of a regional development agency on the framework of the Mekong Committee and offer tangible support for the Committeeʼs present prime interest, the Nam Ngum multi-purpose dam in Laos; he will state that the U.S. is prepared to contribute half the cost of this project, provided certain economic and political problems are resolved and other donors together match with grants our grant contribution; and

(b) Attempt to reconcile differing approaches suggested by the Japanese and the U.N. as to the scope and organization of the new program. (The Cambodian break with the United States has complicated the problem.)

2. I have discussed your offer of assistance with U Thant, who is very enthusiastic. Since then the U.N. has been considering various institutional devices to implement the program. In addition, Mr. Rostow and Ambassador Reischauer have discussed your proposal with the Japanese who have shown an active interest and are in the process of developing their own proposals.

3. We have asked the Japanese, during their on-going conversations with the Soviets, to exchange views with them on your proposal for Southeast Asian development. This would serve as a means of bringing the Soviets into a dialogue on this subject. Hopefully, this exchange would also impress upon the Soviets that your offer is not directed against them and that not all the initiative comes from the U.S.

4. I discussed the Asian Development Bank with U.N. officials, expressing the U.S. interest in participating in the Bank, provided it is properly organized. Subsequently, I have informed the U.N. that I would be glad to attend an Asian Bank Consultative Committee meeting in June if the dates coincide with my tentative plans to visit the Far East late next month. Meantime, a U.S. inter-departmental group is preparing a detailed position in connection with the Asian Development Bankʼs formation.

5. Since the cooperation of Western European countries is so important, I hope also to be able to travel there to ascertain their attitudes. Prime Minister Wilson has told Secretary Rusk that he would like to have discussions on the Mekong River project.

6. Meanwhile A.I.D. and the Department of Agriculture are devising additional assistance projects to reach the needy people of friendly countries in which we have bilateral aid programs. They are taking care to avoid undermining the effort to establish a regional scheme for basic economic (and hopefully) political cooperation.

7. A tentative, preliminary assessment of the possible size and shape of a multilateral assistance program for Southeast Asian regional development under varying conditions has been prepared by A.I.D. See Tab A,3 Illustrative Program for Accelerated Economic and Social Development in Southeast Asia. An earlier draft was an annex to the Task Forceʼs preliminary report.

Eugene R. Black

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. X, 4/5/65–5/31/65. Confidential. Bundy sent this memorandum to the President under a memorandum of May 11 in which Bundy stated that Tex Goldschmidt had subsequently reported that the Mekong Valley Development meeting in Bangkok was going well and that the Asian Development Bank planned a meeting June 28–29, which Black would attend. Bundy suggested that Goodwin include a sentence or two on the effort in Johnsonʼs speech of May 13. (Ibid.) On another copy of the covering memorandum there is an indication that Johnson saw it. (Ibid., Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development, Vol. I, 1965) For text of the speech, “The Challenge of Human Need in Viet-Nam,” see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 522–526.

2 See Document 60.

3 Tab A, which Bundy characterized in his covering memorandum as an “enormous thick black book,” was removed by McGeorge Bundy and was “staffed out.” It was not sent to the President. (Memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to Johnson, May 11; Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. X, 4/5/65–5/31/65)

66. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic and Other Posts 66. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic and Other Posts 1

Washington, May 19, 1965.

SUBJECT

Assessment of SEATO Council Meeting, London, May 3–5, 1965

Summary. At the SEATO Council Meeting the US received firm support for its Viet-Nam policy from five other individual members of SEATO (Thailand, Philippines, Australia, New Zealand and the UK). Two individual members refused to endorse US policy—France openly and pointedly and Pakistan in an ambiguous manner. Because of UK opposition SEATO as an entity did not take any action on the Viet-Nam crisis, either collectively as an organization or through its individual members acting collectively under the Treaty, pursuant to their treaty obligations. This latter course is available, however, whenever the US and any of the other members care to use it.

SEATO moved to new ground by specific mention in the communiqué2 of Indonesiaʼs confrontation with Malaysia. Although within the Treaty Area, this is the first time that a non-SEATO or non-protocol state or a non-Communist threat has been dealt with directly in a Council communiqué. The reason in this instance was the fairly heavy involvement of three SEATO member nations (UK, Australia, New Zealand) in this conflict.

Viet-Nam. The US was able to obtain a strong section in the communiqué on Viet-Nam. As a tactic for obtaining support, particularly from the UK, this yearʼs communiqué reiterated several points made in the 1964 Council communiqué at Manila.3 The most important of these was that the Council members had agreed at Manila to take steps to assist Viet-Nam “in fulfillment of their obligations under the Treaty,” which had represented specific association of the SEATO Treaty with the Viet-Nam conflict insofar as individual action by members was concerned. This yearʼs communiqué was stronger in some respects than last yearʼs, the most important of these being the commitment of member governments to increase their assistance to South Viet-Nam and the specific statement that “resolute defensive action” should be continued until Communist aggression is ended. With these additions the Viet-Nam section appears to have made a good impression on the press.

Pakistan Foreign Minister Bhutto took the line in his first closed session address that the conflict in Viet-Nam represents a “national awakening” of the people against outside domination. This was, of course, a clear adoption by Bhutto of the Communist line on Viet-Nam. He subsequently receded quite considerably from his initial position on Viet-Nam, and agreed to communiqué language which left Pakistanʼs position fuzzy and open to varying public interpretations. An approach at a critical stage by a US representative to a Pakistani representative asking whether it was really worth it to Pakistan to oppose the US on what is now the most important issue confronting the US was doubtless a major element in moderating Bhuttoʼs position.

New ground was plowed in terms of the Councilʼs treatment of the Vietnamese observer. For the first time in Council history he was invited to speak to the Council, to sit at the table with the Ministers during all of the closed sessions, and given the opportunity to reply to the statement by the Pakistani delegate. We did not press our earlier effort to have him address the opening public session (where he sat in the audience), but, as it turned out, this did not particularly matter in view of his decision to circulate to the press his statement at closed session and the opportunity afforded the US Delegation at background press briefings to call the attention of the press to the treatment of the Vietnamese observer. Thanat was the chief instrument in seeing that the Vietnamese observer was permitted to remain throughout the closed sessions.

We were also unsuccessful in our attempt to have those members of SEATO supporting us in Viet-Nam agree to label their activities as collective action under SEATO in response to a request by the GVN. The UK stood adamantly against this proposal, probably mainly because of the precarious domestic position of the Wilson Government. Thus SEATO has still never, in a collective sense, been identified or associated clearly and unequivocally with any crisis in the area that it covers.

Laos. For the first time in a Council communiqué, SEATO specifically stated its support for Prime Minister Souvannaʼs efforts to preserve the sovereignty, territorial integrity and neutrality of Laos.

Thailand. We achieved what we wanted with respect to a strong section on Thailand in the communiqué. The Thai Delegation was very happy with the language and with the way the question was handled. Pakistan originally proposed bland, noncommittal language on Thailand, but eventually agreed to our language even though it specifically cites statements by the Chinese Communist Foreign Minister about Thailand as a guerrilla target.

Malaysia. The US was unable to hold its original intention to prevent any mention of Indonesiaʼs confrontation of Malaysia in the communiqué. The UK, backed by Australia and New Zealand, considered this so important in view of the extent of its commitment in this conflict that we felt it necessary to go along. We sought to limit repercussions on US interests in Indonesia by making it clear that the language about the provision of military forces and other aid in defense of Malaysia pertained to actions by the UK, Australia and New Zealand.

Pakistan-India. Pakistan originally proposed language on Indian “aggression”, but later withdrew it, evidently being persuaded that inclusion might upset talks in another forum aimed toward a settlement of the Rann of Kutch dispute.

Legally, of course, Pakistan has a clearer case for demanding SEATO consultation on its dispute with India than the UK does with respect to Malaysia. The fact that the Council agreed to inclusion of Malaysia in the communiqué means that future efforts by SEATO members to bring up non-Communist threats in various SEATO bodies will probably have to be met by the proposal that such threats can be discussed in the political bodies (the Council and the Council Representatives), but should not be discussed in other technical bodies of SEATO.

Cambodia. Sihanoukʼs communication requesting disassociaton of Cambodia from its protocol status under the Treaty was treated along the lines that we had proposed—by drawing Sihanoukʼs attention to the Treaty provision that SEATO will act in the protocol states only at their invitation or with their consent. This method of handling Sihanoukʼs message went beyond Thanatʼs position since he favored no reply at all to such an insulting letter, but did not go as far as the UK would have liked since it was concerned with the possible effect of a reply on Sihanoukʼs attitude toward a Geneva Conference on Cambodia.

Press Attention. The Council Meeting received moderate coverage in the US, but fairly slim coverage in the UK. As usual the press manifested greater interest in what might be worked up into dramatic adverse news: Pakistanʼs attitude and to a lesser extent Franceʼs position,4 though the latter had already been pretty well played out in the press before the meeting. There was unfortunately little or no coverage of some of the points important to the US, such as support of the US in Viet-Nam by those allies most directly concerned and Thanatʼs insistent view that the Viet-Nam conflict is not a white manʼs war, but resistance of aggression similar to that of Hitlerʼs in the 1930ʼs.

Comments on Delegations

1. Australia. Hasluck was strong, vigorous, direct, and almost blunt. He showed no equivocation on any important issue.

2. New Zealand. Eyre was not very effective and did not contribute extensively to the meeting. His statements showed a tendency towards caution.

3. United Kingdom. Stewart was effective as Chairman, skilled as a speaker and active in promoting UK interests. He was cooperative with the US, but only up to a degree. The limitations on his cooperation evidently stemmed from the domestic political situation in the UK and the primacy the UK attaches to the Cambodia Conference and to its possible role, as Geneva Co-Chairman, in any future Viet-Nam discussions. The UKʼs actions on Malaysia have posed future problems to SEATO as to how to ward off consideration of a whole series of non-Communist threats.

4. Thailand. Thanat was quietly effective and a pillar of strength. His was an Asian voice willing to speak up.

5. Philippines. Unfortunately Cayco proved to be a fairly weak delegate. When he was absent, General Santos who replaced him in the Filipino chair was ineffectual. Madame Soriano proved helpful in the corridors.

6. Pakistan. Bhutto was smooth, intelligent and arrogant. He was obviously out for what would enhance Bhutto and Pakistan politically—in that order. His actions were understandable to a degree in balance of power terms, but he had to be reminded from time to time of other factors to be considered in drawing this balance.

7. France. Clarac, French Ambassador to Thailand, intervened only twice—to state Franceʼs basic position at the Council Meeting at the beginning of the closed sessions and to insert the French dissenting paragraph to the communiqué.

Claracʼs conduct thus fitted our tactical purposes precisely, and we lost nothing politically since French views are already well known on Viet-Nam.

8. Viet-Nam. Vu Van Mau, GVN Ambassador to the UK, played his role of observer discreetly and well. He mixed with others in the corridors and did not overplay his hand at the Council table. He showed good common sense and judgment.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Mendenhall; cleared in draft with Salans, Martin, Special Assistant Frank A. Sieverts of P, and with Admiral Blouin of DOD/ISA; and approved by Bundy. Sent to Bangkok, Canberra, Djakarta, Karachi, Kuala Lumpur, London, Manila, New Delhi, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, Wellington, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 The text of the communiqué is in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 709–712.

3 For text, see ibid., 1964, pp. 835–839.

4 On May 28 France announced that it was withdrawing its delegation to the military staff of SEATO. The announcement indicated that Franceʼs civilian representation to SEATO would not be affected, and that France would continue as a member of SEATO. (New York Times, May 29, 1965)

67. Memorandum From Francis M. Bator of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 67. Memorandum From Francis M. Bator of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Instructions to Gene Black for Meeting on Asian Development Bank

At Tab A are the draft instructions for Gene Blackʼs use at the Bangkok meeting on the Asian Development Bank.2 These are agreed between Gene, Dave Bell, Tom Mann, Charlie Schultze and, with one proviso, Joe Fowler.

If you agree, Gene would propose: (1) That the Bank be capitalized at $1 billion, with a maximum US share of $200 million. Of this, we would pay in a total of $100–150 million, over a 4–5 year period. The exact ratio of paid-in versus callable capital would be subject to negotiation: we would try for 75% but settle for 50%. The cash cost to us would run $25–30 million per year over 4–5 years. (If it works out, we would presumably ask the Congress for authorization next spring and for the first appropriation for FY ʼ67.)

(2) The creation within the Bank of a separately financed Southeast Asia Development Fund, with a maximum US contribution of $100 million (par. 7 in Bellʼs memo.). Gene feels that such a fund within the Bank would (i) make it much easier to get others to put money into Southeast Asia; and (ii) be a good way to funnel some of our own development money, as part of the Baltimore program. (As Daveʼs memo points out, Charlie Schultze has some doubts about the tactical wisdom of Black mentioning the $100 million or any other figure. In the face of Geneʼs strong preference for naming a figure, and the othersʼ concurrence, Charlie is not inclined to press the point. He did want it brought to your attention; his memo is at Tab B.3 )

There is one outstanding issue—whether to tie our contribution to the Bankʼs capital to spending in the US:

All concerned agree that the money for the Southeast Asia Fund should be tied. It is also agreed that, if at all possible, the Bankʼs capital should not be tied. However, Joe Fowler would prefer to avoid a public US commitment, this summer, to give away money which is not tied. He is worried about appearing too relaxed about the balance of payments, and would prefer to leave the question of tying open for later decision. (Joe agrees that the real effect on our payments of tying or not tying will be negligibly small. He is concerned about appearances on the Hill.)

Gene Black, on the other hand, feels strongly that we should make it clear now that the US is against any tying of capital contributions to the Bank. He believes that if we hedge on this, it will be impossible to keep others from tying their contributions and that this would impose a serious handicap on the Bank. He is also afraid that a hedged position on tying would take a lot of the political punch out of the US offer. (He telephoned me just now from New York to make certain that you would be told he feels strongly about this.)

Timing: Black will be leaving for Bangkok at dawn on Thursday. He hopes to have a word with you about this tomorrow evening at dinner.

Francis 4

Approved, with Black free to take the lead against tying of Bank capital (—this is what Gene would like, and all except Joe Fowler agree)5

Approved, with instructions to Gene that “if possible, the question of tying Bank capital should be left open for later decision” (—this is the language Joe prefers)

Bundy speak to me

1 Source: Johnson, Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. I, 1965. Confidential.

2 A June 21 memorandum from Bell to the President, not attached. (Ibid.)

3 A memorandum from Schultze to Bell, June 21, not attached. (Ibid.)

4 “Mac [McGeorge Bundy] had to leave before Dave Bellʼs memo came over. He told me to send it in. He has been over the substance and concurs.” [Footnote in the source text.]

5  McGeorge Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “Approved, just before Gene [Black] left.”

68. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State 68. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State 1

Vientiane, November 1, 1965, 0532Z.

437. 1. A good deal of evidence has accumulated in recent past to justify conclusion that Soviets have undertaken fundamental change in their policy towards Southeast Asia. While in larger strategic sense, I believe we should welcome this change, I think we should also be aware that, in detailed, tactical situations, it will give US problems of a practical nature. This cable is effort analyze situation as seen from perspective of Laos.

2. I will start with my own vivid recollection of evening in Kremlin, during spring of 1963, when I sat with Averell Harriman and listened to Khrushchev tell us quite flatly that he had written off and given up Southeast Asia.2 Implicit in his remarks was the assumption that this part of world would be a theater of major confrontation between U.S. and ChiComs, upon both whose houses he would welcome a proper plague.

3. This nadir of Soviet interest was characterized by a virtual moratorium on their activity as co-chairman for both Geneva Accords, and by intimations which British interpreted as marking their intention abandon their co-chairmanʼs role altogether. After Khrushchevʼs removal from office,3 policy and action went into a sort of deep freeze and it was difficult determine any motion one way or another.

4. First tentative feelers of change came with exchange missions between Moscow and Hanoi; and, despite ChiCom efforts sabotage, developed into supply equipment (and presumably personnel) to DRV. This was accompanied by increasing confidence of Soviets in dealing quietly with other areas (such as North Korea) which Khrushchev had implicitly abandoned to ChiCom hegemony. Change accelerated as ChiCom international troubles multiplied, and has seemed to reach its most satisfactory results (from Soviet perspective) in aftermath of Indo-Pakistan armed border conflict. Looking at position in which USSR emerged from that imbroglio, the foreign affairs specialists in the Kremlin could only conclude that their policy on subcontinent had proved itself sound and had, indeed, withstood the shock of combat better than the policy of any other major power.

5. This experience has seemed to underline, and give impetus to, the basic policy change which was being tentatively set in motion with respect Southeast Asia. In this regard, I think it important to note that many key Soviet personnel in Southeast Asia (such as Ambassador Kirnassovsky in Vientiane) have spent a few years in India during formative period of Soviet policy in sub-continent. I believe, therefore, that we can consider Soviet policy being applied currently in Southeast Asia is based in part on what they conclude to be correctness of their policy in sub- continent.

6. With respect to Laos, this rationale can explain the sudden reasonableness of line Soviets have taken on such issues as finances for ICC, Article 19 re continuation of ICC and in general functioning co-chairman role. At same time, it explains sudden interest in travel grants for Lao journalists in Soviet Union, augmentation of cultural and political staff at Soviet Embassy, conspicuous support for Souvanna Phouma and ostentatious ignoring of Pathet Lao. It also explains willingness tacitly accept a great deal of action which results in direct and severe punishment of Viet Minh/Pathet Lao, without, to best of my knowledge, even a whimper of protest directed towards Souvanna and his government.

7. In analyzing what all this means for Laos alone, I think we can conclude that Soviets have reversed Khrushchevʼs previous policy of cut-and-run, that they intend to stay extremely loose in their operations here, and that they will avoid doctrinaire commitments which might prejudice their opportunities to play for the breaks. I think it means more than half a conviction that U.S. endurance in Vietnam will outlast the DRV, and that the Soviets feel they have good opportunity, once Viet threat to Laos fades, to move into same posture of sharing influence here with U.S. as they have already achieved in India, and at very little economic, military or political cost. In short, I think they are prepared to extend their sub-continent policy eastward, at least into this edge of Indo-China. (Perhaps also to Cambodia, in light of recent happenings there.)

8. For long-run U.S. relations with Laos, this prospect should not displease us. It means (assuming we are successful in Viet Nam) the possibility of a tacit U.S.-Soviet undertaking which would guarantee the continued existence of Laos against ChiCom (or DRV) encroachment. But at same time it means the probable development of an attitude of “neutrality” among the leaders of Laos that will parallel the worst of the casuistic serendipity which obtains in Delhi. These little Laotian rascals unfortunately have a natural predisposition to such frailties, and I suppose we will have to accept it as the general price of containing the ChiComs. I only hope I am long gone from here when they perfect this loss of innocence to an art.

9. As for larger implications in Southeast Asia, we can, if reckless, interpolate this Soviet policy manifest in Laos, to include the shape of things to come in Vietnam. There is already evidence that East European satellites (presumably with Soviet blessing) are seeking to act as handmaidens for U.S.-DRV negotiations. If they (plus the unremitting continuation of our bombing raids and the military pressure in the south) are successful in persuading the DRV to look for a negotiated way out, there will predictably be a sharp break between Hanoi and Peking. And who would then stand ready to move in to hold the heads and swab the wounds in Hanoi but those jolly old green giants from the Kremlin. This would, of course, be a far more significant undertaking and entail greater costs and risks than their maneuvers in Laos; and would presumably be taken only after the most careful scrutiny of circumstances, but, their loose, mobile policy in Laos certainly puts them in posture to move that way if opportunity knocks.

10. My conclusion from all this speculation is that we should treat Soviet policy in Southeast Asia as something that is generally on the make. They see a fluid situation emerging and want to be ready to exploit it. They feel they have been successful in similar circumstances in the sub-continent and can afford, with very little risk, to try it here. This situation will give us certain latitudes strategically and certain problems tactically; but on the whole it is better for us than Khrushchevʼs policy of 1963. Above all, it will be a lot more interesting.4

Sullivan

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-USSR. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Moscow, London, Saigon, Paris, Tokyo, New Delhi, Hong Kong, USUN, and CINCPAC. McGeorge Bundy had this telegram retyped and sent it to President Johnson who saw it. Bundy described it as an “extremely thoughtful telegram from Bill Sullivan suggesting a shift of Soviet Policy in Southeast Asia.” Bundy summarized Sullivanʼs argument as “the Soviets may be moving with some confidence back into Southeast Asia with the double purpose of expanding their own influence in the East and containing the Chinese.” Bundy stated that he shared “Sullivanʼs implied feeling that if this happens, we can probably make a little money on it.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Laos, Vol. XV, Cables, 4/65–1/66)1

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. XXIV, Document 466.

3 On October 15, 1964, the Presidium of the U.S.S.R. Supreme Soviet removed Nikita S. Khrushchev as Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union.

4 In telegram 1606 from Saigon, November 7, the Embassy in South Vietnam concurred with Vientianeʼs analysis, but suggested that for the time being the United States should not expect too much from the Soviet Union or overestimate its influence in Southeast Asia and with North Vietnam. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-US)

69. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs (Toon) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 69. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Soviet Union Affairs (Toon) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 4, 1965.

SUBJECT

Soviet Objectives in Southeast Asia

REF

Vientianeʼs 4372

We assume that in due course Embassy Moscow will comment on the attached cable from Vientiane,3 but in the meantime, I wish to draw your attention to our views of Soviet policy in Southeast Asia, which differ from some of Ambassador Sullivanʼs ideas.

In essence, we do not think that in the long run there is much hope for useful US-Soviet cooperation in Southeast Asia. Limited exceptions may arise on these occasions when Soviet efforts to supplant Communist Chinese presence coincide with our own actions to contain and reduce it. Since the Sovietsʼ purpose is also to reduce our influence, and replace it with their own, we can in general continue to expect Soviet efforts in the region to be hostile to ours.

In this connection, it should be noted that Soviet interests in the Indian subcontinent and in Southeast Asia differ markedly. The former is of immense geopolitical importance to the USSR and involves very heavy Soviet investments of many yearsʼ duration. The USSR can afford to be far less concerned with Southeast Asia, and Soviet policies there are more opportunistic and flexible. We do not believe it is valid to extrapolate from one area to the other.

We are also less sanguine than Ambassador Sullivanʼs cable with respect to the long run effect of the Soviet presence on US relations with Laos. Nor are we hopeful about the prospects for Soviet cooperation in forestalling DRV encroachments there.

Finally, while we concur in general with the cableʼs assessment of the Soviet stance in Laos as being loose and flexible for the present, we are reluctant to read too much into this as an indicator of Soviet policy in Vietnam. The two situations are altogether too different.

Perhaps it is unnecessary to add that we too view Soviet policy in Southeast Asia as being essentially on the make, but we see ourselves as being one of the principal Soviet targets.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-USSR. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by J. Stapleton Roy and Vladimir I. Toumanoff of EUR/SOV.

2  Document 68.

3 The Embassy presented its analysis in telegram 1593 from Moscow, November 15. Although admitting that the United States and the Soviet Union both desired stability in Southeast Asia, the Embassy did not see “significant practical results” from this “coincidence of views in the foreseeable future.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE-USSR)

70. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson 70. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 18, 1965.

The Asian Development Bank will probably have a shortfall of about $100 million in its capitalization when the charter is signed at Manila early in December. The Asians have met their $600 million quota; the United States has met its allotted $200 million, but the hoped for $200 million from Europe will probably fall about $100 million short. Thus, it appears the Bank will start with a capitalization of $900 million instead of the target figure of $1 billion.

Mr. Eugene Black has proposed that the United States should consider picking up the $100 million shortfall on an underwriting basis—that is, hold it until, when and if other countries want to buy these shares from us.2 I oppose this recommendation for the following three reasons: 1) Balance of Payments. The Treasury has been plagued all this year with contingent liabilities that have been made in prior years and are now falling due. While this additional $100 million underwriting proposal could, at the worst, only entail $5 million in cash and $5 million in a letter of credit annually over the next five years, still it is another contingent liability which the Treasury does not want to take on.

As you know, Treasury, State, Commerce, Defense and the Federal Reserve are all engaged in the cooperative effort to tighten up the current voluntary program. I do not think a gratuitous offer of this magnitude would sit well with the business and banking community or the Congress at this time.

2) Diplomacy. I dispatched a team headed by Assistant Secretary Merlyn Trued, with Mr. Robert Smith representing AID and Mr. Benjamin Caplan representing State, to Bangkok in October. These men have had years of experience in international financial negotiations, and it was their unanimous recommendation to me after returning from Bangkok that an enlargement of the United Statesʼ role in this Bank would be resented rather than applauded by the Asians.

3) The Treasury will be responsible for the enactment of the authorizing legislation, and in my appearance before the House Foreign Affairs Committee and in my conversations with the House Banking and Currency Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, I have consistently emphasized that the United States is taking a minority position in this Bank, and that the initiative and direction in this effort is Asian, not U.S. We, in essence, are responding to an Asian request for help, not telling the Asians what to do. So far, I am satisfied and pleased with the reaction to this approach. It meets the Congressional growl that the United States is carrying a disproportional share of the aid efforts in the world.

Conclusion

For the above three reasons I oppose Mr. Blackʼs recommendation.

I have a vast respect for the judgment of Gene Black and I have informed him that we are opposing his position.

Joseph W. Barr

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast, Asian Development, Vol. I, 1965. No classification marking. Secretary of the Treasury Henry Fowler sent this memorandum to the President under a covering memorandum of November 18 indicating that he concurred with all three points made by Barr and “should particularly like to emphasize the importance of his balance of payments argument.” (Ibid.)

2 In a November 19 memorandum to President Johnson. (Ibid.) There was no indication on Barrʼs or Blackʼs memorandum whether the President approved the $200 or $300 million capitalization, but the Asian Development Bank was chartered with a $200 million U.S. capitalization pledge. (Undated briefing memorandum on “Asian Bank and Supporting Legislation”; ibid.)

71. Letter From the Presidentʼs Special Adviser on Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson 71. Letter From the Presidentʼs Special Adviser on Southeast Asia (Black) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 8, 1966.

Dear Mr. President,

Arrangements are being made for my departure April 27 for a monthʼs trip that will take me to some ten Far Eastern countries.

During the course of the trip I plan to have unhurried discussions with a number of key figures in Thailand, the Philippines, Laos, South Vietnam, Malaysia, Singapore, China, Korea and Japan. I may go to Burma. Dean Rusk has asked me to be prepared to visit Indonesia if that seems warranted at the time.

In addition to the special assignment which you have given me, I will try to obtain a clearer picture from the Asian leaders themselves of what they think and propose that be done to bring about a stepping up to economic and social development programs in Southeast Asia. My point of departure will be now that the specific requests to us from U Thant following your April 7 speech2 have been met in full—establishment of the Asian Development Bank and financing for the Nam Ngum Dam in Laos—you desire to know what other possibilities should now be explored. In the Mekong countries I will give particular attention to the future of the river basin development program—including the possibility of strengthening the existing institutional machinery of the Mekong Committee and national agencies to plan and carry out a sound and more vigorous program.

I also plan to follow up on some promising proposals for regional cooperation in the fields of education, health and agriculture. I have invited Henry Heald, former President of the Ford Foundation, to accompany me. Several days ago I met with U Thant and invited his suggestions for the trip. He and his staff were most cordial as they have been to me since my first visit on Southeast Asia affairs a year ago.

There is attached a report and evaluation3 of our efforts over the past year to follow through on your April 7 address at Johns Hopkins. The first ten pages contain my own summary.

Since this report was prepared, I was pleased to learn that Cambodia has asked the UN Secretary-General to raise funds for an important tributary project in that country. Prior to this, Cambodiaʼs participation in the Mekong scheme was tenuous. While I do not believe it would be appropriate for the United States to take the lead in a project for Cambodia—as we did with Nam Ngum—I think we should be willing to be a minority contributor to a UN consortium, provided the Asian Development Bank manages the funds.

I have read the first reports in from Ambassador Reischauer on the Japanese-sponsored Southeast Asian Ministerial Conference on Economic Development held in Tokyo April 6–7. While I agree with the Ambassador that we should avoid the suggestion that we stimulated this important and successful conference, I wanted you to know that in my opinion it was the incentive provided by your Johns Hopkins speech last year that encouraged Japan to call the meeting. Japanese officials leaked plans for the conference to the press the day prior to my arrival in Tokyo last July. Obviously, they did not then nor do they now wish to portray their conference as a direct response to us. At Reischauerʼs suggestion I am making my visit to Japan later than originally planned to allow a longer interval between my visit and the Japanese meeting.

The press in Japan notes with pride that this is the first major international conference hosted by Japan and hails the conference as a major diplomatic achievement. Reischauer agrees. Significantly, Indonesia and Cambodia sent observers who participated in the meetings.

I am satisfied, Mr. President, that we have succeeded in bringing the Japanese to the point where they are prepared to do more in the aid field in Southeast Asia. Prime Minister Sato informed in Conference on Wednesday that it is Japanʼs goal to reach a level of aid equal to one percent of GNP and to soften its loan terms. In its final communiqué the Conference, recognizing publicly the importance of such meetings in promoting economic development and stability in Asia, agreed to meet again next year in Manila and to sponsor a special meeting on agricultural development. The Prime Ministerʼs promise to significantly expand its aid to Southeast Asia will, of course, involve the Japanese more deeply in Southeast Asia affairs.

I was also gratified by the Singapore Foreign Ministerʼs rather surprisingly warm reactions to my offer to visit there and discuss regional economic and social development.

These developments climax—to the day—what I believe has been a fruitful and very promising first year since your Johns Hopkins speech.

I look forward to giving you a full report on my return.

Respectfully,

Eugene R. Black

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that it was received at the Johnson Ranch in Texas at 3:10 p.m. on April 10.

2 For text of the speech, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 848–852.

3 Attached, but not printed.

72. Memorandum of Conversation 72. Memorandum of Conversation1

London, June 10, 1966, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

U.K. Prime Minister Wilson

Foreign Secretary Stewart

Defense Secretary Healey

Sir Burke Trend

Michael Halls

Michael Paliser

U.S. Secretary Rusk

Ambassador Bruce

Minister Kaiser

Ronald I. Spiers

The Secretary said President Johnson sent his warm regards and his appreciation for the way in which Wilson has kept in close touch with us on questions in Southeast Asia. There was one specific problem he wished to raise and that was the question of how Britain sees its relationship to SEATO. As confrontation ends and the British move to bring substantial forces back from Southeast Asia, this question becomes significant. He recognized the special political problems assistance in Vietnam raised for Britain but wondered whether these were applicable in the case of Thailand. The Thais have been pressing us for U.S. manned helicopters and this is a need which the U.K. might fill, one relatively small in scale.

The Prime Minister said this involved deep domestic problems. Last year, he got away pretty well with a tough line on Vietnam but the situation was now changing. The Vietnamese lobby was no longer standing alone and a big fight was brewing not only with the pacificists but with the sophisticated Europeanists. The East of Suez policy was coming under heavy attack and a much more dangerous line-up against the British policy was coming about. Both factions were afraid of Britain getting dug in Southeast Asia in a policy of containment of China. If these suspicions were to be fed by the extension of small aid of the type the Secretary had suggested in Thailand, the result would be a strengthening of the anti-Vietnam forces in Britain which are now showing more and more overtones of anti-Americanism.

Minister Healey noted that the U.K. is now giving a good deal of help, such as in training Vietnamese in Malaysia and in airfield construction in North Thailand. This could be jeopardized if the British gratuitously added to their burdens by expanding assistance in Thailand. He noted also that the British were in particularly short supply of helicopters and helicopter crews. They have had to rob their European inventory seriously and there are only 9 left in Europe. While there are many helicopters in Southeast Asia, they are still over-extended in the area. This was the last type of assistance which the British would be able to handle.

The Secretary returned to the question of how to interpret our obligations under SEATO. The treaty could be liquidated under conditions of peace, but these conditions did not exist. The fact is there is a treaty and the question is how does the U.K. interpret its obligations under it. Defense Minister Healey interjected that SEATO involved no commitment to help the Thais with internal security problems. The Secretary wondered whether it could be extended under SEATO contingency planning. The Prime Minister said that anything which appeared to be “reactivating” SEATO would create problems. Minister Healey observed that the very thing which the United States is trying to obtain, namely a commitment of U.K. power further north, was just the thing which would make the moves suggested most difficult to sell. New physical steps of this character would look to many like the U.K. was beginning along the same path that the U.S. took in Vietnam.

The Secretary observed that there were two different views of the SEATO commitment. The French and Pakistanis have taken one view. The U.S., the Thais, the Filipinos and others have taken another. Where does the U.K. stand? The Prime Minister said that the only way the U.K. could make its commitments in Singapore credible was to terminate confrontation. Defense Minister Healey noted that the U.K. was planning now to bring home only those “confrontation reinforcements” sent out after 1963. If everything were to go perfectly in ending confrontation, the U.K. could start withdrawals to Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong beginning next year. Thereafter, they could start redeploying forces as, for example, returning borrowed troops to the BAOR. At most, their forces in the area would go down to 3/4 of the maximum confrontation force. It was still not clear, however, that things would go perfectly on ending confrontation.

The Prime Minister noted that it was not only the pacifists and Europeanists who opposed the East of Suez policy, but the economists, who felt that more foreign exchange was seeping away than was justified by British interest in the area. Nevertheless, the U.K. would give “prayerful consideration” to the Secretaryʼs words, but the problems could not be overstated. Last year, the Vietnam policy opponents were pressing for a cessation of bombing. Now they were pressing for U.S. withdrawal. He asked how the U.S. felt about the situation in Vietnam at this juncture.

The Secretary said that on the military side, some of the Viet Cong battalions had come out in the open in the last few days. When they come out in the open, they cannot stand up. The U.S. now has enormous fire-power on the ground. By mid-summer, there will be more than was expended in any month of World War II. The problem was, however, in fighting an enemy you could not find. On the political side, the impasse continued. As he had told the Norwegians, they could tell their critics that if they could produce Hanoi, Norway could produce the U.S. Secretary of State. It was necessary to remember, however, that Hanoi had never said that a willingness to negotiate with the Viet Cong would solve anything. There was no reason to believe that Hanoi had any change in policy since the bombing pause, which had lasted twice as long as even the Soviets had suggested without producing a single result. Nevertheless, we are interested in getting some political process underway. That is why we believe we should try to make something out of Sihanoukʼs request to get the ICC going. He had urged the Russians to respond to this request. If the two co-chairmen could meet in Geneva, or the three ICC countries could get together, we would have something going for us. He had even scraped the bottom of the barrel and considered whether as many of us who would, could just go to Geneva and issue a standing invitation to do business, leaving empty chairs for the rest. However, the U.S. just cannot give up in Vietnam. What is at stake is the value of our word and this is more important than 14 million South Vietnamese or even all of Southeast Asia in the present context.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 ASIA SE. Secret; Limit Distribution. Part II of three memoranda comprising the entire discussion. Drafted by Ronald I. Spiers and approved in S on June 20. Rusk was visiting London after attending the NATO Ministerial Council Meeting in Brussels, June 7–8. The meeting took place at 10 Downing Street.

73. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 73. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, June 22, 1966.

SUBJECT

Question as to SEATOʼs Role in Economic Development Activities

Discussion

SEATO Secretary General Vargas in his Confidential Report,2 which will be considered at Canberra, states his conclusion that there is urgent need for SEATO to take a more positive role in economic and social development, and asks a clear decision from the Council whether he should push forward with a meaningful expansion of activities. (SEATO-sponsored projects at present include the SEATO Graduate School of Engineering—soon to become autonomous as the Asian Institute of Engineering; Medical Research Laboratory; Clinical Research Center; Cholera Research Laboratory; Meteorological Telecommunications Project; Military Technical Training School; Tribal Research Center; Vehicle Rebuild Workshop Project, etc.)

Two different answers to the Secretary Generalʼs question have been proposed: (1) We should express our support for the Secretary Generalʼs position and indicate our willingness to assist, as appropriate, on projects which meet SEATOʼs recently established criteria and which have been approved in accordance with SEATO procedures so as to avoid duplication of effort. We should also have in readiness a statement which you could make proposing that SEATO undertake a project relating to rural development and internal security and announcing United States willingness to contribute up to one-half million dollars in support of such a project. (Arguments in favor of this are given at Tab A.)

2. Alternatively, we should take the position that, in future, United States interest in SEATOʼs activities in economic development should be confined to security-related projects. If such a suggestion by the United States is to be made at Canberra, the Secretary should specify in his statement that (a) we believe SEATO activities should be security-related, and (b) the United States offer of one-half million dollars would be devoted during this coming year to such activities as seminars, field trips, conference and training programs associated with civic action/internal security possibilities, and not, at this time, to implementation of action projects within villages, etc. (Arguments in favor of this position are given at Tab B.)

There is no legal impediment to the use of United States funds for SEATO projects under either alternative. These are funds available for either alternative.

The issue is one of policy on which your decision is requested.3

If you approve either alternative 1 or 2, you are also requested to approve the attached SEATO Scope Paper (Tab C), which refers to an announcement of “U.S. willingness to make a substantial financial contribution to an appropriate SEATO project.”

Tab A

Arguments in Favor of Alternative 1

1. SEATO as an organization is important to the US, both internationally and domestically, especially now during the Vietnamese conflict. It is the only organization of its type. If it falters, we cannot replace it. Under present conditions, the organization per se can do little in the military field. The life blood of essential activity must be supplied in large measure by US support for a constructive, though not necessarily large, economic program.

2. Secretary General Vargas deserves US support in his efforts to provide energetic leadership for SEATO. His budgetary proposals for the cultural program have been steeply slashed. If he is now told we want to restrict economic program to certain aspects of security-related projects, he will lose spirit and SEATO may lose a Secretary General.

3. The US is already committed on the general scope of SEATOʼs economic activities. These commitments which include Article III of SEATOʼs Charter, the London communiqué of 1965, and the criteria for projects recently approved by the Council Representatives at a recent meeting contemplate a wider range of SEATOʼs economic projects than merely those security-related. (Texts below, at clip.)4

4. SEATO is a going concern which can add a regional component to economic activities which no other organization is now able to supply. Neither the ADB nor SEAMES is airborne as yet. SEATO can and undoubtedly will continue to make a useful contribution in security-related projects. We should not, however, seek to restrict SEATO to non-operational type project of a security-related nature.

5. SEATO has shown its ability to handle economic projects with a high level of competence. It has also shown the ability to relinquish projects when they have reached a stage when they can become independent or be handled effectively under other auspices. SEATO opens its facilities generously to non-SEATO area members. One of the SEATO Graduate Schoolʼs problems is to deal with the large number of Indian applicants; Burmese and Malaysians have also attended.

6. Area nations within SEATO look to the US for leadership. Large investments are not necessary. What is needed is a forthcoming attitude on the part of the United States. Conversely, an indication of US desire to curtail SEATOʼs activities will have a discouraging effect. So far as obtaining financial assistance for projects is concerned, a realistic appraisal suggests that the “uncommitted” nations of the area will not in any case contribute: Cambodia, Burma, India, etc.

7. We should not give the impression that staunch service on the Free World side is a disqualification for participation in broad-gauge regional economic activities. If it is felt desirable to avoid channeling funds from the so-called “Presidentʼs Fund” through SEATO, there are other funds which can be so channeled. SEATO procedures provide a mechanism to avoid duplication of effort.

Tab B

Arguments in Favor of Alternative 2

1. The Presidentʼs April 7, 1965 Johns Hopkins speech dealt with United States interest in Southeast Asia regional development in non-cold war terms. In that speech and subsequently, we have declared our desire that non-aligned countries like Cambodia, Burma and Indonesia participate, and that room be left for a peaceful North Viet-Nam. Mr. Black has attempted to present the Presidentʼs interest in the area to the Japanese and others in these terms.

2. Over recent months, the Japanese, the Thai, the Koreans, the Malaysians, and others, have organized meetings and moved towards the creation of institutions, based upon this construction of the Presidentʼs desire to support economic and social growth possibilities outside the framework of the cold war.

3. Adoption of this general principle on membership has eased political tensions amongst representatives of countries dedicated to the examination and solution of common economic and social problems. For SEATO to confine its interest in, and competence on, internal security problems within the region is compatible with purposes served by other organizations, avoids risk of duplication and competition that might arise from broader sphere of activity, and is consistent with the defense purpose of the alliance.

4. The experience of other alliances, e.g., NATO and CENTO, in the economic field has been one in which the most creative and productive efforts of the countries involved have taken place outside rather than within the alliance structure. Mr. Vargas and the SEATO secretariat might well benefit from a narrow rather than a broad definition of their responsibilities in the economic and social field, and might over time be more productive were their efforts narrowly focused to civic action and internal security.

Tab C5

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Canberra, June 27–29, 1966

SCOPE PAPER

U.S. Objectives

1. To demonstrate, especially to Australia, New Zealand and other SEATO Treaty Area members, continuing U.S. support for SEATO.

2. To demonstrate continuing SEATO political and military support for the GVN, a Protocol State, in its effort to stem Communist aggression from the North.

3. To help sustain SEATOʼs sense of mission under current conditions of considerable frustration within the Organization.

Means of Attaining Objectives

1. By seeking a strong endorsement in the communiqué of the GVNʼs resistance to Communist aggression, of plans and preparations for elections to the GVN Constituent Assembly, and also of the revolutionary development program based on the Honolulu Declaration.

2. By encouraging publicity, including a statement of endorsement in the communiqué, for the contributions, especially military contributions, by SEATO members to Viet-Nam.6

4. By developing U.S. statements on Viet-Nam and on SEATO that will be concrete and constructive.

5. By seeking to improve the status of the Vietnamese observer at the Canberra Meeting as compared with the 1965 London session.

Possible Obstacles

1. If the French nuclear explosion in the Pacific is set off shortly prior to or during the SEATO Council Meeting, the attention of Treaty Area members, especially Australia and New Zealand, will tend to be diverted accordingly.

2. If internal conditions in the GVN remain in source of immediate and serious concern, the U.S. task will be greatly increased.

3. The U.K. will wish to ensure that there is no implication in the communiqué that the U.K. is committed to any military contribution to SEATO.

4. The French observer will probably be a consistently negative influence, and will disassociate France from Council decisions and the communiqué.

5. Pakistan is likely also to be negative in attitude while avoiding actual obstructionism.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 48. Confidential. Drafted by Bacon with concurrences from Poats and Barnett.

2 Not further identified.

3 There is no indication of Ruskʼs decisions on the source text.

4 Attached, but not printed.

5 Drafted by Bacon and cleared by representatives of 11 relevant bureaus and offices in the Department of State and AID.

6 No paragraph 3 appears in the source text.

74. Memorandum From Donald W. Ropa of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 74. Memorandum From Donald W. Ropa of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, June 23, 1966.

SUBJECT

SEATO and Economic Development

SEATO Secretary General Vargas sees an urgent need for SEATO to expand its role in economic and social development. He cites Article III of the Manila Treaty2 calling for economic development measures, believes that initiatives in this direction to date have been inadequate and is asking for a clear decision from the Council meeting in Canberra next week whether he should press ahead with expanded activities.

The State and AID regionalists cannot agree on how we should respond to Vargas. Bill Bundy has forwarded their separate proposals (attached) to Secretary Rusk for policy decision without his own recommendation.3

This boils down to how narrowly to construe SEATOʼs short term future role in non-military project activity, but it also affects SEATOʼs raison dʼêtre for the foreseeable future and its relationship to other fresh Asian initiatives for regional cooperation.

Bob Barnett and the AID people believe that any new projects should clearly be security oriented. Others at State believe this is too narrow a construction, that non-security oriented projects of regional interest or which are multilaterally beneficial should also be encouraged.

At the inception of the Manila Treaty the objective of fostering economic cooperation in the Treaty area (Article III) made eminent good sense, since other regional cooperative initiatives were then lacking. Now, however, they are not, as a result of the momentum generated in the Far East by the Presidentʼs Johns Hopkins speech. It we press too far in economic development under SEATO auspices we may complicate what we hope to see evolve under ASA, ASPAC, the Asian Development Bank, etc., and further distract SEATO from what should be its primary security and counter-subversion concerns.

The best compromise, and one that considers our overall objectives in the region, might be to encourage only those SEATO development projects that either relate directly to security or can be accomplished better under SEATO than other auspices after considering available alternatives. The Barnett proposed response (Alternative 2 in the attached) comes closer to this.

SEATO, however, needs a boost if it is to play its primary role in security and counter-subversion. That boost could be our positive encouragement at Canberra of a more vigorous counter-subversion program to assist Treaty area states threatened with incipient Communist insurgency. The half-million dollars available as a concrete U.S. gesture could lay the foundation for a SEATO counter-subversion center where methods can be distilled and multilateral counter-subversion assistance programmed against specific threats of incipient insurgency. Neither Alternative 1 or 2 in the attached adequately copes with this.

The added advantage of giving SEATO this boost is that it would be responsive to Vargasʼ other main concern for SEATOʼs future; and both the Thais and Filipinos will be seeking an explicit U.S. gesture at Canberra which gives some substance to SEATO beyond its use to legitimize our effort in Vietnam.

State has come down to the wire the day before Rusk leaves for Canberra without adequately coming to agreement. It might be useful for you to contact Rusk and/or Bundy to review the bidding as set forth above.

Don Ropa

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential.

2 Text in American Foreign Policy, Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 912–915.

3 See Document 73.

75. Memorandum of Conversation 75. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

US/MC/5

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Canberra, June 27–29, 1966

ANZUS MINISTERIAL MEETING

Canberra, June 30–July 1, 1966

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Martin

Thailand Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister

Dr. Sompong Sucharitkul, Private Secretary to Foregin Minister

SUBJECT

Asian Regional Arrangements

The Secretary said he would like to hear the Foreign Ministerʼs thoughts on how the inter-relationships of the various Asian regional institutions, both old and new, might evolve. Thanat said we have of course the security arrangements, including SEATO, ANZUS, and the bilateral defense arrangements between the United States and Korea, Japan, the GRC, and the Philippines. In all of these for the immediate future the power of the United States would remain the shield behind which the free nations of Asia could develop. However, he thought that within the next decade it was possible that these free nations might develop a military capacity which, if properly concerted, could relieve the United States of some of the burden it was carrying at the present.

Outside the security field Thanat thought it would be helpful to guide the groupings into three basic patterns. The creation at Seoul of the Asian and Pacific Council was, in a way, primarily a psychological accomplishment. It proved that, despite the diversity of cultures and previous patterns of alignment, there was now an increasing awareness of the mutuality of their common interest. Some could argue, Thanat, said, that India and Ceylon should be invited. However, inclusion of divided states (SVN and ROK) would not permit this now. Thanat hoped that ASPAC could be maintained as a loosely organized grouping with the primary design of providing an increasingly intimate forum for the candid exchange of views. This would permit, taking into account the absence of Western Powers, the easier concerting of the views of the Asian nations concerned. This process would perhaps in the future give a greater weight to the expression of Asian opinion. Additionally, as it evolved, these exchanges would act also as a moderating influence that might lessen the possibilities for such aberrant conduct as we now see ending in Indonesia. Thanat said Adam Malik debated about either personally attending Seoul or sending an Indonesian observer. He finally decided that either would be premature but definitely planned to attend the next ASPAC session in Bangkok. Thanat said he also thought that by that time Burma and Cambodia might be in a position to attend.

At the other end of the spectrum Thanat said he hoped for the time being to keep ASA confined to Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines. He said working parties were now heavily engaged in preparing for the forthcoming Ministerial Meeting and he hoped that a start could be made in removing as many obstacles as possible to the fullest economic, social, and cultural cooperation between the three countries. Here again, Thanat said, Adam Malik had expressed a desire for Indonesian participation but Thanat thought this could more usefully come a little later after the Indonesians had gone a bit farther in their “tidying up” process.

Mr. Bundy asked about Singapore. Thanat said that during his stopover there last week Lee had indicated interest in having Sabah and Sarawak join with Singapore. He reminded the Secretary of Leeʼs allegorical reference to big fishes who eat little fishes and little fishes who eat shrimp.

The Secretary said that Lee was apparently toying with the idea of consuming a couple of shrimp. Thanat expressed the thought that Lee was still too ambitious. He recalled the incredibly bad judgment of Leeʼs extension of his Party activities out of Singapore into the rest of Malaysia. Leeʼs appetites apparently demanded a bit of “lebensraum”. Thanat thought Leeʼs primary task was to straighten out his relations with Malaysia. Summing up on ASA, Thanat thought that in time Cambodia and Burma would find it attractive as would also South Vietnam.

In between these groupings—through ADB, ECAFE, etc.—the broader groupings should carry on and expand on-going programs. Some nations—Japan, Philippines, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand, as well as Thailand—would participate in all groupings in one way or another. The primary emphasis, Thanat concluded, should be on patience, letting successes of modest programs provide their own attraction so that expansion either in size or in functions would come spontaneously. In all of these activities Thanat said that he hoped they could have the discreet blessing of the United States.

The Secretary said that the Foreign Minister was apparently suggesting that the United States not bestow the kiss of death by too close an embrace. Thanat smilingly assented, saying the United States would be kept fully informed. He was certain that our own good judgment would indicate where and when we might usefully provide assistance.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 305, CF 49. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Approved in S on July 19. The memorandum is part I of VII. The meeting was held at the Ambassadorʼs residence.

76. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 76. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State1

Canberra, July 1, 1966.

Secto 68/Canberra 36. Eyes only for the President and the Acting Secretary from the Secretary.

As I prepare to depart Australia for Manila, Taipei and Japan, I can report general satisfaction about the way our meetings this week have gone.2 The SEATO communiqué3 was a very strong declaration and designated for the first time the aggression in Viet Nam as an armed attack. This is significant under Article 4 para one of the SEATO Treaty. There was, of course, large public interest here in the strikes on Hanoi and Haiphong but general understanding and support. One group of fifteen demonstrators turned up on three or four different occasions and we became quite familiar with each other. I was entirely satisfied with the support from Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines.

Australia, New Zealand and we were quite disappointed in the rapidly softening position of Great Britain on Southeast Asian questions. All three of us agreed that we should work hard on the British separately and privately to try to turn them around. But if I had to report frankly on my present understanding of British attitude, it would be that they have not the slightest intention of joining in any military effort anywhere north of Malaysia and that, with the end of confrontation, they would be glad to be invited out of Malaysia at the earliest possible moment. Michael Stewart, in reference to British interest in eventual bases in Australia, was most unsatisfactory in responding to persistent questions as to what missions such forces would carry out. About the only thing on which he spoke with confidence was that they would be available to assist in the defense of Australia and New Zealand if these Commonwealth partners were subjected to attack. We pointed out that that was a most remote contingency and that what is needed is assistance now where the great issues of war and peace are joined, namely in Viet Nam and Thailand. I now understand more fully than before what they meant when, during my visit with the Prime Minister recently, they said “letʼs not revive SEATO.”

I understand that President Marcos may press me very hard on the war claims issues on which we have repeatedly said that we cannot provide any satisfaction. I am disturbed by indication that he may link this question with whether or not he pays you a visit. This is the same kind of discourtesy which Macapagal pulled on President Kennedy. Unless I hear to the contrary, I would urge him very strongly not to get the question of claims mixed up with a courteous and friendly relationship between our two Presidents. [If he] repeats the business of playing this one for internal politics at the expense of our own President, the reaction in Congress and in our public opinion could be very costly to him. Iʼll do my best on this one.

I know you are relieved by the superb professional job done by our flyers on Hanoi and Haiphong. I must say that their excellent job has made our problem of any possible aftermath much less and once again earns my complete admiration.

Virginia and I sincerely hope that you and Lady Bird will be able to get some rest over the July fourth period.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. No time of transmission appears on the source text.

2 The SEATO meetings of June 27–29 and the ANZUS meetings of June 30–July 1, both held in Canberra.

3 Text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 620–623.

77. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 77. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 20, 1966.

SUBJECT

Princeton Study on Neutralization in Southeast Asia Prepared for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Problem:

Senator Fulbright has sent a study prepared at the request of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by four scholars at Princeton University (Cyril E. Black, Richard A. Falk, Klaus Knorr, and Oran Young) on Neutralization in SEA: Problems and Prospects (Tab A)2 to the President with the comment that “the recommendations, which are sober and sensible, merit the attention of you and your staff.”3 The President has requested you to discuss the best disposition of the study with Senator Fulbright.

Discussion:

1. We have reviewed the study and conclude that while it contains some thoughtful observations on the general problems and myriad complexities of neutralization in Southeast Asia, it is based on a general premise of dubious accuracy: to wit, that “big-power confrontation” can be prevented by neutralization, the price of which may be the acceptance of communist states which emerge as a result of “purely domestic communist pressure.” The study suggests the sketchy outlines of a “neutralization” model which underscores the difficulty of implementing such a plan. Finally, the study suggests that at the right time and under the right conditions, the US should consider exploring such a “neutralization” plan privately with the countries of the area.

2. The study begins with a review of the concept of neutralization and the historical experience of neutralized states. It recognizes that the key problem is not containing direct aggression but indirect aggression and concludes that it would be extremely difficult to calculate how neutralization night affect the pursuit of indirect aggression by states outside a neutralized zone. It discusses the maintenance of neutralization and the concept of control and control mechanisms, acknowledging the difficulty and complexity of such control, the discouraging precedents (e.g. Vietnam and Laos) for effective control machinery, the difficulty of sealing off borders from outside infiltration, and concludes that control problems for any neutralization plan in Southeast Asia would be very great.

3. The study assumes (p. 17) that the object of neutralization is to prevent the neutralized zone from becoming “an important focus of confrontation between powers external to the zone.” It concludes that “if violations mean only that the internal strife within the zone can continue largely without interference from outside, this may represent as much as we can hope for.” This point is not elaborated but appears to mean that violations from one “neutralized” state against another “neutralized” state may have to be accepted as “tolerable”. (i.e., from Vietnam to Laos or Cambodia.) We find this argument difficult to accept.

4. The study discusses at some length the problem of ascertaining whether a violation of neutrality has taken place, the question of unanimity on the part of the control mechanism, and the means by which a guarantor state could take unilateral action or the neutralized state could request help. The discussion underlines the complexity of the problem, admits the possibility of cheating and leads the authors to conclude that if the control mechanism is unable to agree on a violation, the only recourse may be for the neutralized state to renounce its neutrality.

5. The study concludes that the basic requirements for neutralization are (a). “minimal political stability within the neutralized state or states”, (b). a balance of forces among relevant external powers—at least the US, USSR, and Communist China, and (c). an effective control mechanism. It points out the advantages and disadvantages to the three powers in (b) above of a neutralized Southeast Asia. The key advantages cited for the US are realization of the US objective of enabling the neutralized states to develop their own destinies themselves and to receive economic assistance at the same time that substantially fewer US troops would be required in the area (the maintenance of “adequate forces in neighboring areas to fulfill its responsibilities as a guarantor power” is assumed in the study). The main disadvantage would be the need for the US to accept communist takeovers in the guaranteed states “as along as they resulted—without appreciable foreign assistance—from the evolving balance of domestic political forces” (p. 30), including the use of violence. We see this as a critical disadvantage, indeed, and question the quantification of “appreciable foreign assistance.”

6. The authors acknowledge their doubts as to the sincerity with which Peking would enter any agreement for neutralization. The advantages for Peking are listed mainly as the removal of US troops from the neutralized area (although it is assumed Peking would accept US troops in neighboring areas) and the possibility of gaining US acquiescence in “indigenous” communist revolutions. Soviet interests are seen primarily in terms of Soviet desire not to be drawn into any conflict in SEA. Since Soviet interests in neutralization are seen essentially as negative, the studyʼs implicit argument that the USSR might be an effective guarantor state seems itself dubious.

7. The study acknowledges that the hurdles in the way of any agreement would be formidable, that at best neutralization in SEA would not be as effective as in Europe, and that civil strife and political revolutions would probably continue in the area. It argues, however, that under neutralization these would be less likely to lead to international conflicts than otherwise.

8. The study urges that private, preliminary, exploratory negotiations be conducted by the US to “test existing national policies in regard to SEA.” It is not completely clear what is meant by this and in view of the risks in terms of proper timing described in the study itself (p. 37), it is difficult to ascertain how and when the authors of the study would envisage proceeding. The study does note, however, that if both we and the communists envisaged “stalemate or worse” in Vietnam, the advantage of neutralization would look impressive.

Recommendations: 4

9. a. That Ambassador MacArthur or myself review with Carl Marcy5 our general reactions to the Princeton Study as set forth above. Marcy would be told that the Department has itself been examining and will continue to study this subject and welcomes the contribution to an extremely difficult and complex problem made by the study. Marcy would also be informed that you would be prepared to discuss the matter directly with Senator Fulbright, if the Senator so desires.

b. That the attached Department memorandum (Tab B)6 on “Neutralization and Southeast Asia” prepared for Senator Lausche last month be passed to the Committee through Marcy as an example of the Departmentʼs thinking on this subject.

c. That a copy of this memorandum be sent to Walt Rostow in the White House.

d. That no presentation be made to the Cabinet on the subject at this time; and

e. That Marcy be told the Department has no objection to the study being circulated to all members of the Committee and that, while we agree it might be preferable that the study not be published because of the general complexity of the subject and some of the deficiencies of the study, we would not object if the Committee decided to make it public.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 Asia SE. Confidential. Drafted by Paul H. Kreisburg of FE/ACA with the concurrence of Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations Douglas A. MacArthur. Read sent this memorandum to Rostow on August 8.

2 Attached, but not printed.

3 Fulbright made these comments in a June 6 letter to President Johnson, attached but not printed.

4  Rusk initialed approval of all recommendations on July 26.

5 Carl Marcy, Chief of Staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

6 Attached, but not printed.

78. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 78. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, August 15, 1966.

SUBJECT

Foreign Relations Committee Study on Neutralization in Southeast Asia

With your memorandum of July 5, you enclosed a letter from Senator Fulbright and a study entitled “Neutralization in Southeast Asia: Problems and Prospects.” This study was carefully reviewed by several Departmental officers and referred to the Secretary. In accordance with his instructions, Messrs. Torbert and Kreisberg called on Chief of Staff Carl Marcy on August 8, having been delayed for some time by Marcyʼs absence from town.2

They told Mr. Marcy that after careful review of the study, it appeared to contain some thoughtful ideas which would be incorporated in our general thinking and study of the problem, but that we felt it was not quite comprehensive enough to be considered a definitive study of the problem. Furthermore, it presented only one of several possible solutions to the problem with admitted disadvantages. We did not foreclose neutralization, but the final solution would depend on the desires of all the parties at interest, once the preconditions which the study enumerated were achieved. For this reason, we hesitated to recommend publishing the study, although we would have no objection should the Committee decide to do so. We of course had no objection to its being circulated to the Committee (which Marcy then said had already been done). Finally, Marcy was told that the Secretary would be very happy to discuss the report further with Chairman Fulbright should the latter so desire.

Mr. Marcy pressed for a written opinion on the study from the Department, which he could furnish Committee Members for their discussion and possibly later to be published with the study if, as he expected, the Committee should vote to publish it. He was told that we would frankly prefer not to write such a letter in order to avoid being drawn into a controversy over the merits of the study, and/or to avoid committing the Department to any fixed positions in hypothetical future negotiations. If after consideration, however, the Committee still desired a written reply, we would further investigate the possibilities of producing one.

Marcy stressed his desire to get a clear Departmental position to minimize the risk of newspaper speculation on a further dispute between the Chairman and the Administration if and when the study was published. He also dwelled at some length on the Chairmanʼs feeling that the Administration was paying inadequate attention to long-range planning and research as opposed to crises management. Considerable effort was devoted to countering this impression.

It was left that Mr. Marcy would discuss this subject with the Chairman and would be in touch with us if further action was required.

Benjamin S. Read 3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 ASIA SE. Limited Official Use. Drafted by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, H.G. Tolbert, Jr., with the concurrence of Paul H. Kreisberg of FE/ACA.

2 A fuller account of this discussion is in a memorandum of conversation, August 9. (Ibid., POL 8 ASIA SE)

3 Larry C. Williamson signed for Read above Readʼs typed signature.

79. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 79. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 11, 1966.

Eugene Black is in a bind on the Prek Thnot Mekong Project in Cambodia. The Mekong Committee, the Japanese and others had counted on a U.S. contribution to this the next natural Mekong Project after Nam Ngum in Laos.

Section 107–B of the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act2 requires that you determine that it is in the security interest of the U.S. to make a loan to a country which is trading with North Viet Nam. The well publicized movement of goods across the Cambodian-Vietnamese border makes it hard for us to recommend that you make a “national security” determination as now required as opposed to a “national interest” determination which would earlier have been required. State and AID propose to go back to Black, who raised this matter, and have him tell the Japanese and others that “while we are unable to participate in the first phase of this project, we would hope the restoration of peace in Viet Nam or other changes in the situation would permit substantial U.S. participation in financing the projectʼs second phase.” The first phase is likely to take a little over a year.

This is going to create difficulties for Japan and will be regarded as a blow to the Mekong Committee. Blackʼs job will be to persuade the Japanese and other interested countries to finance the relatively small start on the projects ($11 million) and to preserve Cambodian participation until we are through these rough waters.

Unless you perceive some other way around this, we shall proceed along these lines. But I did not want a matter this closely related to your whole Asian program to be dealt with without your knowledge and personal guidance.

We ought to get a telegram out to Black within the next day or so.

Cannot sign national security waiver3

Prepare national security waiver

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Confidential.

2 The Foreign Assistance Appropriation Act for Fiscal Year 1967, P.L. 89–691, October 15, 1966, 80 Stat 1018. Text also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 1058–1063.

3 A note on the source text reads: “11/11/66, 5:40 p.m.—Jake Jacobson telephoned Mr. Rostow that the President first checked ʼcannot sign waiverʼ then crossed it out & said ʼsend back to Walt Rostow to talk with me.ʼ”

80. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator of the Agency for International Development, Far East (Poats) to Secretary of State Rusk 80. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator of the Agency for International Development, Far East (Poats) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, November 22, 1966.

SUBJECT

Your request for information on the basis for the Presidentʼs decision on the Prek Thnot Project

The President made the decision not to participate in financing this project in Cambodia at this time on the basis of a briefing given him in Texas by Walt Rostow, drawing upon Stateʼs telegram 72950 of October 25 (copy attached), and Gene Blackʼs message from Djakarta, Embtel 2227 (copy attached).2 There was further discussion with Rostow by Bill Gaud and perhaps others with regard to Blackʼs inquiry, but no memo was sent to the White House at that time. State and AID were in process of preparing additional information at the request of Mr. Rostow on behalf of the President on the week-end of November 12–13 when Mr. Rostow cancelled this request and informed us that the President had decided not to go ahead with a U.S. contribution to the project.

Stateʼs message #85330 of November 15 (copy attached)3 which recorded this decision was sent to Black on November 15.

The reversal of our earlier consideration of participation in this project resulted from passage of an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act signed October 15, and receipt of information on Cambodian gifts to the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese representatives in Phnom Penh. The amendment to the Appropriations Act removed the Presidentʼs authority to waive, on the basis of his determination of “national interest,” the legal prohibition against providing economic assistance to any country which furnishes items of economic assistance to North Vietnam or Cuba. The law now leaves the President no waiver latitude except a finding of “national security” importance to the United States.

The two outgoing cables attached explain the rationale for the decision, and, I believe, reflect the considerations presented to the President by Mr. Rostow.

Rutherford Poats

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret; Exdis.

2 Both attached, but not printed. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw telegram 2227 from Djakarta, November 9.

3 Attached, but not printed. A note on the source text indicates Rusk saw telegram 85330 to Taipei and Tokyo.

81. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 81. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 1

Washington, November 23, 1966, 8:35 p.m.

90619. For Ambassador Goldberg from Sisco. I know from your telephone call the other day that you are concerned about the fact that we can not now commit ourselves to financial support of the Prek Thnot Dam in Cambodia. While our AID people have been in regular contact with Goldschmidt, this matter is of such importance that it has undoubtedly come to the attention of the SYG and he will expect the fullest kind of explanation. We believe, therefore, that rather than to wait for his inquiry you should take the initiative at the earliest appropriate moment to explain our position in perspective and in context. For your background you should draw upon Deptel 72950 of October 25 and Deptel 85330 of November 15.2 We can send you an appropriate officer if you feel you want added details.

Apart from desirable approach to the SYG, there is also the fact that SYG has called an informal meeting on the Prek Thnot project on November 25 the purpose being to provide governments interested in assisting Cambodia with information concerning the project and to address to these governments an appeal for cooperation and the necessary financing. In view of the fact that we will not be able to make any financial commitment, I would suggest that the Mission be represented at this meeting by Clarence Blau. This is not going to be a pledging session but rather discussion of the status of the Prek Thnot project and the question of financial support. If asked, suggest Blau should confine his comment on US inability to finance Prek Thnot to simple statement that legal and administrative complications exist at present time.

Following is pertinent information additional to that which is contained in above reftels for use in your private talk with U Thant.

When the President following his Baltimore address designated Eugene Black to be his representative on Southeast Asia social and economic development, he requested Black to invite U Thant to offer views as to how best to proceed with his responsibilities. At that time U Thant advised Black to avoid if possible advocacy of schemes that would have the appearance of American initiatives but rather to build upon the work of ECAFE and in particular progress already made by early 1965 in implementing a Mekong Valley development program and in creating an Asian Development Bank.

At the last session of the ECAFE plenary, it was decided that 1966 should be Cambodia Year for the Mekong Coordinating Committee. We consider it important that you impress upon U Thant: (1) continued United States interest in the Mekong Coordinating Committeeʼs activities;

(2) our desire to see that Committee succeed in working out projects from which all the riparian countries, including Cambodia, can benefit;

(3) the continued readiness of the United States to give sympathetic consideration to making financial contributions to sound projects agreed upon by the Committee.

Having made these points clear, U Thant should be taken fully into our confidence as to why we are unable to make a commitment to assist in financing Prek Thnot at this time. U Thant should know that in August 1966 we did, in fact, state confidentially that under certain conditions we would contribute some $5 million to support the Prek Thnot project in Cambodia. We cannot carry out that commitment now because the United States Congress amended the Foreign Assistance Act for 1967 with a provision that imposes upon the President the obligation to find that considerations of national security exist as justification for extending assistance to any country which furnishes items of economic or military assistance to North Viet Nam.

We must consider that the question of such assistance applies to the Viet-Cong as well as North Viet Nam. Cambodia is a source of supply for the Viet-Cong and has made token gifts to the NLF and to NVN in April and earlier. We do not believe that it would be consistent with the purposes sought by Cambodia, the United Nations, and the United States through the operations of the Mekong Coordinating Committee, to make—and publicly defend making—a United States financial contribution to Prek Thnot on grounds that this project in Cambodia served the national security interests of the United States.

We have not regarded support of projects in the Mekong Basin as serving cold war or military purposes. New legislation places the United States in a situation where a commitment to finance Prek Thnot would have to be justified to the Congress and to the world at large as motivated by national security considerations. To do so would be contrary to the basic policies the President supports. To do so would, we believe, present the probability that Prince Sihanouk would reject our assistance and cause him to abandon interest in the project itself. We hope that our decision not to assist in financing Prek Thnot at this time will not deter the Japanese Government, the United Nations and other potential donors from mobilizing the required resources.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Sisco and Barnett; cleared with Poats and Walter M. Kotschnig, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Security Affairs; and approved by Sisco.

2 See footnotes 2 and 3, Document 80.

82. Memorandum of Conversation 82. Memorandum of Conversation1

Tokyo, December 6, 1966.

SAT/MC–10

PARTICIPANTS

Eisaku Sato, Prime Minister

Takeo Miki, Foreign Minister

Kenji Fukunaga, Chief Cabinet Secretary

Takeshi Yasukawa, Director, North American Bureau, Foreign Office

Moriyuki Motono, Prime Ministerʼs Private Secretary

Mr. Makoto Watanabe, Interpreter

Dean Rusk, Secretary of State

U. Alexis Johnson, Ambassador

William Bundy, Assistant Secretary

Ernest K. Lindley, Special Asst. to the Secretary

Richard I. Phillips, Deputy Asst. Sec. for Public Affairs

J. Owen Zurhellen, Counselor of Embassy

SUBJECT

Cambodia

The Secretary said that he had talked with Foreign Minister Miki about Cambodia and would welcome any help that the Government of Japan could give in restoring friendly relations between the U.S. and Cambodia. Prime Minister Sato said that a problem concerning Cambodia was the Mekong River aid program, of which Prek Thnot was the immediate problem. He understood that a total of 33 million dollars was required. One-third of this would be paid by Cambodia, leaving a total of 22 million dollars in foreign currency to be raised. He understood that U.S. law had changed and that U.S. help was therefore impossible. Mr. Black had proposed that Japan pay one-half of all of the foreign currency needed. This might seem like a small problem from the point of view of the U.S., but it was a difficult one for Japan. Japan needed U.S. help to get the Mekong Conference on the tracks.

The Secretary said we were puzzled as to how to proceed. The congressional action had been against the wishes of the President and the Secretary of State. This problem was definitely linked to Vietnam. The U.S. would like to see it go forward, if the other governments and international institutions concerned could do so. It is possible that there will be developments later on in Vietnam which will open the door again for the U.S., but the Secretary could not hope at this time for Congress to change its mind. We would nevertheless like to see Cambodia kept in the plan. If Japan could find some way to adjust on this matter, we might find some way to adjust somewhere else.

Prime Minister Sato said that what he had wanted to say was that the matter might go forward with Japan paying one-half and the United States using its good offices to get contributions for the other half from countries such as France and Australia.

The Secretary said that we should keep in close touch on this matter.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Zurhellen and approved in S on December 22. The meeting took place at the Japanese Prime Ministerʼs official residence.

83. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 83. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 9, 1966.

SUBJECT

Eugene Blackʼs Report on His Trip to Asia

You have agreed to see Eugene Black on Saturday, December 10, at 11:30 a.m. He wishes to report to you on his second trip to Asia as your representative to discuss social and economic development and regional cooperation.2

He will also tell you of a long conversation with Nasser.

Black went to Laos, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Vietnam, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, Manila and Japan, where he participated with Henry Fowler in inaugurating the governors of the Asian Development Bank.

At each stop Black found continuing high interest in multilateral and regional cooperation, plus active exploration of projects that involve a flow of foreign capital in the area and the institutional framework for increasing their regional contacts. Black confirms the great expectations held for the Asian Development Bank.

He also encountered Asian views that our help is most effective when we 1. Assist in stabilizing their raw materials prices.

2. Help them gain easier and expanded access to foreign markets.

3. Help them cope with problems created by fluctuations in foreign exchange earning capacity.

Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia continue to be highly sensitive to our actions affecting rubber and tin. All resent arrangements which impede the expansion of their textile industries.

In reporting to you Black may stress the following: 1. The real possibility of misunderstanding and disappointment if we make too much of the $1 billion offer for Asian economic development. He may suggest instead that we think of the offer as an order of magnitude of our intentions, rather than a firm promise for which we will in future be held accountable.

2. That we seek from Congress in the spring an appropriation of $200 million for special funds for the Asian Development Bank, to be matched equally by Japan and “all others,” for grants and soft long-term lending. This “soft window” might establish special funds for agriculture, Mekong projects, and transportation and communications development.

3. The desirability of exercising restraint in GSA stockpile disposals and in applying various controls on imports of Southeast Asian exports.

During his trip Black participated in formalizing the Southeast Asia Ministers of Education Secretariat at Manila. Black followed your instructions in presenting our position on a contribution to regional education projects, and found the education ministers generally satisfied.

Black also had hoped to commit our assistance to the Prek Thnot dam project in Cambodia. As you know, Congressional constraints made this impractical for now. Black then attempted to persuade the Japanese to take the lead in a multinational consortium, and we are still pursuing this. (The latest report from Sect. Rusk suggests the Japanese will take the lead in this matter; but movement is now held up because the Cambodians called off the meeting scheduled for last Saturday.)3

Black fully understands some of our Congressional problems—which I discussed at lunch with him—and has offered to lobby for your regional development objectives. I recommend that you encourage him to do so.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966. Secret.

2 The President saw Black from 11:59 a.m. to 12:55 p.m. on December 10. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No memorandum of the meeting has been found. Blackʼs written report to the President, December 9, is ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. II, 1966.

3 December 2.

84. Memorandum of Conversation 84. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 12, 1967.

SUBJECT

Contribution to the Prek Thnot Project

PARTICIPANTS

Canada A.E. Ritchie, Ambassador of Canada

Michael Shenstone, Canadian Embassy

Peter Roberts, Canadian Embassy

United States William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary, EA

Josiah W. Bennett, EA/ROC

Charles A. Kiselyak, EUR/CAN

Charles C. Flowerree, EA/VN

Mr. Bundy opened the discussion by re-capitulating the present status of the funding of the Prek Thnot Project. He said that the Japanese had agreed to contribute fifty per cent of the foreign exchange cost of the project and noted that the remainder would have to come through contributions from countries other than the United States as we were prevented by Congressional action from contributing funds to projects in Cambodia. In answer to a question by Ambassador Ritchie, Mr. Bundy explained that our inability to contribute was based on no other consideration than the aforementioned act which forbade the United States Government from making contributions to countries which trade with North Vietnam. Exceptions would necessitate a Presidential waiver on grounds of overriding National Security interest. Although we are unable to contribute to this project ourselves, we have undertaken to encourage other countries to make pledges. Ambassador Ritchie then asked whether Congress would not recognize a project in Cambodia as being important to United States National Security. Mr. Bundy replied that even if Congress did so, it would be unlikely that Sihanouk would accept funds vouchsafed to him in the name of United States National Security.

Ambassador Ritchie next asked whether the Asian Development Bank would be able to participate in the funding of the Prek Thnot Project. Mr. Bundy said that he thought that the ADB was unable to undertake the handling of soft loans of this nature, but he would have the matter examined further. He then went on to say that thus far, in addition to the Japanese pledge, about three and one half million dollars might be expected from Australia, the Netherlands, France, India and Pakistan. The cost of the project could be reduced somewhat if the power plant were deferred; however, there would still be a shortfall of some five to six million dollars.

Mr. Bundy then brought up the question of timing, saying that it was imperative to move ahead rapidly as Sihanouk might reject the whole project out of pique, if it appeared doubtful that adequate funds would be forthcoming. The Japanese initiative in this instance was commendable, and we did not wish to see it fail. He also noted that this project has value as an example of a way which is open to other countries in Southeast Asia to help themselves. Returning to the subject of timing, he spoke of the forthcoming trip by UN Under Secretary Narasimhan who will visit several Southeast Asian capitals to discuss the project before going to Phnom Penh. Time is therefore of the essence.

Ambassador Ritchie said that he presonally could appreciate the argument which Mr. Bundy had presented. His government, however, had serious doubts about the wisdom of participating in this project. In the first place, Ottawa considered that its technical soundness has not yet been demonstrated. Moreover, Canada was already heavily involved in the Nam Ngum Project. Ambassador Ritchie promised to report the United States views, but said he anticipated some resistance in Ottawa.

He again raised the question of the inability of the US to participate. Mr. Bundy restated the legislative problem with this particular project but pointed out that we are ready to contribute to other projects in the area as indicated in the Presidentʼs State of the Union message. As an example, he noted our willingness to contribute to the Southeast Asian Educational Organization,2 and the Presidentʼs proposal for a 200 million dollar special fund to be administered by the ADB.

Ambassador Ritchie said that he would put the question of a Canadian contribution to the Prek Thnot Project to Ottawa.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Secret. Drafted by Flowerree.

2 Director of the Bureau of the Budget, Charles Schultze, recommended that the United States agree to Eugene Blackʼs proposal for a $28 million contribution for regional education institutions in Southeast Asia over the period covering fiscal years 1967–1973, subject to provision of funding by Congress. (Memorandum from Schultze to the President, November 10, 1966; Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, W.W. Rostow, Vol. 15, Nov. 1–30, 1966) On November 17, 1966, Rostow reported in a memorandum to the President that the results of an informal poll he took among the Congressional leadership indicated that most leaders supported the idea, but some were generally unwilling to make such a long-term commitment. (Ibid.)

3 On January 23 Rusk sent Canadian Foreign Minister Paul Martin a letter requesting that Canada consider a contribution toward the Mekong Committeeʼs Prek Thnot project. (Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG)

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, January 12, 1967, 1218Z.

8822. For Bundy. Ref: State 116180.2

1. I can understand that the prospect of another SEATO Council meeting in Washington does not offer great appeal. I can also understand that Thanat might well see special advantages to a meeting of troops contributing nations where he could concert with his Korean colleague on the evolution of a “directorate” for the SEA war. Nevertheless, I am firmly of the opinion that a troop contributing conference would not and could not take the place of the SEATO Council meeting which is already scheduled for April.

2. Not only we but the other SEATO countries contributing forces to Vietnam have repeatedly cast our commitments to Vietnam in the context of our SEATO obligations. We will have to do this again and again. The Secretary will have to emphasize this relationship again in his testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the 16th and 23rd. The Thai will shortly be making a public statement regarding the U.S. use of Thai bases, and this statement will be predicated upon Thai and U.S. obligations under the SEATO Treaty.3 It would be difficult to find a formulation to explain the postponement of an already announced conference of countries participating in the fundamental constitutional structure upon which our position in Vietnam rests. It would be additionally difficult in view of the military advisorsʼ already scheduled meeting to immediately precede SEATO Council meeting.

3. We have come through some difficult times in SEATO and the organization has been strained by the French and Pakistani performance. But we have correctly maintained the position that SEATO plays an important fundamental role in the pattern of security in Southeast Asia. This policy, I think, has been fully vindicated by the presence in SVN of forces from all fimy [four?] SEATO Pacific members. There is growing confidence in Asia that, in the face of our joint determination, Chinese Communism will not be allowed to extend further to the south. This is no time in my opinion to risk any signal which might be interpreted as wavering on our part either by our friends or by our enemies.

4. There is perhaps much to be said for a conference of troop contributors, but, I believe, it should be treated as a separate conference from that of SEATO countries and should not be allowed to appear to substitute for it. The date of the SEATO conference is set and it is widely known that it will take place in April. In setting the date we have taken the position that postponement would pose great administrative problems for us. Under the circumstances I think that a postponement of SEATO in favor of a troop contributors conference would suggest that we are already in the process of scuttling SEATO. I would find it most difficult to imagine a formulation which could adequately explain why this step was taken.4

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret; Exdis.

2 In telegram 116180 to Bangkok, January 11, the Department asked for Martinʼs comment on Ruskʼs idea as expressed to Foreign Minister Thanat of Thailand of scheduling a meeting of foreign ministers whose countries contributed troops to the fighting in South Vietnam in place of the SEATO Ministerial meeting which could be postponed. (Ibid.)

3 Apparent reference to a statement made by Thailand on March 22 about U.S. Air Force use of the Thai Air Base at U Tapao; see Document 342.

4 The Department agreed with “general thrust” of Martinʼs “observations on holding SEATO meeting in April, but since the date had not been announced, there was an opportunity to discuss with Thanat the relationship of the troop contributors meeting with the SEATO meeting. (Telegram 119654 to Bangkok, January 16; Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3)

86. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 86. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 20, 1967.

SUBJECT

Viet Nam: Departmentʼs Legal Memorandum of March 8, 19652

Ernest Lindley has relayed your request for an indication of reasons why the Viet Nam legal memorandum of March 8, 1965 did not rely upon the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty as a basis for United States actions in the bombing of North Viet Nam. We are now clearing a draft public position on this. Meanwhile, the present memorandum outlines the background of the 1965 memorandum and sets forth the reasons for its non-reliance on SEATO. To summarize, those reasons may be stated briefly as follows: (1) After the start of continuing U.S. air strikes against North Viet Nam in February 1965, the first criticism of these actions was rested on two grounds: (a) the bombing was inconsistent with U.S. obligations under the United Nations Charter; and (b) the bombing violated the Geneva Accords. Thus, in preparing a memorandum in support of U.S. actions, we addressed our arguments to the issues of Charter obligations and the bearing of the 1954 Geneva Agreements. Of course, the issue of law involved in a reliance on Article IV, paragraph 1 of the SEATO Treaty is precisely the same as that involved in a consideration of the United Nations Charter provisions: i.e., whether there has been an armed attack by North Viet Nam against the South, Accordingly, reliance on the SEATO Treaty would not have provided an independent legal justification.

(2) More to the point, in March 1965 it was the judgment of the Department that reliance on the Southeast Asia Treaty would not strengthen our case. On the contrary, such reliance would have been vulnerable to the criticism that our SEATO partners did not agree with us. There had been no collective action by SEATO under Article IV, paragraph 1. While we could have relied on the individual obligation set forth in Article IV(1), the Department was concerned that we would be alone in asserting that the treaty provision was applicable.

Discussion:

Our first determination that there had been an “aggression by means of armed attack” against South Viet Nam was made following the Pleiku attacks early in 1965 and in connection with the decision to launch air strikes against the North. This determination laid the basis for asserting that the air strikes were justified in the light of Article 51 of the United Nations Charter (“inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs”). This determination also laid the basis for an invocation of Article IV(1) of the Southeast Asia Treaty.

The United States has long taken the view that Article IV(1) sets forth an individual as well as a collective obligation to “act to meet the common danger” in the event of aggression by means of armed attack. There has not at any time been a collective decision by the SEATO Council to act under Article IV(1) in defense of South Viet Nam, which is a protocol state covered by the Treaty.3 In the absence of such collective action, individual members of SEATO could have relied on Article IV(1) as stating an obligation to assist South Viet Nam in meeting the armed attack from the North. As of March 1965 none of our partners in SEATO had taken this position, and at least some of them seemed likely to disagree. If the United States had asserted a treaty commitment under Article IV(1), we would have been exposed to the argument that our position was very weak since the other SEATO members were unwilling to give a corresponding interpretation.

On March 10, 1965 the Office of the Legal Adviser sent a memorandum to the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs4 pointing out that, since the United States now characterized the aggression in Viet Nam as an armed attack by the North on the South, there was a legal basis for invoking Article IV(1) of the Southeast Asia Treaty. Some days later FE replied that it saw no particular advantage in “bringing SEATO into the Viet Nam picture via the Rusk-Thanat route, since this would simply put a SEATO label on our individual action.” The FE memorandum went on to discuss the difficulties of invoking collective action by SEATO.

At the time of the Gulf of Tonkin incident in August 1964 the Administration did not rely on the SEATO Treaty as a basis for U.S. air strikes against vessels and facilities of North Viet Nam. Your testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on August 6 included the following statement: “We do believe that the obligations of the SEATO Treaty are both joint and several, and that the SEATO Treaty is a substantiating basis for our presence there and our effort there, although, however, [we are]5 not acting specifically under the SEATO Treaty.”

On the same day you gave similar testimony before the House Committee: “Our view is that the obligations of the SEATO Treaty are both joint and several. But we are not in Southeast Asia at the present time precisely under the SEATO Treaty.”

On January 14, 1965 you made a statement as follows at a briefing of the House Foreign Affairs Committee: “There is no formal commitment by the allies at this point to South Viet Nam. We are now considering—and this I hope the Committee will keep very privately—we are considering now whether it would not be a good idea for South Viet Nam formally to request assistance from the members of SEATO under the terms of the SEATO Treaty.”

In preparing for the tenth SEATO Council meeting scheduled for May 1965 in London, the United States proposed to some of our SEATO allies that the GVN should make a formal request to the members of SEATO that they take action under the Treaty to meet aggression from North Viet Nam. Relying on the Rusk-Thanat interpretation of Article IV, paragraph 1 of the Treaty, we proposed that those SEATO members willing to act should state their readiness to do so at the Council meeting. The United Kingdom and New Zealand both opposed this proposal, and Australia was cool toward it. We therefore did not press the proposal.

On April 29, 1965 Australia announced its intention to place ground forces in South Viet Nam. A month later, New Zealand announced that it too would send combat forces.

It was in May 1965 that the United States first stated a direct reliance on the Southeast Asia Treaty for our actions in Viet Nam. The President, in a message to Congress requesting additional appropriations to meet military requirements in Viet Nam, stated: “…we are directly committed to the defense of South Viet Nam. In 1954 we signed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty. That treaty committed us to act to meet aggression against South Viet Nam. The United States Senate ratified that treaty and that obligation by a vote of 82 to 1.”

Prior to this time the United States had made clear, in the Tonkin Gulf resolution and various statements, that we would live up to our obligations under the Southeast Asia Treaty, but had not asserted that there existed already a state of facts in which the obligations of Article IV(1) had been brought into operation. We had referred to the Southeast Asia Treaty as a “substantiating basis” for the U.S. presence in Viet Nam and our assistance in preserving the independence of that country, but this reference to the Treaty as a whole, as an expression of the United States interest in Southeast Asia, should not be confused with a reliance on Article IV(1).

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret.

2 This memorandum, prepared by Carl F. Salans and entitled “Legal Basis for United States Actions Against North Vietnam,” was sent to all diplomatic posts and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. (Ibid.) Carl Marcy, Chief of Staff of the Committee, told Senator Wayne Morse that it was “about the sloppiest piece of legal work I have ever seen.” Marcy reported that it sounded “like it was put together by a high school student.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 46, Marcy Chron File, Marcy memorandum to Morse, March 17 as quoted in Gibbons, U.S. Government and the Vietnam War, Part III, p. 79, footnote 97)

3 The closest SEATO has come to collective decision was the 1966 Council communiqué which characterized North Viet Namʼs aggression against the South as an “armed attack.” [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Brackets in the source text.

87. Action Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 87. Action Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 24, 1967.

SUBJECT

Relationship of SEATO Treaty to Viet Nam: Recommended Public Position

My memorandum of January 20, 1967,2 outlined for your information the background of the Departmentʼs memorandum of March 8, 1965 entitled “Legal Basis for United States Actions Against North Viet Nam”3 and set forth the reasons for its non-reliance on SEATO. In order to answer queries from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee or elsewhere about the Departmentʼs alleged change of emphasis on whether the SEATO Treaty underlines our presence in Viet Nam and, in particular, why the 1965 memorandum did not rely on SEATO, we recommend the following response:

Our commitments in the SEATO Treaty have all along been an important basis for the United States presence in Viet Nam. But it was not until North Viet Namʼs aggression against the South had reached the proportions of an “armed attack” that our formal commitment under Article IV, paragraph 1, was engaged.4 At that point, action against North Viet Nam in exercise of the right of collective self-defense was justified under the United Nations Charter and under the Southeast Asia Treaty. Prior to that time, we had relied on the request of the GVN for assistance in meeting an aggression externally inspired and supported as the legal basis for our actions in South Viet Nam. There may be some question as to the exact date at which North Viet Namʼs aggression grew into an “armed attack”, but there can be no doubt that it had occurred before February 1965.

The memorandum of March 8, 1965 was addressed to specific criticism made at that time regarding the legality of United States air strikes against North Viet Nam under the United Nations Charter and the Geneva Accords of 1954. It was not, therefore, necessary in that context to discuss the question of obligations under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Salans with concurrences from Manhard, Heyward Isham, Deputy Director of the Vietnam Working Group, and Marshall H. Noble of P.

2  Document 86.

3 See footnote 2, Document 86.

4  Rusk wrote the following note next to this first two sentences in the second paragraph: “This is the point. DR.”

5 There is no indication on the source text that Rusk approved this response.

88. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting 88. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting1

Washington, April 4, 1967.

SEATO/G–1

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Washington, April 18–20, 1967

SCOPE PAPER

U.S. Objectives

1. To demonstrate to the U.S. public and to other countries that SEATO is a going concern, serving an important purpose, and that the U.S. strongly supports the Organization.

2. To demonstrate continuing SEATO support for the GVN in its effort to stem Communist aggression as well as to dramatize GVN appreciation for such support.

3. To demonstrate continuing SEATO support for Thailand in its effort to suppress Communist-directed insurgence there.

4. To sustain SEATOʼs sense of mission in strengthening “the fabric of peace and freedom” in Southeast Asia.

5. To gain greater public understanding of U.S. policy in Viet-Nam, including the relevance of our SEATO obligation, and the danger to the whole area the Communist threat in Viet-Nam represents.

Means of Attaining Objectives

1. By providing, as host, conference arrangements and representational functions in accord with SEATO precedents and of such a character as to demonstrate the special political and military importance we attach to the Organization.

2. By generating the widest possible publicity for the Council Meeting, including statements made by our SEATO allies and the Vietnamese observer.

3. By working for a strong endorsement in the communiqué of the GVNʼs resistance to Communist aggression, of its plans and preparations for the transition of constitutional, representative government in South Viet-Nam and of the GVNʼs commitment to programs for revolutionary development, economic stability and progress, and national reconciliation as set forth in the Manila communiqué of October 1966.

4. By including in the communiqué a clear endorsement of Thailandʼs efforts to suppress the insurgency sponsored within her borders by external Communists, and by publicizing this Communist sponsorship and citing the evidence thereof.

5. By making clear U.S. support for appropriate cultural activities of SEATO, including our willingness to contribute financial support for approved programs.

6. By making clear U.S. support for appropriate economic activities of SEATO, including our willingness to contribute financial support for approved programs, and recognizing that SEATO should give priority consideration to countersubversion and counterinsurgency type projects in order to avoid duplication with other multilateral efforts in the region.

7. By developing U.S. statements on Viet-Nam, on Thailand and on SEATO that will be concrete and constructive.

Possible Obstacles

1. The U.K. will wish to ensure that there is no implication in the communiqué that the U.K is committed to any military contribution to Viet-Nam and will probably take a generally cautious approach to SEATOʼs work.

2. Pakistan is likely to be largely passive except possibly in making an effort to include reference to Pakistan-Indian problems in the communiqué. It may register a reservation to any strong reference to Communist aggression in Viet-Nam.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 170. Secret. Drafted by Wilber W. Hitchcox of EA/RA, cleared by Rusk and representatives of 15 relevant bureaus and offices in the Department of State and AID.

89. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 89. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 19, 1967.

SUBJECT

Meeting with SEATO Ministers

You have agreed to meet with the SEATO Council Ministers at 5:00 p.m. today. I sent you a suggested statement last night.2

In connection with any informal discussions with the Ministers, the following background may be useful: —For several years, the Thai and Filipinos have been concerned that we would let the foot-dragging of France and, to a lesser extent, of Pakistan and the UK sap SEATOʼs vitality.

—France, for the first time, refused to send even an observer to the current meetings, but has not given any sign of an intent to withdraw or stop paying its dues.

—The UK declined to send any military forces to Viet-Nam and has taken an increasingly restrictive attitude toward many SEATO activities.

—Pakistan has stopped active participation in SEATO military planning and intelligence work, but it continues to pay its share of the budget.

—The Thai have increasingly questioned the usefulness of participation in SEATO by those who will not assume real responsibility, notably France, the UK and Pakistan.

With the exception of Korean forces, the only military contributions to Viet-Nam have come from four SEATO partners (Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and the Philippines).

If you meet the Ministers and one other delegate from each country in the Mansion, you might: (1) welcome each one personally;

(2) make a few remarks (text submitted last night; alternatively, express your general feelings about Viet Nam, rather than SEATO;

(3) talk briefly with each of the ministers.

If the meeting is in the Cabinet room, you might: (1) let Sec. Rusk introduce you to each of the ministers, going around the table;

(2) ask Sec. Rusk to bring you up to date on the SEATO meeting itself;

(3) ask for comments by each senior minister present;

(4) either talk along the lines of the text submitted last night or simply express your general view and feelings about Viet Nam.3

I personally recommended the former procedure because: —the informal setting will be more congenial;

—the hospitality of the President in his home will be appreciated by the members more than a more formal gathering;

—these men will have been sitting around a conference table for most of two days, and a more personal contact with the President will mean more to them.

Walt

Arrange for informal reception in the Mansion4

Arrange meeting in the Cabinet Room

Invite two members per delegation (total 17) (present situation)

Invite three members per delegation (total 24)

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Confidential.

2 Apparent reference to “Talking Points,” transmitted by Read to Rostow, April 18. (Ibid.)

3  Rostow added the following handwritten note in parentheses: “I prefer the latter.”

4 There is no indication on the source text as to the Presidentʼs choice, but for the account of the meeting, see Document 90.

90. Memorandum for the Record 90. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, April 20, 1967.

SUBJECT

Presidentʼs Meeting with SEATO Delegates

The President met in the Cabinet Room on April 19 with delegates attending the SEATO Ministers Conference. The meeting lasted from 5:15 p.m. to 6:15 p.m.

[Here follows a list of participants.]

Secretary Rusk opened the meeting with a review of the SEATO Ministerial Council discussions to date. He said that Secretary General Vargas had provided a review of SEATO activities—military and civil. There was a general feeling that “the organization is in good shape.” He said there were signs of greater solidarity among the free nations in the treaty area. The delegates had reviewed the situation in Communist China. Also, the situation in Viet-Nam in some detail.

There was general concern about the inadequate understanding of the real issues in Viet-Nam on the part of many people in other parts of the world. All agreed more effort should be devoted to promoting a better understanding.

Foreign Minister Hasluck (Australia) said he was more and more impressed each year with the growing cooperation among Asian and Pacific states and with the progress that was being made. He said that with all the new cooperative efforts, a great problem in the future may be the need to coordinate all the efforts being made. He underlined the fact that peace is a global problem and that the security of Asia is a major part of the world security problem.

Prime Minister Holyoake invited the SEATO Ministers to meet in New Zealand next year. He said it was important that people understand that communism is the outmoded wave of the past. The actions in Viet-Nam were a demonstration of the unity of the member nations. SEATO has New Zealandʼs full support.

Foreign Secretary Ramos (Philippines) said the meetings had “renewed our confidence that SEATO as an organization is important and vital to us.” He said his country was grateful for the protective shield SEATO provides. It was grateful for the support of the United States.

Foreign Minister Thanat (Thailand) said “the fact that the United States has undertaken to defend Southeast Asia—your defense of Viet-Nam—is an action of great historical importance.

“As far as the Thai are concerned, we are ready to bear our share of the responsibility.”

He was concerned with the political repercussions of the war in Viet-Nam which were the result of a major step-up in Communist propaganda.

He hoped that SEATO members could “begin to initiate a counter campaign against this Communist propaganda.”

Foreign Secretary Brown (UK) noted that he had spoken in favor of SEATO when it was before the House of Commons in 1954. He was happy to see how well the organization is doing.

He said that Viet-Nam “will one day be part of history.” But the growth and progress of Asia will go on.

Foreign Minister Do (Viet-Nam) said his people were “more confident of success” and confident of the future of their country. He described major political events—the Constitution, elections, etc. He noted the new program of Reconciliation just announced by his government. He expressed the hope the “other side” would be willing to accept a peaceful solution by the end of this year.

Secretary General Vargas (SEATO) complimented Secretary Ruskʼs handling of the SEATO sessions. He noted new staffing programs. He said SEATO should help member countries in countering subversion, which he said was the greatest threat to peace and security. He had visited Viet-Nam and was happy to see the progress that is being made. He said the VC “cannot hope to win by force.” There was a need to step up Revolutionary Development.

Prime Minister Holyoake said he could not let the opportunity pass to express “our amazement and gratitude for the fortitude and courage you are showing in Viet-Nam.”

President Johnson said “I hope each of you know how glad we are to have you in our country.

“Our viewpoints may vary, we may have some differences, but I know I am in the presence of friends.

“I did not vote to ratify the SEATO Treaty,” he said, “because I was in the hospital.” (He noted former President Kennedy also had not voted for the SEATO Treaty.)

He recalled a comment made by the U.S. Secretary of State at the first SEATO meeting: “I am confident of one thing—the way of the aggressor has been made harder.”

He noted that the Senate had held extensive hearings on SEATO. The Foreign Relations Committee (“of which you may have heard”) had approved it with only one dissenting vote (Langer of North Dakota). The full Senate had approved the Treaty by a vote of 82 to 1.

“That, I think, expressed the feeling of 200 million Americans—the feeling that it would make the way of the aggressor harder.

“We were born as a country with the words: ʼGive me Liberty, or give me death.ʼ We attach a high price to liberty. And it is so good that we want everyone to have a share of it.”

He noted that the United States had entered into more than 40 alliances.

“We have given our word. We are in great trouble today. I donʼt like to see men get killed. But our word has been given that in moments of danger we will act.

“If we reach the point where the word of the United States is not respected, is not ʼgood as gold,ʼ we will have a very dangerous situation loose in the world.

“If our word is not good in SEATO, tomorrow it will be no good in NATO, or in ANZUS, or with the Japanese or our other allies.

“Our enemies would say that the United States does not take its commitments seriously. We would telegraph to the world that aggressors are now free to roam.

“We have been engaged in two wars in Europe in my lifetime and two in the Pacific. And now we are in Viet-Nam. Each time we were involved so that aggressors were not free to roam.

“We could get our tomorrow. But that would mean that hundreds of thousands would be slaughtered.

“So, as difficult as it is, I do want you to know that we think we are right, and we think that right will prevail. I am not going to throw overboard my word.”

He said this was meant as “no criticism of others.”

The President said he had recently received a letter from a widow. She said that he had killed her husband just as surely as if he had pulled a gun and shot him. There were not many letters like that, but each one hurt.

He recalled visiting a veteran of the fighting who was a triple amputee; he had lost two arms and one leg. He was 20. His wife was 18. When he visited, the wife could only say: “Mr. President, arenʼt you proud of him?”

So this isnʼt easy for us.

“But we want your people to be free Mr. Minister (looking at Vietnamese Foreign Minister Tran Van Do). If you are not, the Thai wonʼt have freedom next week. The Philippines wonʼt have it the week after that.

“We donʼt want to bomb people. We donʼt want to punish people. We arenʼt there for territory or for treasure.

“We are there because we want the people of South Viet-Nam to have self-determination.

“And I want you to know that if there is a common danger, we will be there.”

He recalled that his father had told him: “When you get into a disagreement, try to put yourself in the adversaryʼs place; look at it as he does.

“If we put ourselves in the Vietnamese position, we see men coming into their country from the North to kill them. We see them killing our public officials, and bombing our busses, and attacking an embassy.

“We can kill them by the thousands. But we would rather stop their trucks from moving down. We would rather put their steel mills out of action—and their power plants. So they canʼt make war.

“People keep saying: stop the bombing! But they arenʼt ready to stop their bombing.”

He said: “We are not going to tie our hands behind our backs” and tell our Marines and soldiers not to do anything until the enemy is on top of them.

“We try to be reasonable.” We stopped the bombing five times. He noted that he had written directly to Ho Chi Minh. During that time, many people, some Senators and others, were criticizing him for not being willing to negotiate. Yet he didnʼt release the letter.

Despite the failure of all moves toward peace, “we are going to keep trying.” Our goal is “maximum deterrence with minimum loss of life.”

He said we did not want to “invade North Viet-Nam.”

“We just want those people to have a chance to have their own way of life.”

He said he shared the general optimism expressed about Asia and its future.

He said we would like to use our resources “for bread and babies”—for food, and health and education.

“And this (Asia) is where mankind is—two-thirds of it—in Asia.”

He said Europe was now strong.

“The other side of the world needs us more than Europe ever did.

“To those of you who are with us in Viet-Nam, be strong of heart. To the others, I ask: try to be as understanding as you can.

“Iʼve got enough troubles without getting them from my brothers.

“I am not as patient as an assistant I once had. He was, I think, the most patient man Iʼve ever known. He had a young son named Lyndon. One morning, as the man was sleeping, little Lyndon climbed up to the bed and kicked him in the teeth. My assistant jumped up and said: ʼNow, Lyndon, if you kick me in the teeth once more Iʼm going to take you by the arm and sit you down in a corner.ʼ

“I donʼt think I would have said it quite like that.

“I want you to know: we are there; we are going to stay there; but we are flexible.

“We have said ʼyesʼ 35 times—to the British proposal, to the Indian Prime Minister, to the United Nations, to the non-aligned nations.

“We keep saying ʼyes.ʼ They keep saying ʼno.ʼ And I get blamed.”

But, he added: “We think weʼll find a solution.”

The President said he wanted to see SEATO “stronger, not weaker.”

And he said that “we donʼt want this war to spread—but if it does, it will not be our fault or our wish.”

Bill Jorden

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SEATO. Secret. Drafted by Jorden on April 20.

91. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) 91. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)1

Washington, April 21, 1967.

Dear Bill:

I appreciated the opportunity afforded by your letter of April 122 to give you a full report on the Mekong-Prek Thnot project in Cambodia.

We have supported the Mekong River development program for many years. The first important move we made after the Presidentʼs April 1965 Johns Hopkins speech to show our great interest in the political and economic potentialities of this UN-supported initiative was in May 1965, when we took the lead in offering to provide half the funds for the Committeeʼs top priority project in Laos.

The Committee took as its next priority project the Prek Thnot irrigation and hydroelectric project near Phnom Penh in Cambodia. It was not, however, until last fall that the Mekong Committee managed to produce the economic and technical analysis of the project which was needed for us to determine whether we could justify assistance on economic grounds. While these studies were being carried out we, nevertheless, attempted to induce other donors to take the lead in raising financing for Prek Thnot, so as to permit prompt collective action. Thus, we sent an emissary to Ottawa in November 1965 in an unsuccessful effort to persuade the Canadians to take the lead. We also urged Japan to take the lead. Our idea was then that it would be preferable to finance the Cambodia project from non-U.S. sources but that, if necessary, AID would contribute the residual, minority share. Given Sihanoukʼs attitude towards U.S. aid and the state of U.S-Cambodian relations, it was clearly necessary that another country lead such a consortium and work out administrative arrangements with the Mekong Committee and the Cambodian Government. As a practical matter, it also was necessary that Cambodia agree to the use of an international financial institution such as the World Bank or the Asian Development Bank as the financial agent of the donors.

At the May 1966 ECAFE plenary session our delegate stated that we intended to do our share for Mekong Committee-sponsored projects in all four riparian countries. A few months later, we authorized our Ambassdor in Bangkok to say to Mekong Committee officials that we would sympathetically consider a U.S. contribution to Prek Thnot if the Committee and other donors found the project feasible.

By this time Japan had indicated increased support for various development efforts in Southeast Asia and stood out as the most promising leader for Prek Thnot. We, therefore, indicated both to the UN and to Japan in the spring and summer of 1966 that if Japan or some other country took the lead with the project and could not raise sufficient funds without us, we would be a minor contributor, assuming there was a finding of feasibility, satisfactory arrangements for financial and engineering management, and Cambodian willingess to accept inclusion of U.S. funds in the package.

This was our position when the Congress last October removed the normal Presidential authority to waive on “national interest” grounds the ban on aid to countries which sell, furnish or permit ships under their registry to carry items of economic assistance to North Vietnam. At that time, we reviewed information available on Cambodian official gifts—all of a token character—to North Vietnam or the National Liberation Front and on the increasing use of Cambodian territory and resources by Vietnamese communist military forces en route to or operating in South Vietnam.

A continuing difficulty for us, also, has been uncertainty as to the Cambodian position on the project, including the acceptability of U.S. assistance. Cambodian representatives at the Mekong Committee meetings have consistently sought financing of the full $33 million project without qualification as to donors, and the Mekong Committee was assured by the Cambodian delegation in September 1966 that Sihanouk had given the project top priority. However, Sihanouk in December attacked the idea of Cambodiaʼs accepting U.S. assistance for the Prek Thnot project and criticized the suggestion that Asian Development Bank involvement was needed. Then, in a letter to U Thant in January of this year, Prince Sihanouk explained that he did not want to burden Cambodia with new loans, saying that projects presently under construction would be sufficient for Cambodiaʼs projected electricity needs, and he requested that further consideration of international financing be suspended. Although recently the Cambodian delegate at the ECAFE meeting in Tokyo said Cambodia wanted the full Prek Thnot project and welcomed any assistance given for it, the latest indication of Prince Sihanoukʼs view is his assurance to U Thant that he would review the whole question after his return to Cambodia in early March. He has not as yet communicated the results of his review of the desirability of this project to U Thant.

Responses to paragraphs two through six of your letter are in the following paragraphs corresponding to the numbers of your questions.

2. Our decision not to contribute to the project was made, subject to continuing review, last October and reiterated in November. The decision was made by the Administrator of AID, in consultation with senior officials of the Department of State and others. I subsequently reviewed the decision and joined in the effort to persuade other countries to supplement the Japanese offer of half the foreign exchange costs.

3. The decision was occasioned by the need for Eugene Black, then traveling in East Asia, to inform the Japanese whether or not we would contribute in order that they could decide as to their own participation in light of the U.S. position.

The decision was based on: a) The Congressional action on the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act, referred to above, which deleted the Presidential waiver authority on national interest grounds, and reduced the Presidentʼs latitude only to the findings—which would almost certainly have become known and been unacceptable to Sihanouk—of a United States national security interest as the basis for a waiver, and

b) The possibility that provision of United States aid to a project in Cambodia would provoke criticism from the Congress and endanger its support of future foreign aid legislation, if there were to occur some new Camobdian action in support of North Vietnam or expanded use of Cambodian territory by North Vietnamese or Viet Cong forces.

4. With regard to your inquiry concerning a legal finding as to whether Cambodia is engaged in trade or aid within the meaning of Section 107(b) of the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act, no such finding has been made. However, aside from the question of whether Section 107(b) constitutes a bar in a strict legal sense, consultation with several members of Congress who have inquired into our position has suggested that it would be unwise to interpret narrowly the Congressional intent behind this restrictive language.

5. The reasons which persuaded us not to contribute last fall still militate against U.S. participation in the Prek Thnot project at the present time. However, Prek Thnot is in itself a good project and an integral part of the Mekong scheme. Following up the initiative taken by the Japanese, we have made strong efforts with the Canadians, West Germans, and others to get additional support for the financing of the full project. There also has been some thought of starting with a smaller project for which presently committed financing seems to be sufficient. There is, however, still uncertainty as to Cambodian interest in this possibility. If adequate financing is not found for the full Prek Thnot project this year and Cambodia remains uninterested in anything less, it may be possible for the United States to participate in this project next year through a lump-sum contribution to a general Mekong Development Fund now being considered by the Asian Development Bank as part of its proposed Special Funds.

6. There have been no objections raised by members of the Mekong Committee to the U.S. decision not to participate in the funding of Prek Thnot, although the decision did occasion disappointment within the Committee. The other three members of the Committee have continued to express strong support for the project, and hope that financing can be found. Cambodia has not attended recent meetings of the Mekong Committee. We believe that Cambodia will in time again participate in the Committee and that the achievement of acceptable financing for the project, either through a Japanese led consortium or a special fund of the Asian Development Bank, could hasten its return. As you know, Eugene Black on May 2 will consult with your committee on U.S. contributions to Mekong and other special funds of the Asian Development Bank.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, E 11–2 MEKONG. Drafted by Thomas C. Niblock, Director, Far Eastern Development Office of AID, and Ewing, cleared by Barnett and in draft with Gaud and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations John P. White.

2 Attached, but not printed.

92. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson 92. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury (Barr) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 5, 1967.

SUBJECT

Asian Bank Proposal

In my memorandum to you of August 26 (copy attached),2 I described to you what I consider to be a classic example of how foreign assistance legislation should be developed. I used as an example the history of the Inter-American Bank proposal.

It is probably unrealistic to go through this rather elaborate procedure every time we go for funds for the international financial institutions, but some of the ingredients should be present.

The most important ingredient that is lacking in the Asian Bank proposal is the announced willingness of any other nation to join with us in this concessional loan fund. It would help us mightily in our Congressional presentation if we could announce that at least Canada, Japan, Australia and New Zealand were joining us in creating this new “soft loan” operation.

Subsequent to Mr. Blackʼs visit with Congressman Widnall, the Minority Clerk of the House Banking and Currency Committee said that they would like to know the answers to some of the following questions: 1) Is the Bank organized and in a position to run a $200 million “soft loan” operation? (The answer is no—as of two weeks ago they had only a skeleton force in their loan operation.)

2) Has the Bank made any loans from its ordinary capital? (The answer again is no.)

3) Has the Bank prepared any studies as to how it would use these funds? (The answer is that studies on agriculture and transportation are underway, but not complete.)

4) Has the Bank made a formal proposal to its member nations asking for support for this fund? (The answer here is that President Watanabe has had informal discussions with a few nations but has not submitted a formal proposal to the Board of Governors.)

Conclusion

I am deeply concerned that we can damage the prospects of an extremely useful Asian institution by rushing in prematurely before tying up some of the loose ends that I have indicated above.

Joe Barr

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking.

2 Attached, but not printed.

93. Memorandum of Conversation 93. Memorandum of Conversation1

Wellington, April 1, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

SEATO/SEVEN NATION/ANZUS MEETINGS

Wellington, April 2–5, 1968

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Ambassador Leonard Unger

SEATO Secretary General Jesus Vargas

SUBJECT

SEATO and Council Meeting

In reply to the Secretaryʼs question, General Vargas said that he did not anticipate any particularly controversial items arising in the course of the SEATO Council Meeting starting the next day. He said, however, that intense interest has been generated by the Presidentʼs speech about bombing suspension and particularly about his non-candidacy.2 After some exchange on this subject the Secretary speculated that the likely future President has in fact not yet made his candidacy known.

The Secretary suggested that with the presence in the SEATO Meeting of representatives of both Pakistan and the United Kingdom, he was not disposed to go into a great deal of detail on Vietnam but rather to leave that for the Seven Nation Meeting. He and the Secretary-General discussed the British and Pakistani membership in SEATO and the Secretary indicated his disposition to have them pressed to make more of a contribution if they are going to continue as members of the organization. General Vargas observed that the Pakistani (and for that matter, the French) are neutral in their SEATO activities, and while they make no contribution, neither do they obstruct the work of the organization.

Turning to a review of the situation in the treaty area, the Secretary-General described his recent travels around Thailand and indicated his concern over the growing insurgency, paying particular attention to the problem of the subversion of the hill tribes in northern Thailand. He regretted that the Thai insurgency problem had not been tackled with more vigor when it was still small in 1965. The Secretary agreed with this point, urging that we learn the lesson well from past experience and mistakes in the counter insurgency field, including Vietnam, and try to get the Thai problem promptly under control.

With regard to the Philippines, the Secretary-General felt that the rural insurgency was not now a matter of serious concern but he was preoccupied with the more classic type of communist subversion among the urban population. General Vargas also described the status of the seminar on Internal Security in Rural Areas. He underlined his strong interest in this and also mentioned the counter insurgency center which he would like to see established. Secretary Rusk commented in general terms about the importance of the SEATO role in counter insurgency.

General Vargas then told Secretary Rusk of his recent visit to South Vietnam, including his conversation with General Westmoreland and his visits to PHILCAG, the Queenʼs Cobras and other allied units. He underlined the added importance he attached, as a result of this visit, to the blocking of the routes of supply to the communist forces and in this connection he mentioned the recent discovery of 90-some sampans in the Mekong near the Cambodian border which were intercepted and sunk with heavy loads of munitions.

As a result of his visit to Manila he told the Secretary that President Marcos believes that the extension of the PHILCAG will go through. At the same time he noted that the opposition in the Philippine Congress wants more on the side of medics and fewer engineers in the Philippine contribution in Viet-Nam. Vargas will be returning to Manila and hopes to be able to exert some helpful influence on this project.

In conclusion, the Secretary expressed his appreciation to the Secretary-General for his willingness to serve for a further term as SEATO Secretary-General.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 8–3. Secret. Drafted by Unger and approved in S on April 4. The meeting was held in the Secretaryʼs Suite at White Heron Lodge.

2 Text in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968, Book I, pp. 469–476.

94. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting 94. Scope Paper Prepared for the SEATO Council Meeting1

Washington, April 2, 1968.

SEATO/SEVEN NATION/ANZUS MEETINGS

Wellington, April 2–5, 1968

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

U.S. Objectives

1. To underscore for the US, our SEATO allies, and other countries our strong support for SEATO and the importance we attach to it as the only multilateral security mechanism in Southeast Asia.

2. To demonstrate continuing SEATO support for the GVN in its effort to stem Communist aggression, to dramatize GVN appreciation for this support, and to emphasize SEATOʼs interest in a just and peaceful negotiated solution to the present conflict.

3. To emphasize SEATOʼs role in combatting Communist subversion in the Treaty Area, and specifically to demonstrate support for Thailand and the Philippines in suppressing Communist insurgency.

4. To give due emphasis to multilateral participation in SEATO projects such as military exercises, their civic action components, and the Organizationʼs non-military activities, including SEATOʼs cooperation in certain projects with non-member countries.

5. To overcome possible apprehension among SEATO members that the UK decision to withdraw its forces from Southeast Asia portends a weakening of SEATOʼs ability to deter or defeat Communist aggression.

Means of Attaining Objectives

1. By strong public and private expositions of the US position on issues of concern to SEATO.

2. By working for a SEATO communiqué and developing public statements that will contain support for the GVN and US policies there as strong as or stronger than in prior years.

3. By emphasizing US support for the planned SEATO Seminar on Internal Security in Rural Areas.

4. By emphasizing also US support for cultural and economic projects, particularly when these are related to counter-insurgency and by stressing the fact that all of these projects have significant multilateral support from SEATO members.

Possible Obstacles

1. There is a tendency among the SEATO members to question the security significance of the organization and even Thailand, with no other treaty guarantee for its security, has at times been uneasy about the effectiveness of the U.S. commitment under SEATO.

2. The divergence of the policies of France, Pakistan and to a lesser degree of the UK from those of the other SEATO members constitutes a continuing problem, especially to Thailand and the Philippines. So also does the failure of France and, more recently, Pakistan to participate in SEATOʼs military activities.

3. With the new UK defense policy, UK participation in SEATO military activities can be expected to become more and more nominal. If the UK should be represented at the Council Meeting, as is possible, at a level lower than that of the Foreign Minister, the UK position might have little flexibility.

4. There has been an unimpressive showing by the US and others on the SEATO economic side since the resolution by the Council last year that it would give “sympathetic and urgent attention” to economic requests from Thailand, the Philippines and Pakistan.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-International Conference Files: Lot 69 D 182, CF 276. Secret. Drafted by Peter W. Colm of EA/RA and Bacon, cleared by Rusk and 16 relevant bureaus and offices of the Department of State, AID, and Department of Defense.

95. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 95. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 30, 1968.

SUBJECT

Your meeting with Eugene Black at 1:30 p.m., September 30

BlackM wishes to report on his trip to Asia.2 I expect there will be three areas of particular interest to you: 1. His experiences in Cambodia. The Black visit accomplished nothing. The Cambodians adhered to their stiff position regarding Communist use of Cambodian territory, and were uncompromising about the release of the LCU crew.3 However, it is Blackʼs feeling that the Cambodians are concerned at being left behind in economic development, and are now more disposed to cooperate with international programs than at anytime in the recent past.

2. Japan. Japanese were surprisingly responsive to Blackʼs exhortation that they should do more in Southeast Asia. In fact, they virtually pledged to double their contribution to the Asian Development Bankʼs Special Fund. Black feels that it is certain that the Japanese will be extremely active in Southeast Asia. As he sees it, the question is whether their efforts can be folded into a healthy multilateral effort sponsored by the United States—or whether the Japanese will concentrate on bilateral programs aimed mainly at seeking shortrun commercial benefits.

3. Mekong development. Black believes things are moving along well, and the nations of the area are generally committed to moving ahead both with the large projects and the smaller ones.

Black will leave with you a written report, which will include four recommendations. The first, and most important, is that the time is ripe for the Asians to organize themselves to handle aid from the United States and Japan as the Europeans organized themselves in the OECD to handle the Marshall Plan. You might question Black on how he sees the timing of such a development, that is, is it practical now or is this something for the next administration to pursue. Black will also recommend that our aid programs for Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and ultimately Cambodia, be placed under the umbrella of an international consortium looking to the development of the Mekong Basin.

The other two recommendations are that we press forward on the Special Fund and on the mainstream Pa Mong Dam, neither of which require any action on your part that is not already afoot.

W.W. Rostow 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking.

2  Black met with President Johnson from 12:47 to 1:22 p.m. on September 30. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation has been found, but Blackʼs written report to the President, September 30, is ibid., National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. There is an indication on Blackʼs report that the President saw it.

3 On July 17 the Cambodian Navy captured a U.S. Army landing craft that had strayed into Cambodian waters. President Johnson sent Black to try to release the 11 U.S. soldiers and 1 South Vietnamese policeman held as detainees; see Documents 244-248.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

96. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific (Holdridge) to the Director for Intelligence and Research (Hughes) 96. Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific (Holdridge) to the Director for Intelligence and Research (Hughes)1

Washington, November 11, 1968.

SUBJECT

NIE 50–68: Southeast Asia After Vietnam2

This Estimate was requested last summer by Secretary of Defense Clifford. It focuses on the likely impact in Southeast Asia as a result of a settlement of the Vietnam situation. As its basic terms of reference, the Estimate (1) excludes the possibility of an outright military victory or a precipitous withdrawal by the Allies or the Communists, (2) assumes a compromise settlement which, in a year or two, leads either to Communist control or to the continuation of a pro-US regime in South Vietnam, and (3) does not prejudge future US policies or courses of action in Southeast Asia, regardless of the outcome in South Vietnam.

As you recall, USIB remanded the Estimate on October 31 because of ACSI objections to the conclusions on Section II, A Settlement Favorable to the Communists, the main part of the Estimate. In the two ensuing lengthy meetings by the USIB representatives, it became clear, as had been expected, that DIA, the DOD services, and NSA continued to find serious difficulties with the draft and in effect were joining ACSI in an effort to rewrite the Estimate. The present draft reflects considerable effort by CIA to incorporate DOD views in the hope of arriving at a broadly acceptable Estimate. On the other hand, despite a large number of editorial and organizational, as well as some substantive, changes, the net effect has been to recast the conclusions to include specific judgments in the text but without conceding any major compromise by CIA or INR.

Therefore, regarding a settlement favorable to the Communists, the Estimateʼs main conclusions remain: (1) Communist political and military assets in the region probably would not be immediately strengthened, nor would the Communists be likely to rely more heavily on armed violence than at present; (2) Cambodia and particularly Laos might well become fairly early casualties although initially at least Hanoi would probably rely on political rather than military pressure to alter the situation in its favor in both countries; (3) neutralist sentiment would increase in several countries, and throughout the region there would be damage to US prestige and serious doubts about the validity of US power and commitments; and (4) Southeast Asian leaders would nevertheless continue to be influenced to an important extent by US actions elsewhere in the area during and after the settlement, and they “would not be panicked into precipitous changes in policy or posture” and “would probably suspend any definitive policy decision” until there had been time to appraise US intentions. In short, a settlement in Vietnam favorable to the Communists in itself would not necessarily unhinge Southeast Asia.

There were very few changes in the second scenario, a situation unfavorable to the Communists. The Estimate continues to hold that there would be a sense of relief throughout the region, US prestige would increase, Communist morale would sag, and the “peoplesʼ war” concepts of Mao and Ho Chi Minh would be seriously questioned. However, few countries would conclude that the Communists had been permanently stopped in Vietnam or that the future of the Saigon regime had been assured, nor would doubts be removed about the willingness of the US to engage on a substantial scale in any new military conflict in Southeast Asia.

DIA and the Services retain reservations on all or various parts of Section II and its conclusions. Army and Air Force reserve on the entire Section and all its conclusions (A through F); DIA on Conclusions C, E, and F and on Paragraph 32; and Navy on Conclusion E and Paragraph 32. The NSA representative, although dissatisfied with the Estimate, could not say confidently whether his principal would reserve although he ventured to guess that he would do so if DIA or the Services put forth a “persuasive” position at USIB. In the meantime, I have learned that DIA and the Services are considering a joint footnote on the entirety of Section II and its relevant conclusions. As before, the main thrust of the DOD objections are in a nutshell, that the Estimate understates the adverse impact throughout Southeast Asia of a settlement in Vietnam favorable to the Communists. In this respect, DOD argues that, in contrast to the judgment in the Estimate, the Southeast Asian governments, including Thailand, would proceed to reorient their policies immediately and would not wait to see what actions or policies the US would take in the area. (Paragraphs 26 and 32.)

As noted earlier, neither we nor EA have any major problems with the Estimate. We would have preferred the draft submitted to USIB last month on the grounds that some of the conclusions were more clearly stated. Indeed, we recommended during the last round of discussions that, in view of the problems still existing between CIA-INR and DOD, we should return to the previous draft. This would at least have the virtue of clarifying the differences in the various points of view. For a while, CIA considered this possibility but decided against it apparently in the hope of pulling DIA off its reservations and at least presenting a united DIA-CIA-INR front against the Services.

We recommend that you approve the Estimate in its present form.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/ERA Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 50–68. Secret. Drafted by Sarris.

2 Approved by the USIB on November 14. (Ibid.)

BurmaBurma

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, April 28, 1964, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA–US. Secret;Nodis.

98. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, May 13, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. I, 5/1–27/64. No classification marking.

99. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State

Rangoon, July 31, 1964, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA–US. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok and CINCPAC for POLAD.

100. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 9, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Ewing and cleared by Trueheart. Sent through Ball and U. Alexis Johnson who both initialed it.

101. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, September 3, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Burma, Ne Win Visit, 9/8–10/66. Secret.

102. Editorial Note

103. Draft Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Berger) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Bundy)

Washington, December 13, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Berger.

104. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 14, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165. Secret; Controlled Dissem. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the NSA prepared this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with it except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map indicating the major areas of insurgent activity are not printed. Fred Green, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific, recommended that Hughes approve this estimate. Green noted that DIA and Berger had initially requested its production because of concern about increasing Chinese Communist involvement and cooperation among insurgent groups. DIA was the most concerned about the threat of insurgency, while the State and Office of National Estimates representatives did not view Chinese activities as a real danger. The other area of difference was the Burmese Army as a counter-insurgency force. CIA gave it high marks; DIA considered it totally inept. The estimateʼs conclusion is a compromise of these extremes, which Green considered the best judgment possible given inadequate sources of information. (Memorandum from Green to Hughes, March 12; ibid.)

97. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 97. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 1

Rangoon, April 28, 1964, 10 a.m.

669. For the Secretary. I hope you can find time to read mytel 6682 giving summary of my impressions after being in Burma approximately six months. You will find it pessimistic and yet I want you to know that I am not ready to write off Burma.

I did not wish to include in above reference telegram my belief that Ne Win is basically afraid of the US. From reports reaching me he seems to fear that we will do him in, possibly violently. Every rightist coup which the press associates us with increases his fear. The leftists in his Revolutionary Council feed this fear and he is of a nature to let this fear become an obsession. He doubled his guard on Kennedyʼs assassination thinking this might give ideas to his own enemies, [1 line of source text not declassified] one of his ex-comrades who had fled from Burma, in the … period expected to follow. His governmentʼs strange refusal to permit only one qualified pilot on the training team for their new F1C aircraft was later identified as connected with his fear that otherwise the aircraft could be flown with only US personnel aboard and it might be used to shoot him down.

It was reported to me that his impression of me as a person on our first and only interview was favorable. But he also said “whatʼs the use of dealing with him—he canʼt control Washington and CIA.” I have the feeling that he even thinks friendship with me might be dangerous in that it would soften him up for the kill by elements that he assumes I cannot control. He remembers all too well the publicity following Amb Keyesʼ resignation that he was not in the know about [3 lines of source text not declassified].

This situation is a real toughy. We certainly cannot afford to miss any opportunity here. Think I was able to make one breakthrough on a matter connected with our road project last week. This and the manner in which I hope our current problem (no Wash action now necessary) over fighter aircraft might make the General pause to ponder US intentions.

Had you not been on a SEATO mission I would have asked that you return from Manila via Rangoon for an assist. This might work to our advantage sometime in the future when you are on a trip and I shall watch your movements with this in mind. In Ne Winʼs present mood no one conference could accomplish the desired results, but it might give an opening to follow through on.

We are attempting to find ways of turning Ne Winʼs suspicious mind to the fact that his leftist personal [garble] may try to dump him when the course of the revolution has gone far enough. I think this is in fact a possibility. If he would start thinking in these terms he might come to us in a hurry.

A shock treatment approach to warn Ne Win that there are limits to which he can go and still expect US help in a crisis is tempting but until we can soften him up a bit I believe it too risky. In his present frame of mind I think we would conclude that he had already made the decision to engineer his downfall.

I wanted you to have these supplemental thoughts which I did not wish to have area distribution. Upper Burma is still just as beautiful as ever.

Regards.

Byroade

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA–US. Secret;Nodis.

2 Dated April 28. (Ibid.)

98. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 98. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 13, 1964.

RE

Determination to grant military aid to Burma

This bulky file involves allowing the use of just over $1.2 million to military assistance to Burma under conditions which require a determination signed by you.2 I have reviewed the whole file, and while the case is not open and shut, I believe the recommendation is right. While in formal terms the Burmese have not done what is normally required, they would certainly interpret a failure to go forward on our part as a breach of faith, and the costs to us in Southeast Asian political terms would be substantially more than $1 million worth of military equipment. Moreover, while Burmese neutrality under Ne Win leaves a great deal to be desired, it is angelic when compared to some other people we have to put up with.

If you approve, all that is needed is your signature on the paper under the tab.3

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. I, 5/1–27/64. No classification marking.

2 Attached, but not printed.

3 Bundy and the President discussed this memorandum on the telephone. Bundy told Johnson that the Burma determination was “the only one that has any political hazard in it.” He noted that, “Ne Win has not been very helpful, but I donʼt think you want to pick a row with one more neutral who is being reasonably quiet this month, if we can avoid it.” Bundy suggested that there would be trouble with Sihanouk and Sukarno, and “thatʼs enough on our plate right now.” Bundy stated that “we do get effective connection to the Burmese military and the Burmese have been damn good about preventing any serious communist infiltration, but they are not cooperative in other ways.” The President responded: “Okay, much obliged.” (Memorandum of a telephone conversation, May 13, 5:35 p.m.; ibid., Transcripts of Telephone Conversation, Alpha Series, McGeorge Bundy) The recording of the conversation is ibid., Recordings of Telephone Conversations.

99. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 99. Telegram From the Embassy in Burma to the Department of State 1

Rangoon, July 31, 1964, 3 p.m.

81. My comments on Embtel 78.2 Disappointment reflected in reftel over last talk with Ne Win was as much influenced by impressions of Ne Win as a person as by anything he said.

It seems to me we can live fairly comfortably with his external policies, which, stated simply, are that Burma will tell all comers she not going to be involved in SEA or any other major international question. One might hope for a closer understanding, but as long as he stands up to ChiComs in roughly same manner, we could do worse. What worries me most is that I remain unconvinced he can make the grade internally, and am concerned as to what his government will do to Burma in the meantime.

I do not believe Ne Win has anything but the most rudimentary knowledge of things economic. I doubt if he can hold his own at all in any discussion of financial and economic matters with his more skilled leftist advisers. It perhaps did not get through in reftel that he sees it as his task to devote all his governmentʼs energies to a “master plan” to carry them through several years—and he admits this will take a long while. I am afraid he believes country and people can remain stopped, or suspended as it were, until that great day arrives, and then suddenly everything and everyone will fall into its proper place. With the loss of government control of a large portion of the country already, and with the economy basically even now at a standstill I donʼt really see how this approach can succeed. When all plans are finished he willing consider foreign material assistance, but believe he thinks that at that time advice or other foreign technical assistance will not be necessary as everything will already be worked out.

I also believe he visualizes a completely regimented society, with all wants and needs supplied by government, according to his master plan. Everyone will then be happy and insurgents will gladly come forth to share in the better life. If anyone not happy, he just hasnʼt been properly instilled with the new spirit of things.

I hope Iʼm wrong to criticize him so severely, but I believe he is both a naive and narrow person, and apt to become more so as he continues to isolate himself and attempts to isolate Burma.

I also believe that to a great extent expressions of grievances against US, at the very least condoned by him, are tactical and purposely exaggerated. These grievances often look very small indeed when analyzed. Of late, Soe Tin and others have stepped up tales of their complaints about the US to other Ambassadors. Some Ambassadors who made calls to explore what Chou En-laiʼs visit3 was all about, received long discourses instead on Burmaʼs troubles with the US. Believe FonOff reasons that if they to take the risk of trying to keep Russia, and more particularly Red China, at armʼs length, they must make sure that word they doing same to US reaches both the other giants. They do not really want to criticize US in SEA, so scrape bottom of the barrel for examples against US locally here in Burma and elsewhere. When other embassies query us as to why our relations suddenly worse, they surprised when we say we donʼt really think they are—and might just be improving a bit.

Getting back to Ne Win personally, regret cannot as yet know whether discussion will result in any better rapport between us. Am afraid it is a firm policy to keep the US and others at armʼs length—and that we will be unable to break that barrier.

Byroade

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 BURMA–US. Secret; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 78 from Rangoon, July 30, Byroade reported on a conversation of that day with Ne Win lasting an hour and a half. (Ibid.) In anticipation of the conversation, the Department suggested in telegram 37 to Rangoon, July 28, that “if Ne Win is in mood for a frank talk, he may bring up allegations of past or present CIA involvement with ChiNat irregulars or ethnic insurgents.” Byroade should assure him that the United States “was not interested in removing him or his government.” (Ibid., POL BURMA–US)

3 Chinese Prime Minister Chou En-lai visited Burma February 14–18, 1964.

100. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 100. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Berger) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 9, 1966.

SUBJECT

Invitation to General Ne Win to Visit the United States

1. Ambassador Byroade continues to believe that an invitation to General Ne Win to pay an official visit to the United States would be useful in terms of our interests in Burma. In recent months, he has received indications on several occasions from Foreign Minister U Thi Han and other Burmese officials that such an invitation would be favorably received,2 and Ne Win in February told James Linen, Time President, that he would like to visit the U.S. Bill Bundy and I feel that the timing for an invitation is propitious, particularly in that it would follow the invitation to President Marcos of the Philippines and other recent visits by firm friends and would indicate continued interest in neutral opinion.

[2.] Other factors which make a Ne Win visit useful at this time are outlined in the attached Memorandum for the President.3

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached Memorandum for the President.

3. Since his takeover of the Government in March 1962, Ne Win has sought to maintain Burmaʼs neutral, non-aligned status. In visits to the Soviet Union and Communist China during the past year he carefully avoided allowing himself to be associated with any derogatory statements regarding the U.S. position in Vietnam. An invitation to pay a state visit to the United States would serve to counterbalance those visits and to emphasize U.S. understanding and respect for Burmese independence and non-alignment as well as the importance we attach to Burma. Such a visit would provide an opportunity for Ne Win to meet the President and other top leaders and help to counteract the impressions of his previous visit and dispel lingering suspicions in his mind that the U.S. is hostile toward his regime and wishes to see it replaced. While unlikely to bring about any major change in Ne Winʼs policies or relaxation of his program for socialization of the Burmese economy, it could result in a friendlier atmosphere for our Embassy to work in and make it possible over a period of time for us to exercise somewhat more influence upon developments in Burma. The principal purpose to be achieved by the visit would, nevertheless, remain to demonstrate our support of Burmese neutrality and to reaffirm that U.S. interest in the area is not limited to our close friends and allies.

Recommendation:

That you seek to get Presidential approval for a state visit by Ne Win, if possible during the current year; a memorandum to the President suggesting a visit by Ne Win is attached for your signature.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Ewing and cleared by Trueheart. Sent through Ball and U. Alexis Johnson who both initialed it.

2 As reported in telegram 197 from Rangoon, October 25, 1965. (Ibid.) In telegram 149 from Rangoon, September 25, Byroade weighed the pros and cons of a Ne Win visit, and reported that he came “down definitely on the side of extending an invitation.” (Ibid.)

3 In a March 18 memorandum to the President the Department of State suggested that a visit by Ne Win would “demonstrate our support of Burmese neutrality and reaffirm that our interest in Southeast Asia is not limited to our close friends and allies.” It would dispel Ne Winʼs bad experiences of his 1960 trip and the suspicion that the United States was hostile to him. it would also counterbalance his visits in 1965 to the Soviet Union and China. (Ibid.)

4  Komer sent the President a March 18 memorandum endorsing the invitation and noting that “with our increasing focus on Asia, having a neutralist statesman like this could be a plus. You should know that Ne Win has carefully avoided any statements pro or con on Vietnam.” The President approved the invitation. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Burma, Ne Win Visit, 9/8–10/66)

101. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 101. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 3, 1966.

SUBJECT

Your Meetings with General Ne Win, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma

General Ne Win has been invited to the United States as a gesture of support for his efforts to maintain Burmaʼs non-alignment and independence and a reaffirmation of our willingness to accept true neutrality in a Southeast Asian State. The visit is also intended to dispel suspicions which Ne Win has long held that the United States is hostile to his government and help improve the atmosphere of our relations with Burma.

General Ne Win has visited the United States five times before, but never as head of government or chief of state. His last visit, in 1960 as Chief of Staff of the Burmese Armed Forces, left him and Madame Ne Win with a feeling of resentment over their treatment about which they are still sensitive.2

Since taking power in a military coup in 1963, General Ne Win has concentrated all power in his own hands. Internally, he has taken a strongly nationalistic approach, aimed at eliminating foreign influence and pulling Burma up by its own bootstraps. However, drastic nationalization of the economy, under a program of “Burmese socialism”, has resulted in serious mismanagement and economic disorder, and chronic problems of insurgency, concentrated in the ethnic minority areas, have continued.

In foreign relations, Ne Win has maintained a strict neutrality avoiding involvement or comment on issues not directly related to Burmese interests. Acutely conscious of Burmaʼs long and exposed border with Communist China, he has continued to regard the maintenance of good relations with Communist China as essential to prevent Burma from becoming another battlefield like Vietnam. At the same time he has indicated awareness of the importance of an American presence in Southeast Asia in permitting Burma to preserve its neutrality.

There are no bilateral issues that need to be raised in this visit. Your meetings with Ne Win will, therefore, be more in the nature of an exchange of views on subjects of mutual interest. Ne Win may not initially be very forthcoming, and I suggest that you make a point of seeking out his opinions early in the conversation.

Recommended Topics to Raise:

Vietnam: The Burmese Government maintains a carefully neutral attitude on Vietnam, and has resisted Communist pressure to condemn our position there. Ne Win has an appreciation of the significance of the Vietnam struggle for Burma, although the dictates of avoiding provocation to Communist China will not permit him to say so publicly. I recommend that you have a full discussion with him of our position and aims in Vietnam and Southeast Asia as a whole.

Southeast Asian Regional Development: Burma has not taken part in regional development activities because of concern for its neutral status and belief that its limited resources should be confined to Burma. I suggest that you express your belief in the contribution regional development can make to improving the lives of all peoples in Southeast Asia and point out the encouraging progress made to date. I recommend that you do not press Ne Win specifically on participation, which he would be likely to resent.

Communist China: Although most Burmese see China as a long-term threat, their relations with Communist China to date have worked satisfactorily for them. I suggest that you explain our policy briefly and solicit General Ne Winʼs views. Since Ne Win has made a number of trips to Communist China, you may wish to ask him for his estimate of the recent developments in China as well as his views on the basic attitudes and motivations of the Chinese Communist leadership.

Topics General Ne Win May Raise:

Burmaʼs Non-aligned Policy: Ne Win has indicated sensitivity that the reasons for Burmaʼs non-alignment are not fully understood and he may wish to explain the rationale for his policy. I recommend you reassure General Ne Win of our understanding and respect for his non-alignment and his efforts to maintain Burmaʼs independence. You might also add we respect Burmaʼs right to choose its own way and have no wish to interfere in Burmaʼs internal affairs.

I am enclosing a copy of Ambassador Byroadeʼs cable3 discussing the visit, which I recommend that you read if you have not already done so.

Dean Rusk

Attachment

VISIT OF GENERAL NE WIN OF THE UNION OF BURMA

Washington, September 8–10, 1966

Ambassador Byroadeʼs Cable of August 18 on

Meetings With General Ne Win

For the President and Secretary of State

As the visit of Ne Win of Burma will be unusual in a number of ways, I hope the President and Secretary can read this message prior to receiving him.

There are no current bilateral problems between the United States and Burma which need attention at the Head of State level: no agreement of any type will be sought; no assistance of any substance will be requested or accepted. The only document involved should be a communique4 acceptable to both but too mild to cause enthusiasm in either camp. This can probably be worked into final form before the meeting even starts.

This naturally raises the question as to what this visit is all about. Unless we goof badly, Ne Win will accomplish his primary purpose (see paragraph 1 below) simply by visiting America and being received by our President. Our primary purpose is to leave him with certain impressions and to dispel others. We will have to do it almost entirely by the manner in which we receive him, what we choose to talk about, and how we say it. The following constitutes the best guidance I can provide.

1. Ne Winʼs primary purpose in visiting America is simply to prove his continuing neutrality. His recent visits to Peking and Moscow, and the burdensome number of visits he has had from Communist states of late, make him want to redress the appearance of balance that he is determined to retain in his policy of non-alignment. From our point of view we should welcome the opportunity to help him achieve this aim, and to demonstrate that we can accept genuine neutrality in a Southeast Asian state.

2. A close associate of Ne Win recently told me that this visit could be very successful if only our President and Secretary could find means to let Ne Win know that they realize that a policy of neutrality is not an easy one for him to pursue situated where he is geographically, and with a 1200 mile common border with China, in todayʼs Southeast Asia. He thought an awareness of this, and an appreciation of it on our part, was of overriding importance. I believe this assessment correct.

3. I believe the most important thing the President could do would be to talk frankly to Ne Win about his own great personal convictions regarding the struggle in Vietnam. There need be no fear of an argument from him if we express our position frankly but not in such a manner as to imply that we expect public approval from him. He does not want us to lose in Vietnam, but he worries that escalation may involve Burma. He desperately wants to stay out of this conflict because he is painfully aware of the great destruction past wars have wrought upon Burma. We, on our part, have an equal desire that Burma be able to stay out of the conflict in Southeast Asia. This is the single most important parallel interest between the United States and Burma today, and this point should be made. I believe Ne Win is beginning to realize this, but he should have no doubts in his mind after the talks are over.

You should of course seek his views on Vietnam, he probably wonʼt feel he can advise us, but he should be made to feel that we look upon him as an Asia whose frank views we would value at any time.

I believe the President should also devote some time to his own conviction that, over and above a successful conclusion of the struggle in Vietnam, there should be increasing attention to the well-being and standard of living of all the independent nations in Southeast Asia.

4. The most important impression we want to leave in Ne Winʼs mind is that he need have no fear of us. I believe his fears of us are considerably less than even a year ago, and I doubt seriously he would even consider coming to America if this were not so. In the past he has worried about possible U.S. support (or U.S.-backed Thai support) to various insurgent groups in Burma, because he knows that most of these ethnic hill groups have sought support from us (without exception turned down) that some are predominantly Christian, that some fought with us during Would War II, and that they are by nature individualists who want no part of the “Burmese Way to Socialism”. (In all fairness to Ne Win and his government I must state that I do not believe the insurgents would, for a long time at least, like any Rangoon government that attempted to extend its influence into their areas.) He has also feared that we might so dislike the radical socialist economy he has tried to force on Burma that we would some day try to overthrow him. He has also, and partly for the above reasons, been obsessed in the past with fear of CIA.

The passage of time and our low-key policies have alleviated these worries. He should not dwell on his insurgency problems, although it would be natural to ask him about the difficulties it has caused him in building a better Burma. If the opportunity arises naturally, I think you should tell him quite plainly that we consider that the nature of Burmaʼs internal organization and economy to be none of our business. This would sound more convincing if we added that we have very definite views as to what type of economy was best for people, but that we were not about to press these views on him.

5. Ne Win rather likes to talk about China and his views should be sought. He has had more first hand experience with Chinaʼs leaders than almost anyone else we can talk to these days, and he holds his own with them quite well. He may not give much because he doesnʼt believe Washington can keep secrets from the press, and he cannot afford to have his frank views on China leaked, but he may talk if the meetings are small. It would be interesting if he did. I mentioned to him once our hopes for the next generation in China. He said “You Americans shouldnʼt put too much hope in that.” We were unfortunately interrupted at that point.

6. I do not believe Ne Win will ask for any economic assistance from the United States while in Washington. They may have in mind some future requests, but if they do I believe they will broach the matter quietly later here in Rangoon. I feel certain that he wants to avoid any accusation of having come to America for assistance. If the subject of aid arises, he is capable of giving a quite refreshing viewpoint as to how nations must learn to stand on their own feet. We could quite honestly applaud this attitude of self-reliance.

We might even go so far as to say we recognize and appreciate that Burma, which has accepted relatively small amounts of foreign aid, has not engaged in the practice of whipsawing both sides in the cold war for ever-increasing amounts of money.

The subject of past aid might arise, particularly with the Secretary. The Burmese have a rather irritating desire to convince us that our aid procedures are far too complicated, involve too many technicians, etc. U Ohn Khin, on the delegation, repeatedly wants to explain why they cancelled out our large road project in 1964 just before it finally got started, feeling that Washington may not understand and be unhappy with Burma as a result. (We were, in fact, not unhappy at all to end once and for all discussion of this unfortunate project which was initiated in 1959.) I will try to prevent this type of discussion but if it does occur I suggest you listen patiently and assure them their views will be given careful thought.

7. I do not believe Ne Win will raise the subject, nor should we, of past or future U.S. military assistance, [2 lines of source text not declassified]. You should know that we have had a small and inconspicuous military assistance program here since 1958. When Ne Win refused our offer of a grant program in 1958, primarily because of his concern over Chinese reaction, we agreed to a cut-rate sales program repayable in local currency. Ne Win likes to assume that he can truthfully say that he continues to purchase military equipment from several sources (we are the primary one) and that his arrangement with the U.S. is no more than a normal Sears Roebuck type purchase operation with no political connotations. It is in our interest to let him continue to think along in these lines. He was furious at U Thant recently for mentioning publicly that Burma received U.S. equipment.

Our previous arrangements will soon expire. I want to see us continue this program, under somewhat different rules, as Burmese requirements are modest and it gives us our most intimate contact with the personnel who are running todayʼs Burma, and those who will be important in the future. I am submitting recommendations in this regard, but do not want to see this the subject of Heads of State discussion anymore than I think Ne Win does. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

This is a complex and sensitive subject. If he raises it, which I doubt, I could brief both of you more fully in his presence, and in a manner in which I do not believe he would take exception.

8. We should not bring up old irritants of the past, particularly the KMT question. I do not think Ne Win will raise it, but if he does, you should both know that I have been open and honest with him on this subject. I did not deny a degree of U.S. support for the refugee Chinese Nationalist forces in Burma to act as a buffer against Communist China in 1951, but I tried to correct his exaggerated opinion of its extent and duration. Also by putting it into broader context, including the Korean situation at that time, I attempted to convince him that this was not aimed any way at Burma. He has never mentioned the subject to me since. In this regard it might be wise for the Secretary to read report of my talk with Ne Win on this subject sent to Bundy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on 30 June 1964. (Attached to briefing paper on Chinese Nationalist irregulars)5

9. Burma is one of the few countries in the world that does not, publicly or privately, keep telling the U.S. how to manage its foreign affairs. Soon after he was invited on this visit, Ne Win reportedly said “Maybe the Americans are finally beginning to appreciate a guy who can keep his mouth shut.” (This was done in a context which suggested he was thinking of Sukarno, Sihanouk, etc.) Perhaps (by indirection) a way can be found which lets Ne Win know we do in fact appreciate this.

10. You probably should express a normal interest as to how the development of Burma is coming along but let it drop rather quickly. Ne Win is ashamed of the state of his economy which he admits “is a mess”. I believe he knows now that some movement towards the right, by loosening the extent of government controls, is virtually a necessity. A reversal now is not an easy matter for him, and in this process there must never be any sign of U.S. prompting which he could ill afford.

Ne Win is not a doctrinaire socialist and he would probably be embarrassed if someone were to ask him to give an ideological explanation of the Burmese Way to Socialism. He certainly is, however, a dedicated nationalist. He took power in a Burma that had used the forum of parliamentary democracy as an opportunity for endless political squabbling and corruption. Free enterprise to him means the ownership of the economy by unassimilable foreign groups: British, Indian and Pakistani, and Chinese, with the Burmese looking in from the outside. I believe his basic motive in seizing power in Burma was to make sure that the majority of the people, who are Burmese, had their chance to determine the future of their country. He is paying the price for dispossessing the former in-groups, who were after all the bulk of this countryʼs trained managers, and in the process fastened his countrymen onto a system that is steadily reducing them to the subsistency level. What we have in Burma has some of the elements of a tragedy.

11. Burma tries to keep her problems with her neighbors manageable and appreciation could be expressed that she has no area problems that threaten the region. Donʼt go overboard about the Thais as he doesnʼt trust them over the long haul. He knows they look down on Burmese, and wonders how they can be wily enough to have never had a war on their soil while Burma always gets beaten up good and proper.

12. Mention our encouragement over regional efforts in the area and hope that Burma will some day find these useful and profitable. Donʼt press, as he does not want outsiders to know the true condition of his economy. Besides all border area are sensitive and only partly under his control. Regional projects at the moment mean nothing to him as he thinks he has enough problems internally. He may also feel that, under present circumstances, joining regional activities would compromise Burmese neutrality.

13. Do not mention, even inadvertently, U Nu or others that he has interned (as you may be urged to do by domestic critics of Burmese affairs). We still have some way to go to convince Ne Win that we are not trying to meddle in his affairs. While it would be well if he could be convinced that his own security probably would be enhanced with moderation and release of his enemies rather than in continued repression, this is not a subject he would consider appropriate for a first meeting between Heads of State.

14. Try to keep the meetings small. I realize this is difficult, but the smaller the meeting the better the talks will be.

15. Let Ne Win talk. This unusual injunction is given because he is not a self-starter in official conversations, although he warms up if given a chance. This has been on my mind since the visit of the Mansfield group here, and the Foreign Ministerʼs remarks to me afterward. The size of that group, and their desire not to sit through embarrassing silences caused them to bridge all gaps of conversation. Wait him out once in a while and he will do well. This is important, because he will have a better feeling after the talks are over if he feels he carried his part.

16. We should give every impression of being completely frank and honest with this man in all subjects discussed. There will be no danger whatsoever of any leak from him or his staff, to the press.

17. When alone with him, show a friendly concern for his person. The President could inquire about his health, say he had heard with concern of his trip to London for medical reasons. Offer him at any time our very best medical services, the most immediate delivery of any useful new drug or medicine, etc.

18. I have promised him that we will not take advantage of his presence to criticize publicly third parties. This was a relief to him and if we can live up to this promise in our toasts, etc., he will be grateful. This is a good opportunity to convince him of the difference between us and communist leaders, who invariably embarrass him by public statement casting blame on the U.S. In this regard I have asked for advance copies of your intended remarks. He would approach Washington in a far less tense mood if I could furnish these to him somewhat prior to his arrival. (His staff strongly urged me to see if remarks and toasts could be dropped at the Secretaryʼs luncheon. I told them only that I would do what I could to keep it short.)

19. Please insure that all involved in this visit know of a desire at your level that things go smoothly on this visit. I will leave it to your staffs to tell you how unbelievably badly Ne Winʼs visit to the U.S. was mishandled in 1960.

The above advice on how to approach Ne Win does not reflect in any way my humanitarian concern for the people of Burma under certain current aspects of Ne Winʼs “Burmese Way to Socialism”. Rather it reflects my assessment as to what is good for the U.S. with the present state of affairs today in Southeast Asia. It is based upon my belief that Ne Win, with all his shortcomings, remains our best bet in Burma today. The majority of his Burmese critics do not want him replaced. They are furthermore glad he is going to the U.S. as they see in this a sign of a future more to their liking. My advice is also based upon the conviction that we want above all a stable, independent Burma which can manage to stay out of the Southeast Asia conflict, and whose relations with us continue, in a slow and undramatic way, to improve up to the point of a neutrality leaning slightly—but not too much—on our side.

I hope you both can find time to read the bios we have sent the Department on both the General and Madame Ne Win.

Byroade

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Burma, Ne Win Visit, 9/8–10/66. Secret.

2 A paper prepared by Ewing on September 6 details these four incidents: U.S. customs officials searched Ne Winʼs and his wifeʼs baggage; doctors at Minnesota University Hospital were questioned about his health; he was kept waiting for an appointment at the Pentagon; and Mrs. Ne Win overheard an insulting reference to herself allegedly made by Mrs. Eisenhower while she was in a private waiting room at Walter Reed Hospital. (Ibid.)

3 The Department of State copy of this telegram, 217 from Rangoon, August 18, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 BURMA.

4 The communiqué, September 9, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 643–644. There were difficulties on the wording on Vietnam. They are outlined in a memorandum from Rostow to the President, September 8. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Burma, Ne Win Visit, 9/8–10/66)

5 Neither found attached.

102. Editorial Note 102. Editorial Note

On September 8, 1966, President and Mrs. Johnson welcomed Chairman and Mrs. Ne Win at a ceremony held on the South Lawn of the White House. After remarks by the President and the Chairman, Johnson took Ne Win by the arm and walked with him to the Diplomatic Room where they and their wives stood in a receiving line. Then, the President took Ne Win out the South Portico to a waiting limousine for a welcoming parade around Washington. During the motorcade ride the two men exchanged pleasantries, but no substantive remarks. The motorcade returned to Blair House where Ne Win received the key to the city of Washington from the D.C. Commissioner. President Johnson and Chairman Ne Win met privately in the Oval Office from 5:07 to 6:05 p.m. No memorandum of this conversation has been found. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary) Prior to the meeting, Special Assistant Rostow sent the President a brief memorandum suggesting that the President should outline his position on Vietnam, raise the question of Southeast Asian regional development, and ask Ne Win for his view of what was happening in China. (Memorandum from Rostow to Johnson, September 8; ibid., National Security File, Country File, Burma, Ne Win Visit, 9/8–10/66) That evening Ne Win and his wife attended a dinner at the White House. On September 9 President Johnson met Ne Win briefly from 5:07 to 5:30 to discuss their joint communiqué and bid him farewell. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

Ne Win met separately with Under Secretary George Ball and Ambassador at Large Averell Harriman on September 9, 1966. Their conversations covered Bo Setkya, exiled opponent of Ne Win, China, and Vietnam. (Memoranda of conversations, September 9; Department of State, Central Files, POL BURMA–US and POL 7 BURMA) The difficulties posed by Bo Setkyaʼs presence in the United States during the Ne Win visit are outlined in a memorandum from Rusk to the President, August 23. (Ibid., Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Miscellaneous Chron)

103. Draft Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Berger) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Bundy) 103. Draft Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Berger) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Bundy)1

Washington, December 13, 1967.

SUBJECT

Aid to Burma?

Summary

1. There have been intimations that the Burmese Government may soon approach the United States Government for economic aid on a substantial scale. This paper examines the factors to be considered in determining our response and concludes that we should be chary of entering into any aid program with Burma under present circumstances. We can, however, be helpful in minor ways in showing our good will toward Burma and, in certain circumstances, it might be in our interest to join, in a limited way, with other friendly nations to help Burma.2

Burmaʼs Exposed Position

2. Burmaʼs 1200-mile frontier with Red China dictates her foreign policy of neutralism and non-involvement. However much Burma may fear Red China or sympathize with her neighbors who are fighting the expansion of communist influence in Southeast Asia, she will not publicly declare herself in support of others, let alone join others in a common cause. While standing up to Red Chinese pressures and harassments with dignity and firmness, Burma avoids outside entanglements in order not to give Red China additional cause for complaint or activity directed against her.

3. Hence, Burma has stayed clear of regional defense associations or bilateral defense agreements, and is unwilling to join even the more innocuous cultural, political or economic associations such as ASPAC, ASEAN, or the Ministerial conferences on trade, agriculture and education, or the Asian Development Bank. Her sole memberships are in ECAFE, the Colombo Plan, and the Mekong Committee.

4. The strength of Burmaʼs position via-a-vis Red China lies in her nationalism, which is well-developed, real and fervent, and in the continued weakness, up to now, of the Burmese Communist Party. Should Communist China decide to abandon its “respect for Burmese neutrality,” which has characterized its policy until recently, step up its support of the Burmese communists and help them to develop cadres for a “national liberation front,” a serious insurgency situation could develop within a few years, for there are shocking weaknesses in Burma which can be easily and rapidly exploited.

a. The Burmese Government is both ineffective and incompetent in dealing with its internal problems.

b. Doctrinaire economic policies, developed under the slogan of Burmaʼs “nationalist way to socialism,” have caused the economy to decline in all key sectors: food and manufacturing production, domestic and international trade, and foreign exchange earnings and reserves. As a dramatic example, this nation, which was one of the largest producers and exporters of rice in the world when it became independent, has allowed its rice production to so run down that it has barely enough rice to feed its people. As a result of this and similar shortcomings, there is growing popular dissatisfaction and dissension in Burma in both the Burmese portion of the population as well as among the large minority ethnic groups.

c. These ethnic groups, who live in the border areas, have closer ties with similar ethnic groups in Laos, Thailand, and China than with the Burmese. Some of these groups are fiercely independent, and have resorted to arms in pursuit of autonomy. Others are passive or resigned. In their attitudes toward Red China and communism, some ethnic groups are hostile, others indifferent, while still others would not hesitate to take help from communist sources outside Burma in furtherance of their resistance to Burmese dominations.

d. Banditry is widespread in many parts of the country.

5. In short, the authority of the Burmese Government even now does not exist or is being challenged in many parts of Burma. With an ineffective military government, a deteriorating economy, disaffected national and ethnic groups, and widespread banditry, Burma is ideal terrain for communist insurgency, whose invariable aim is to destroy the authority of the government, starting in the rural areas, and set up its own authority instead. A real effort by Red China to exploit these weaknesses—and there are signs that Communist China now intends to do so—could in a few years produce an insurgency far more dangerous than exists in Thailand, and one much more akin to what we have been confronted with in South Viet-Nam.

6. Should general economic conditions worsen and the internal danger grow, the Burmese Government will more and more be forced to turn to outside powers, especially Japan and the United States, and possibly Russia, for help—economic and military—to enable it to defend its national independence against these internal threats supported from China. But Burmese nationalism is so prickly, and her attachment to doctrinaire socialism so pervasive, that she would insist that help be without strings, that there be no interference in her internal affairs, and that there be no obligation to abandon either her domestic policies or her neutralist and non-involvement foreign policy.

7. All the foregoing suggests that Burma is, at present, hardly a country to which we should give aid or commit ourselves to support. Yet the temptation to provide help to resist a growing communist-led insurgency within Burma will be great. And, one step leading to another, we could, if we pursued this course, find ourselves in a few years enmeshed in a situation which not only would be costly, frustrating and complicated, but most unpromising as to any successful outcome.

8. It is important, as we move into this new and more dangerous period which is now unfolding in Burma, with the prospect of aid requests being put upon us, that we establish very clearly with the Burmese what we are and what we are not prepared to do: a. In my view we should state bluntly to the Burmese that so long as Burma pursues her present economic policies we are not prepared even to consider aid requests, since aid will produce no meaningful or constructive results in present circumstances. Only if the Burmese abandon unwise economic policies and embark on a course that will reverse the disintegration of recent years are we prepared to consider aid and support. We ourselves are not prepared to give the Burmese advice on what that new course should be. World Bank and IMF services and experts can provide this advice if the Burmese wish to avail themselves of it. This is what Indonesia has done, when it reversed its course, and this is what we suggest for Burma.

b. Secondly, we must point out that aid is not the answer to Burmaʼs problems. There is much that Burma can do by itself without aid to reverse its economic decline. The restoration of incentives to produce, especially among farmers, and the restoration of features of a market economy, are essential. If Burma does move in these new directions we are prepared to join with the Japanese and other friendly countries to see what we might be able to do, in concert with others, to help. However, we will not act alone or bilaterally.

c. Thirdly, that while we understand and respect Burmaʼs desire, given her geographic position, not to get involved in the wider aspects of the free world-communist confrontation, we cannot treat Burma in isolation of this wider struggle. Before we can provide aid there are domestic and international aspects of such help to which we must pay attention. For us to help Burma we require that she bring forcefully to the attention of the UN the developing insurgency which is being fostered from the outside and seek UN moral support and endorsement of her efforts to preserve her national independence. Unless Burma is willing to seek the support of world opinion on her behalf—an effort to which we would lend our help—we would find it difficult to provide aid. If UN support is not forthcoming, we would be prepared to reexamine our position on aid, but the important thing is that Burma must itself make the effort to obtain UN resolutions calling on member countries of the UN to help Burma.

9. There are other aspects of Burma which would complicate our giving aid, for example, the military dictatorship, the governmentʼs narrow political base, the Burmese attitude toward its minority groups, etc., but there is little need to raise these matters in the first instance. The first hurdle to be mounted is the will of the Burmese Government to initiate fundamental economic change. If they would move sensibly and pragmatically in the right directions in these regards, we can assume that they would also see the light in regard to political and minority matters.

10. Meantime we can say that we are prepared to do some simple things even at the outset to show our good will toward Burma. We are willing to train economists in the US, provide books to its universities, put Burma in touch with the latest scientific developments in rice culture, help train civil servants in administration, give Burma the benefit of our experience in countering insurgency, and sell arms and equipment useful in counter-insurgency on commercial terms.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) BURMA. Secret. Drafted by Berger.

2 John C. Bullitt, Assistant Administrator of the Far East, Agency for International Development, commented on Bergerʼs memorandum stating it was “excellent” and the recommendations “just right.” Bullitt did suggest minor revisions. (Memorandum from Bullitt to Berger, December 14; ibid.) William Gleysteen, Deputy Director, Office of United Nations Political Affairs, agreed with the summary statement and “the thrust of its subsequent discussion,” but suggested revisions in recommendation 8c that would downplay the support Burma could expect in the United Nations. (Memorandum from Gleysteen to Berger, December 20; ibid.) Ralph Clough of the Policy Planning Staff agreed with the recommendations, but felt the paper overstated the insurgent threat directed from China; underestimated Burmese nationalism as a countervailing force; and stressed that Burmaʼs immediate neighbors should take the lead while the United States remained in the background. (Memorandum from Clough to Berger, December 22; ibid.)

3 According to telegram 151165 to Rangoon, April 23, the East Asia Interdepartmental Review Group reviewed the question of additional aid to Burma. It concluded on April 12 that the United States should decline to give Burma aid under PL–480 and should decline a request from Burma for a pre-investment survey. The United States was prepared to provide a “modest amount technical assistance in form of participant training” and would advise Burma to join the ADB and seek economic advice from international organizations. (Ibid.)

104. Special National Intelligence Estimate 104. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, March 14, 1968.

SNIE 51–68

INSURGENCY IN BURMA

The Problem

To assess the probable course of insurgent activity in Burma over the next year, with special emphasis on the involvement of Communist China.

Conclusions

A. The recent sharp rift in Sino-Burmese relations, after a long period of cordiality, and the continuing deterioration in Burmaʼs economic situation have combined to produce a climate more favorable to Burmaʼs persistent insurgents—the Karen, Shan, and Kachin ethnic minorities as well as the Burmese Communists. In recent months there has been some intensification in dissident activity.

B. Over the next year there may be a further growth in the insurgent threat, due in part to the limited aid which we believe the Chinese will give to the ethnic minority insurgents along the border and to Burmese Communist insurgents in lower Burma.

C. Chinese support will probably remain limited in the near future, and the Burmese Government has stepped up both its political and military countermeasures. Hence we believe the insurgency will be contained during the next year.

D. The longer term outlook depends significantly upon the future policies of the Chinese and Burmese Governments. Given time and effort, Chinese supported insurgency could severely strain the re- sources of the Burmese Government, especially if Rangoon continues to generate popular discontent by implementing restrictive economic policies and persists in maintaining an uncompromising attitude towards the status of the ethnic minority groups.

[Here follows the Discussion section of the paper.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165. Secret; Controlled Dissem. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the NSA prepared this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with it except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map indicating the major areas of insurgent activity are not printed. Fred Green, Director of the Office of Research and Analysis for East Asia and the Pacific, recommended that Hughes approve this estimate. Green noted that DIA and Berger had initially requested its production because of concern about increasing Chinese Communist involvement and cooperation among insurgent groups. DIA was the most concerned about the threat of insurgency, while the State and Office of National Estimates representatives did not view Chinese activities as a real danger. The other area of difference was the Burmese Army as a counter-insurgency force. CIA gave it high marks; DIA considered it totally inept. The estimateʼs conclusion is a compromise of these extremes, which Green considered the best judgment possible given inadequate sources of information. (Memorandum from Green to Hughes, March 12; ibid.)

CambodiaCambodia

Contents

January 1964–May 1965: Neutrality Proposals; Border Incidents and U.N. Consideration; Deterioration and Break in U.S.-Cambodian RelationsJanuary 1964–May 1965: Neutrality Proposals; Border Incidents and U.N. Consideration; Deterioration and Break in U.S.-Cambodian Relations

105. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Hannah on January 23 and cleared by Harriman. Ruskʼs initials appear on the source text.

106. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 24, 1964, 12:05–12:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and approved in S on February 8. The time of the meeting is from Ruskʼs Appointment Book. (Johnson Library) The discussion on Cambodia was part two of three separate topics.

107. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, February 8, 1964, 4:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Koren, cleared by Hilsman and Harriman, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Paris, London, Ottawa, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, February 19, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

109. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, February 19, 1964, 9:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah; cleared by Harriman, Forrestal, and in substance by Salans of L/FE; and approved by Hilsman. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok. Repeated to London, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Vientiane, Kuala Lumpur, and CINCPAC.

110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Forrestal. Secret.

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, March 3, 1964, 8:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared by Johnson and Harriman, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Kuala Lumpur, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

112. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, March 4, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

113. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State

Vientiane, March 9, 1964, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok for Bundwo, CINCPAC, London, Paris, Phnom Penh, and Saigon.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, March 10, 1964, 8:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared in draft with Hilsman and Harriman, and approved by Trueheart. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

115. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnon Penh, March 11, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 CAMB. Unclassified; Flash. Passed to the White House, CIA, and National Military Communication Center. There was no time of dispatch on the source text, which arrived at the Department of State at 11:36 p.m.

116. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, March 11, 1964, 9:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 CAMB. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hannah and Hirschfeld, cleared in draft with Harriman and Hilsman, and approved by Trueheart. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok and repeated to London and Paris.

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, March 13, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, POL 23–8 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

118. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. II, Memos, 3/64–7/64. Secret. Copy sent to Komer.

119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, March 16, 1964, 12:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Hirschfeld, cleared by Trueheart, Green, and Sullivan, and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, Paris, London, Ottawa, and Bangkok.

120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, March 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. II, Memos 3/64–7/64. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 22, 1964, 6:06 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 CAMB. Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Verbatim Text. Drafted and approved by William Bundy, cleared in draft with U. Alexis Johnson and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok and Paris Eyes Only for the Ambassador.

122. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation

March 23, 1964, 9:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–13 CAMB. Secret, Limdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in S on March 29. Rusk was in Washington; Butler in London. This conversation was on a secure line.

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, March 26, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, the White House, Department of Defense, JCS, and CIA. Passed to USUN.

124. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 26, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on March 26. The Department of State sent an account of this meeting to the Embassy in Moscow in telegram 2845, March 30. (Ibid., POL 27–14 CAMB)

125. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 1, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Raymond L. Gartoff of G/PM and approved in S on April 15.

126. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 1, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, Luncheon Meetings with President, Vol. 1. Secret.

127. Editorial Note

128. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 6, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 CAMB, Confidential. Drafted by Trueheart. A note on the source text reads: that “Secretary Saw.”

129. Memorandum of Conversation

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret. This memorandum, part I of a two-part conversation, was drafted by Salans and approved by S on April 16. The meeting was held at the Embassy chancery.

130. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green)

Washington, April 16, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

131. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 15, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum and concurred by William Bundy. A note on the source text reads: S[ecretary] saw.”

132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, May 21, 1964, 9:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by Hirschfeld, Buffum, and Patrica M. Byrne of UNP, cleared by Trueheart, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Saigon.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, May 25, 1964, 8:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum; cleared by Meeker, William Bundy, Sullivan, and Cleveland; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Abidjan, La Paz, London, Moscow, Oslo, Paris, Phnom Penh, Prague, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro, Saigon, Taipei, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

134. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, May 30, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by Buffum and Patricia M. Byrne of UNP. There is an indication on the source text that Ball saw it.

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State

Phnom Penh, June 3, 1964, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

136. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, June 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, UN 3 SC. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Buffum and John W. Kimball of UNP. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it on June 5.

137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations

Washington, June 12, 1964, 9:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by William G. Jones and Patricia M. Byrne of UNP; cleared by Buffum, Trueheart, Mendenhall, Salans, and Stephen M. Schwebel of L/UNA; and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Saigon and Phnom Penh and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, London, Paris, Abijan, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro, Oslo, Taipei, and La Paz.

138. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart)

Washington, June 30, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret.

139. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Director of Central Intelligence McCone

Washington, June 30, 1964.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI Executive Registry Files (McCone), Job 80–B01676. Secret.

140. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, July 4, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 CAMB. Confidential. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Saigon, and Bangkok.

141. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 29, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Hirschfeld and cleared by Trueheart.

142. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 30, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Hirschfeld. Trueheart added a covering memorandum noting that these points had been approved by Kidder and passing on a request from CIA that they receive a copy.

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 30, 1964, 1:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Kimball and Sisco, cleared by Green, Cleveland, and Forrestal, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and Phnon Penh and repeated to CINCPAC.

144. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 12, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Peters and seen by Bundy.

145. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Kimball and cleared by Green and Corcoran.

146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, November 15, 1964, 1:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 CAMB–US. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by David H. McKillip, Director of Western European Affairs, cleared by Trueheart, and approved by Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs William R. Tyler. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and Vientiane.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, November 15, 1964, 2:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret; Flash. Drafted and approved by Bundy and cleared by Rusk.

148. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, December 3, 1964, 8:27 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Spivack and Hirschfeld, cleared by Bundy, Trueheart, Corcoran, and Bonsal, and in draft with Eric L. Fox of L/FE, and approved by Harriman. Sent to Bangkok, London, New Delhi, Paris, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia

Washington, December 17, 1964, 7:38 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by Marshall P. Jones, Director of FE/EX, and approved by Green. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

150. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, December 28, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos 8/64–6/65. Secret.

151. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, January 6, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/64–6/65. No classification marking. The source text indicates that the President saw it.

152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, January 27, 1965, 7:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and Salans, cleared with Trueheart, in draft with Corcoran and Bonsal, in substance with Albert A. Lakeland, Jr. of SOA, and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and Saigon.

153. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 15, 1965, 2:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved in S on April 27. The meeting took place at the White House.

154. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 21, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Secret;Exdis.

155. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 30, 1965, 7:31 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts of Telephone Conversations and Meetings, Tape F 65.1, Side A, PNO 1. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

156. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, May 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/64–6/65. No classification marking. The source text indicates that the President saw it.

105. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk 105. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the British Ambassador, January 24, 1964

The British Ambassador is calling on you to discuss the differences between us on handling the Soviet proposal for a conference on Cambodian neutrality in April.2 There is some urgency because the Foreign Office expects a question on this subject to arise in parliament on Monday. The substance of the US position, as set forth in our telegram of yesterday (Tab A),3 was given to Mr. Trench of the British Embassy yesterday afternoon. Upon learning of the differences in our positions, Trench stated that he was under instructions to seek an appointment with you for his Ambassador.

Probable British Position

The Soviet proposal, which has also been passed to Prince Sihanouk, changes the situation and will generate increasing pressures for a conference. The British believe that any indication on their part of turning back now might “set Sihanouk off again.”

US Position

The position already given the British Embassy is that their proposed reply is in effect a commitment to attend a Geneva Conference in April. This is not significantly affected by certain drafting changes which the British have proposed to their own note. It would be ill-advised to talk of the holding of a conference, unless the agenda and subject matter are thoroughly discussed and texts agreed to beforehand by all parties concerned. We proposed that the British tell the Soviets that it is premature to set a date for a conference unless the subject matter is agreed beforehand. We specifically proposed using the co-chairmen machinery to reach agreement on texts, using the British draft. Recognizing that a new British approach to a conference might “set Sihanouk off”, we said it would be better to take this risk now rather than later, when the conference process was even further along and Sihanoukʼs reaction would be more violent.

Recommendation

That you seek to persuade the British Ambassador of the importance that the US and UK coordinate their actions in such a way as to avoid a conference. Our opinion is that the best tactic to achieve this would be our suggestion of utilizing the co-chairmen machinery to obtain agreement of interested countries to neutrality agreements on Cambodia. We would propose that this matter be discussed in more detail with Mr. Peck in the preliminary talks which you suggested in your letter to Mr. Butler. In the meantime, we would hope the British will take no definitive position with respect to the Soviet draft.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Hannah on January 23 and cleared by Harriman. Ruskʼs initials appear on the source text.

2 See Document 106.

3 Telegram 4457 to London, January 23. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S) Its contents are summarized below under the heading, “US Position.”

106. Memorandum of Conversation 106. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 24, 1964, 12:05–12:33 p.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Neutrality Proposal

PARTICIPANTS

The British Ambassador

Mr. Nigel Trench, Counselor, British Embassy

The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Mr. Wm. C. Burdett, Deputy Asst. Secy for European Affairs

Mr. H. L. T. Koren, Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs

The Ambassador said he thought their draft answer2 to the Soviet proposal for a Cambodian neutrality conference date and place was sufficiently vague that it was not inconsistent with the US position, and would keep Sihanouk happy as well. The Secretary stated once again the US position opposing a conference unless the results expected were understood and agreed to beforehand. He pointed to the experience of the Laos Conference where we were under heavy attack for the first few days simply because there had been no advance agreements. He also emphasized our heavy responsibility in SVN and Thailand. We simply could not ask them to come to a conference clearly aimed at them as this one had been. The chances were practically nil that the US would come to a conference to debate. The Ambassador suggested that in view of Sihanoukʼs vanity and how much depended on indulging that, a short conference would be a small price to pay to keep him happy.

The Secretary said it was first imperative to wait until we could see what results could be obtained and if none could be agreed upon, there would be no conference as far as the US was concerned. He added that if we were going to have trouble with Sihanouk, as we very well might, it would be better to have it now rather than at a conference. The Ambassador remarked again he thought the UK draft safeguarded our position. The Secretary replied that he thought there would have to be more language on the need for a pre-agreement of desired results. The Secretary spoke of very real fear in Viet-Nam of pressure for neutralization and its effect internally. We had too much at stake in Viet-Nam to risk this. Besides we did not have much in the way of relations with Sihanouk and we did not have much to lose. If the results were fully agreed to it should be possible for Ambassadors to sign at Phnom Penh.

The Ambassador asked whether we were adamant on this position because they didnʼt feel that they could stall with the Soviets. The Secretary said that we did not want to draft their reply for them. But we would not come to a conference if the results were not agreed in advance and even then we must take Thai and Vietnamese views and interests into account. We would not even be very happy about just a signing conference.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Koren and approved in S on February 8. The time of the meeting is from Ruskʼs Appointment Book. (Johnson Library) The discussion on Cambodia was part two of three separate topics.

2 Not further identified.

107. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 107. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, February 8, 1964, 4:25 p.m.

517. Phnom Penh 747.2 Although your suggestion USG inform Sihanouk our acceptance UK draft has attraction as possibly obviating conference, we could not do this without serious injury our relations with Thai and Vietnamese and therefore to our own interests. Moreover it is far from sure that this step would still Sihanoukʼs desire for conference. Also Communists might not find UK draft to their liking and themselves then demand conference to iron out differences.

GVN FonMin made clear GVN found it impossible to support any neutrality declaration regardless how achieved. This means such unilateral step by US would cause serious difficulties in our relations with that country. Although Sihanouk may consider it unimportant whether Thai and Vietnamese take part in an internationally negotiated neutrality for Cambodia, we disagree and consider that they are parties most vitally concerned. We cannot and will not disregard their interests merely to satisfy Sihanouk. Our commitment in Viet-Nam is so great that we must regard our other actions in SEA in light of their possible effect on achieving our objectives in Viet-Nam. By his neutrality thrust DeGaulle has considerably complicated our already difficult problem in Viet-Nam. We must be very careful not to aggravate it by our own actions vis-à-vis Sihanoukʼs demand for neutrality which fits into DeGaulleʼs scheme and in French view is desired preliminary step to neutralization of all Indochina.

One of Gen. Khanhʼs two stated reasons for taking over power was to obliterate move toward neutralism within GVN. It is obvious that the more GVN and Vietnamese people feel that US is negotiating over neutralization of Cambodia the more difficult it will be to convince them that this does not alter our commitments and will to win in Viet-Nam. A conference to internationalize Cambodiaʼs neutrality will in Vietnamese eyes be step two (after Laos) in eventual neutralization of all Indochina. If the US supports this, then their will to continue their struggle will diminish. We might be faced in SVN with the alternative of pulling out, putting in massive US force, or ourselves agreeing to some sort of neutralization. We have told the GVN we will not consider a Cambodian neutrality conference unless agreement is had beforehand on expected results. In view of what GVN now faces and our own commitment in Viet-Nam and our relations with Thailand we must at least maintain this position.

Thailand has been somewhat more flexible than Viet-Nam. Nevertheless, after consulting with Thai on UK draft we could not suddenly agree to sign without taking into consideration their modifications. Thailand is not fighting a war, nor is it under direct or immediate pressure for inclusion in French proposed neutrality belt. There is however latent neutralism in Thai thinking. Since Thailand is gateway for application of US force in SEA we must thwart moves to neutralize Thailand if we wish to maintain our position in SEA. For this basic reason we cannot afford to let preoccupation with Sihanoukʼs demands damage our relations with Thailand.

We recognize UK and possibly France may welcome opportunity to agree with Sihanouk on UK draft as it stands and thereby hopefully put matter to rest. For reasons cited above however we cannot agree and will resist pressure on us to take this or similar step in order to keep Sihanouk from carrying out his various threats. We recognize Sihanouk may sever relations with us and make some kind of arrangement with Communists. We do not however share French and UK views as to seriousness of effect of latter step. We doubt Sihanouk would sever ties with UK and France, particularly in view his need for French aid. The Communists will likely be very careful about committing themselves very deeply to the erratic Sihanouk, particularly if we made clear our opposition. France would like to replace us in Cambodia and they are not likely to acquiesce in Sihanoukʼs turning completely to Communists.

We would sincerely regret break in our relations but this has been a possibility since cessation of our aid. Although we do not count on it, it is always possible that domestic pressures may confine Sihanouk to continuing threats and further deadlines. In any case, we cannot sacrifice our commitments to Thailand and Viet-Nam to meet Sihanoukʼs threats which would not likely cease even if his neutrality proposals were internationally agreed.

We believe it advisable to make our position on his proposals clear to Sihanouk as soon as possible and before he announces publicly his new May deadline. Otherwise we may appear to be responding to his blackmail. Therefore, if you do not shortly receive audience appointment in connection with Phil good offices, you should make another request. If in meantime nothing has occurred to alter our position on “reconciliation” exchanges, you should carry this out and then speak on neutrality question in accordance Deptel 492.3 Emphasis throughout should be laid on necessity for all concerned to agree on proposals.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Koren, cleared by Hilsman and Harriman, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Paris, London, Ottawa, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 747, February 4, Sprouse suggested that the Department “give serious consideration our going on record with Sihanouk through UK as one of Co-Chairmen by expressing willingness to accept drafts as they stand, thus obviating need for conference if other concerned countries agree.” (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 492 to Phnom Penh, January 29, reiterated that the Embassyʼs instructions had not changed. (Ibid.)

108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 108. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnom Penh, February 19, 1964, 7 p.m.

808. Embtel 804.2 Sihanoukʼs new proposal provides further proof his penchant for public diplomacy and inability refrain from uselessly irritating preliminaries, even when he has something to say which offers constructive possibilities. Despite presumptuous summoning to U.S., Thai and Vietnamese plenipotentiaries at Phnom Penh within short time limits and his offensive and unjustified accusation U.S. has been active enemy Cambodian neutrality and has instigated plots aimed at destroying neutral Cambodia, believe Sihanoukʼs present initiative represents backward step for him and is worth consideration as offering possible alternative to ultimatum he issued February 15 (Embtel 790).3

Advantages we see in Sihanoukʼs new proposal are: 1) It provides way for U.S., Thais, and SVN to avoid attending conference without incurring risk (which country team considers real one) Sihanouk will do what he says he will do—namely recognize Hanoi, abandon neutrality, enter defensive agreements Hanoi and Peiping, and break relations with U.S. and possibly U.K.

2) Settlement Cambodiaʼs borders with its neighbors would be essential element in any easing of tensions; in effect Sihanouk reverting to earlier position reconciliation and with his neighbors contingent upon recognition for present borders. While we aware Thai reluctance subscribe formal recognition document and difficulties inherent in attempting establish border between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam, we believe might be worth exploring possibility opened by Sihanoukʼs initiative for useful negotiations toward eventual settlement.

3) New proposal apparently does not require U.S. provide guarantees but it would commit Cambodia not to make military alliances and to deny use its territory to Viet Cong, commitment which would be backed by activity expanded ICC.

Disadvantages seen are: 1) Proposal extremely vague and, unless spelled out before actual proposed meeting, subject to last minute introduction undesirable elements and interpretations arising from Sihanoukʼs fertile imagination and unprincipled gamesmanship.

2) U.S. required pay cost of expanded ICC as well as cost of tractors to be furnished under grotesque Castro-like “gentlemenʼs agreement” as compensation for Cambodian deaths as result border incidents.

3) Proposal does not eliminate Geneva Conference but would simply excuse U.S., Thailand and Viet-Nam from attending. (However, if agreement of type proposed reached among four countries, UK might take position no real reason remains for conference.)

We recognize that Sihanoukʼs new and startling proposal unlikely prove attractive to GVN and, especially, RTG. However, seems to us, given strong possibility only alternative may be carrying out Sihanoukʼs threats of February 15, would be in interest our SEA allies as well as ourselves at least attempt explore further just what kind of four-power agreement Sihanouk has in mind (including any texts he may already have drawn up) with view ascertaining whether any real possibility for negotiation to produce desired result of re-establishment relations between Cambodia and its neighbors, denial Cambodian territory to Viet Cong, and continued neutrality this country. Subject views Embassies Bangkok and Saigon, Department may wish authorize them discuss Sihanoukʼs new proposal with respective governments with view ascertaining whether they agreeable to our attempting seek further clarification from RKG, including text draft which would expose RKG hand, in context of possible willingness on part U.S., RTG, and GVN negotiation along lines suggested if agreement can be reached on objectives and procedures. We would strongly oppose holding negotiations under such proposals in Cambodia, where Sihanouk could disrupt or stage manage conversations through press conferences, broadcasts or other means to suit his whims. Perhaps Kuala Lumpur might be most satisfactory locale if talks should take place, as Tunku has expressed interest in assisting settlement difficulties between RKG and its neighbors.

Sprouse

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

2 See footnote 2, Document 109.

3 In telegram 790 from Phnom Penh, February 15, the Embassy reported that Sihanouk threatened to recognize North Vietnam (DRV), sign defensive agreements with the DRV and the Peopleʼs Republic of China (PRC), and break relations with the United States. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

109. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 109. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, February 19, 1964, 9:42 p.m.

551. Sihanoukʼs new proposal (Embtel 804),2 while confused and in certain parts unacceptable, suggests he may be seeking a way off the course to which he had apparently committed Cambodia. This may reflect his realization of difficulties in carrying out alignment with Chicoms (although insistence on March deadline indicates he has his threatened timetable in mind). Whatever his motivations, we see the possibility of shifting focus from thorny Geneva conference proposal to more promising negotiation between Cambodia and its neighbors, together with US. Dept. desires exploit opportunity quickly before new events overtake it.

Dept. plans to send within two or three days high-level representative to discuss details Saigon, Bangkok and Phnom Penh. Our purpose in so doing is to insure that if there is any possibility of reaching agreement it not be allowed to slip by.

For Phnom Penh: Harriman has telephoned Nong Kimny expressing US interest. You should seek interview soonest to reinforce. Dept. would favor direct approach to Sihanouk if possible. However leave matter of approach to your judgment. You should commend Sihanouk on his imaginative initiative which appears to be a forward step in resolution of the regional problems which have troubled him for so long. While there are problems and details to be worked out, US is much impressed with basic concept and principles, including recognition Cambodian neutrality and territorial integrity as well as Cambodian acceptance of responsibilities of neutrality and commitment to prevent use of its territory by rebel bands. You should request Sihanouk to designate a representative with whom you could work out modalities for a conference.

For Bangkok and Saigon: You should discuss quadripartite proposals soonest with GVN and RTG. State that US thinks all three of us should move quickly and positively, to explore Sihanoukʼs proposal. Inform Thai and Vietnamese that we are seeking further information and details from RKG and that we are seeking to encourage RKG to develop Sihanoukʼs proposal further. Obviously we have no intention of making any commitments until we have further information and until we have consulted with RTG and GVN.

We recognize Sihanoukʼs statement is cast in a tone objectionable to Thailand and Viet-Nam, as well as US, but we think we should ignore the tone and respond positively to the substantive core; i.e., a quadripartite solution of Sihanoukʼs problems. While Sihanouk says a Geneva Conference could “underwrite” quadripartite agreement, it is possible that successful conclusion of agreement would make conference unnecessary.

We think the objectionable parts of Sihanoukʼs proposal should be treated as problems to which we can suggest constructive solutions at the proper time rather than as obstacles to negotiations. This would apply to the question of recognition of frontiers and also to the problem of enlarging the ICC. By working out such positive procedures, we would hope to eliminate such things as Sihanoukʼs “Gentlemenʼs Agreement”.

We urgently request Thai and Vietnamese views on how we can exploit this opportunity. We will inform RTG and GVN of results Ambassador Sprouseʼs inquiry to RKG.

For Bangkok only: In your talk with Thanat it might be useful to refer to his “constructive idea” of a Southeast Asian conference on Cambodia (Bangkok Tel 997 of January 2).3 Sihanoukʼs proposal would seem to provide an opening for moving in this direction.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah; cleared by Harriman, Forrestal, and in substance by Salans of L/FE; and approved by Hilsman. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok. Repeated to London, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Vientiane, Kuala Lumpur, and CINCPAC.

2 On February 19 Sihanouk published in Cambodiaʼs official news bulletin a solution to Cambodiaʼs problems with the United States, South Vietnam, and Thailand that Sihanouk claimed would keep Cambodia neutral without a conference. The solution entailed quadripartite (U.S., South Vietnam, Thailand, and Cambodia) negotiations leading to an agreement recognizing Cambodiaʼs neutrality and borders. In return Cambodia would observe strict neutrality and prevent “the passage or presence of rebel bands across or on its territory.” The solution envisioned normalization of diplomatic relations and a “gentlemenʼs agreement” by the United States to reimburse Cambodia in farm and heavy construction equipment for Cambodians killed in error by South Vietnamese armed forces. Transmitted in telegram 804, February 19. (Ibid.)

3 Not printed. (Ibid.)

110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 110. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

Far East Matters for Your Lunch Today2

1. No reply has yet been received from Bohlen in answer to our instruction that he see Couve about Vietnam and Laos. Sullivan points out the instructions were sent over a week-end, which may have been Burgundian.

2. We told the Cambodians privately yesterday that in principle we agreed to attend a Quadripartite (Thailand-Vietnam-U.S.-Cambodia) Conference on Cambodian neutrality. The GVN has already agreed to do so publicly, and the Thais have said that, although they havenʼt been asked officially, they would give sympathetic consideration to the idea.

Today telegrams are coming in from Phnom Penh reporting Sprouseʼs meeting with the Cambodian Foreign Minister, at which time the latter turned over to Sprouse a pile of Cambodian draft proposals for a neutrality declaration and protocol.3 Unfortunately, our drafts have only been given to the GVN and the Thais; so we have been caught flat-footed on two counts. We have made no public announcement of our agreement to the Quadripartite Conference, and Sihanouk has beaten us to the punch on the draft proposals. Hilsman thinks we should defer any further public statements until we have had a chance to examine the Cambodian package.

3. On troops to Thailand, Ambassador Martin hasnʼt gotten around to discussing the possibility with the Thais; but Unger in Vientiane has agreed that the move would be useful to him.

In view of the inchoate state of these decisions in the Department, I think the best thing the President could do would be to philosophize a bit on the pressing need for military and diplomatic actions in the very near future to give some evidence that we are not just shooting off our mouths in Southeast Asia.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Forrestal. Secret.

2 Reference is to the so-called Tuesday lunch with Rusk, McNamara, and the President of which no other record has been found. The meeting began at 1:30 p.m. and the Presidentʼs next appointment was at 5 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

3 Telegrams 870, 871, 872, 873, 874, and 875, all March 3. (All in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, March 3, 1964, 8:10 p.m.

601. Phnom Penh tels 870–875.2 Sihanoukʼs draft proposals, which are under study in Dept, obviously contain many unacceptable elements including ultimatum aspect as well as so-called “gentlemenʼs agreement” plus numerous objectionable clauses in proposed declarations and protocol. While documents are under study we believe it is essential that our own suggested draft agreements (Deptel 586)3 be immediately made available to RKG. This is necessary for several reasons: 1) To prepare our position against probable future publication by Sihanouk of RKG drafts;

2) To advance for consideration our own concept of a satisfactory agreement;

3) To establish a basis for negotiation if a conference should occur;

4) To test Sihanoukʼs willingness to negotiate;

5) Prompt delivery is essential in order to emphasize that our drafts were prepared independently and not as a reply to the Cambodian drafts.

Therefore you should immediately forward copies of US drafts to RKG FonOff under cover of note, operative portion of which to read as follows:

“Upon instructions of the Department of State, I have the honor to submit copies of draft documents which the United States Government would propose for consideration along with other proposals and drafts which may be discussed at a quadripartite conference.” Do not ask the RKG to comment on these drafts.

Certain modification are being incorporated in drafts, including some points suggested by the Thai. Modifications being cabled shortly as well as French translation.

The Embassy reported in telegram 870 from Phnom Penh, March 4, that it had delivered the U.S. drafts. (Ibid.)4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared by Johnson and Harriman, and approved by Hilsman. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Kuala Lumpur, London, Paris, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 See footnote 3, Document 110.

3 Dated February 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB)

4 Inform Dept as soon as you have delivered drafts to FonOff.

112. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 112. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnom Penh, March 4, 1964, 6 p.m.

880. Embtel 879.2 Now that Sihanouk has given us his draft and we have given him ours, we can hope his next move will throw at least partial light on his motives in presenting us with document which he must have recognized as unacceptable for varying reasons to all three governments to which addressed. Aside from such grossly objectionable features as 1) ultimatum aspect involved in time limit and explicit rejection in advance any substantive negotiation, 2) unilateral border assertions supported by maps, 3) requirement US pay for fixed border posts of ICC, and 4) placing onus of responsibility for indemnifying victims claimed SVN border violations, drafts contained more subtle technical booby traps such as requiring RKG consent for virtually all activities of ICC and reinsertion (numbered paragraph 5 proposed RKG declaration) of request for virtual guarantees.

Since Sihanouk and whichever of his advisors assisted him in preparing these formidable documents must have been aware of their inacceptability, we can only surmise he intends use anticipated rejection of them to attempt to prove before world opinion that he is left with no choice but to take actions foreshadowed his February 15 ultimatum (Embtel 790).3

If above reasoning correct, and without our presentation today of US drafts, Sihanouk might have been expected take his own time in denouncing unwillingness US, RTG, and GVN subscribe to his proposals. He might even have waited until his announced terminal date of March 31. However, introduction of unanticipated (by him) new element of US drafts might conceivably upset his timing and cause him to react sharply, possibly in form of immediate public blast which could come at any time but may be delayed until departure Souvanna Phouma, scheduled for March 7.

Spivack

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Repeated to Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

2 Dated March 4. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 3, Document 108.

113. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State 113. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State 1

Vientiane, March 9, 1964, 1 p.m.

969. As expected PriMin Souvanna this morning spoke to me at some length in very serious tones about his visit with Sihanouk and absolute necessity that Sihanouk not be rejected by U.S., that he receive guarantees he is asking for and also that Geneva style conference on Cambodia be held. (Here Souvanna noted that Sihanouk accepted British draft.) Thanks to earlier messages and Deptel 7102 I was able give Souvanna assurances our good will in this matter and paint favorable picture about probable convening quadripartite conference; Souvanna nevertheless continued emphasize his concern and need for improving situation rapidly, he stressed repeatedly that he had known Sihanouk for long time and well, that he had never seen him more serious or determined and that Sihanouk meant everything he said quite literally.

According PriMin, Sihanouk fundamentally fears dismemberment Cambodia at hands South Viet Nam and Thailand. His resolve above all is maintain integrity nation of his ancestors and if he cannot secure requisite assurances from West (which he would strongly prefer) then he will seek help to maintain Cambodiaʼs integrity from Hanoi and Peking. (Souvanna did not mention Moscow at this point.) Sihanouk would not remain in Cambodia if this should occur and without him left wing forces would promptly take over country. (Souvanna said Sihanouk told him Communist already have military formations.) Sihanouk apparently believes it is intention South Vietnamese and particularly of Thais to drive him to point of seeking help from Communist Bloc so that they can use this as pretext to move in, with U.S. help, and partition Cambodia between them. This is conviction which lies behind Sihanoukʼs assertions Phnom Penhʼs sent Dept 885.3

In Souvannaʼs mind at least Sihanoukʼs fears lie primarily on Thai side and much as I insisted on basis my acquaintance with Thailand that I was certain there was no intention any aggression against Cambodia, Souvanna made clear that not only does Sihanouk not accept this but neither does Souvanna himself. Souvanna demonstrated as he has many times in past his fundamental mistrust of Thais, noting that Thailand was once suzerain over both Laos and large part of Cambodia and cannot forget this. He recalls his time in Bangkok when Thai invariably referred to Laos not as sovereign country but using Thai word for “province”; Souvanna believes Thais have not accepted loss of Champassak or Sayaboury areas on west side Mekong. He also remains bitter about Sarit4 labeling him Communist in 1960 following Kong Le5 coup and blockade of Vientiane at that time. I cite this all to explain that seen from Souvannaʼs vantage point Sihanoukʼs fears and demands for assurances are reasonable and in keeping with his own estimate of fundamental Thai intentions.

Souvanna says in effect Sihanouk believes he is asking for no more than was accorded to Laos in Geneva Conference 1961–62 and feels it ironic that he has met such continual rebuffs in this regard when he, organizer of that conference, seeks similar reassurances for himself. Souvanna made clear that quadripartite conference will not in itself satisfy Sihanouk and Geneva conference must take place. I referred to disappointments following Geneva Conference on Laos when some of key signatories have failed keep their word and make solution work as it should. Souvanna said if Sihanouk could once be assured on his problem then there would be solid base for setting up area of neutral countries including also Laos and Burma which would provide protection to Thailand, Malaysia, etc. He added that he had discussed with Sihanouk problem faced in Laos because of unquestioned North Vietnamese military interference and said that Sihanouk had pledged do what he could to help Laos with Chinese and North Vietnamese. Souvanna several times returned to theme that if there cannot be a neutral and guaranteed Cambodia and it instead goes Communist, situation Laos becomes untenable and he would have to withdraw. While not accepting this reasoning I did not feel it worthwhile debate the point except to keep before him fact that failure of Geneva Accords in Laos must be laid at door of Communists and that U.S. has demonstrated its complete guaranty to neutrality Laos as it has also fully accepted neutrality of Cambodia.

Souvanna said Sihanouk pressed him to convey his thoughts to Americans and Souvanna would shortly be writing him to say he had talked with me. I asked him also to include mention of points I had just made (see preceding sentence) and he agreed.

I emphasized to Souvanna our desire help Sihanouk and pointed out how difficult he makes it for us, citing among other things his assertions enumerated Phnom Penhʼs reftel. Souvanna acknowledged this but said we must overlook these outbursts. Again drawing on ref Deptel, I assured him we were doing our utmost to find answer to problem. I added that I would also convey what he had said to me to Mr. Bundy whom I expected see evening Bangkok.

Comment: However misguided are Sihanoukʼs views about dangers he faces from Thailand and South Viet Nam, I believe Souvanna is persuaded that we have reached critical pass in relations with Cambodia and West stands to lose severely if we do not find means providing reassurances of sort and in manner requested by Sihanouk.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok for Bundwo, CINCPAC, London, Paris, Phnom Penh, and Saigon.

2 Dated March 8. (Ibid., POL 7 LAOS)

3 In telegram 885 from Phnom Penh, March 6, the Embassy reported that Sihanouk had charged in a speech on March 5 that the United States blamed Cambodia and North Vietnam for its “defeat” in South Vietnam, but because of Chinese Communist strength, dared not strike Hanoi, so instead devised a plan to invade Cambodia with Khmer Serei and South Vietnamese forces. (Ibid., POL 27–13)

4 Sarit Thanarat, deceased former Prime Minister of Thailand.

5 Captain (later General) Kong Le who led a coup against the Royal Lao Government in August 1960.

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, March 10, 1964, 8:31 p.m.

1554. Phnom Penh 900.2 Sihanoukʼs latest explosion seems to Dept to afford excellent opportunity for RTG and USG to make simple statement of willingness to meet and discuss all problems at a quadripartite conference (GVN statements Saigonʼs 1725 and 1726 to Dept already on record).3 Such a simple statement at this juncture would serve to focus public attention on the contrast between Thai, Vietnamese and US forthcoming attitude and Sihanoukʼs negative attitude. While we are not optimistic it might also have the effect of causing Sihanouk to back down somewhat in the interest of his own public image. Dept spokesman has already reiterated that we are favorably disposed toward quadripartite conference (Deptel 1546 to Bangkok, 1407 to Saigon).4 Further statement made today will be forwarded septel.5 We hope RTG can make parallel comments quickly.

We also feel that we must limit possible area of disagreement with Sihanouk to important substantive issues. Therefore, it is doubly important that you approach Thanat soonest in order to present the views outlined in Deptʼs Depcirtel 16396 in strongest possible manner.

We fully understand RTG position on substantive issues such as ICC with Polish member, authority of Co-Chairmen, and territorial questions. As Bundy told Thanat, we do not propose to accede to any agreement which would prejudice Thai national interest. However, we do attach importance to negotiating with RKG on these and other important substantive issues. Our immediate goal is to get the conference going and if agreeing to Phnom Penh will have this effect, we think RTG/GVN and USG should agree to it. In our judgment time is running out on the Cambodian problem and we think speed is of the essence. We should compromise on site to strengthen position for negotiation on substance.

In making your approach you should not refer to possibility of shifting venue of conference to other site which would simply give Cambodia excuse for refusing to participate, and Thai position we feel will not be understood internationally.

You should explain to Thai that this suggestion is calculated to strengthen our (and their) public position and does not reflect any inclination to go to a conference at all costs or to accept Sihanoukʼs terms on frontiers or any other question.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate. Drafted by Hannah, cleared in draft with Hilsman and Harriman, and approved by Trueheart. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Vientiane, London, and Paris.

2 In telegram 900, March 10, the Embassy reported that Sihanouk disagreed with U.S. draft proposals for a 4-power conference and saw them as a rejection of his proposals, Sihanouk was therefore now opposed to the quadripartite conference. (Ibid.)

3 In telegrams 1725 and 1726 from Saigon, both March 10, the Embassy reported that the Republic of Vietnam had not rejected Sihanoukʼs calls for a quadripartite conference and Geneva conference on Cambodia. It was still studying the requests “with a view to a prompt reply.” (Ibid. and POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

4 Dated March 10. (Ibid., POL 27–13 CAMB)

5 Telegram 623 to Phnom Penh, March 10, in which the spokesman stressed that the U.S. proposals were not intended as a reaction or rejection of Cambodiaʼs draft, merely suggestions for consideration at a four-power conference. (Ibid.)

6 In circular telegram 1639, March 8, the Department suggested that the United States, Thailand, and South Vietnam should arrange for a quadripartite meeting within a week at a site agreeable to all parties. The Department noted that with a 3 to 1 majority and no Communist participation, there should be no fear in meeting in Phnom Penh. (Ibid.)

115. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 115. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnon Penh, March 11, 1964.

908. Embassy under heavy demonstration and rock throwing attack from 9 am this morning and attack still going on at time this message being sent. First signs impending demonstration noted 0820. Informed presences crowds arriving given instructions by older men, report reached Embassy thru local employee. Demonstration scheduled for 10 am.

Actual demonstration started 9:00 a.m. led by group bearing placards indicating it was from Ministry Information of Cambodian Government. Just before demonstration began, men carrying red paint tins and brushes painted sign “US go home” on Embassy and USIS buildings. Police who were standing by in increased numbers made no effort interfere with them. SecState for Agriculture Chau Seng observed directing traffic of procession two blocks away from Embassy. SecState for Information Tim Dong observed taking prominent part in organization of procession, which included pre-printed placards and banderolles. After about twenty minutes of peaceful procession past Embassy, violence began with rock throwing. Within twenty minutes, violence had increased to point where virtually every window in Embassy and USIS broken, and at least one official vehicle completely destroyed. At time drafting this, no one has yet been able to venture out of building attempt assess total extent of damage.

No Embassy employees injured, and no indication demonstration has spread to residential portions of city, although at this moment telephone communications outside Embassy cut off. There can be no possible doubt this demonstration occurred with knowledge and permission, if not actual cooperation, RKG. At 8:25, suspecting demonstration was in wind, I spoke on telephone to highest ranking FonOff official I could reach, Director of PolAffrs Chan Youran. He said SecState FonAffrs Sambath not available but he (Chan Youran) would attempt convey to Sambath soonest my communication. At 9:28, with telephone communication still possible, I again telephoned FonOff and spoke with Sambathʼs private secretary (he was reported still unavailable), protesting in strongest terms against failure police give Embassy protection required by international law and practice. Private secretary again promised he would attempt convey my message to Sambath.

At 9:45, with violence at its peak and all personnel inside Embassy building gathered for protection into most secure area, police began making feeble efforts hold demonstrators back. At present time (11:14) demonstration has ended and police are holding back crowds at some distance. Quick survey reveals massive damage ground floor of Embassy into which demonstrators penetrated by breaking down front doors. Further reports damage will be sent soonest.

I shall continue my efforts see Sambath and shall, unless Department immediately instructs otherwise, repeat to him strongest protest against this demonstration.2

Spivack

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 CAMB. Unclassified; Flash. Passed to the White House, CIA, and National Military Communication Center. There was no time of dispatch on the source text, which arrived at the Department of State at 11:36 p.m.

2 Spivack reported that he met with Huot Sambath, Cambodiaʼs Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs at 6 p.m. on March 11. Sambath immediately stated that Cambodia regretted the violence against the U.S. Embassy and offered compensation for the damage. Spivack said he would inform the Department of Sambathʼs expressions of regret and offer of compensation, but he had to protest the fact that the demonstration had at least Cambodian Governmentʼs approval. (Telegram 914 from Phnom Penh, March 11; Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 CAMB)

116. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 116. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, March 11, 1964, 9:52 p.m.

632. Following is text of memorandum2 setting out Departmentʼs current thinking re immediate reaction sacking Phnom Penh Embassy and USIS. Comments addressee posts requested urgently.3

Begin text: 1) Our general posture—Our posture during the next few days or until Sihanouk has clarified his intentions should contain the following elements: a) Public and official expressions of shock and dismay.

b) Disappointment over RKG official connivance in attacks (not for attribution).

c) Request for enlightenment from RKG regarding its future policies toward United States and toward quadripartite conference.

d) Establish our own continued willingness to negotiate under proper circumstances but do not run after the Cambodians.

e) Maintain the open door but leave the initiative to the RKG to walk through.

2) Letter from Secretary—(See separate telegram).4

3) Liaison with UK—Maintain close contact with the UK, coordinating our actions with theirs whenever possible. Take no further initiative on quadripartite conference beyond Secretaryʼs letter.

4) Thailand and South Vietnam—Brief them on recent events and our attitude. State that we hope to hold the question of a quadripartite conference in abeyance pending further developments. Neither we nor Thailand nor South Vietnam should take any action which could be used by Sihanouk to place the onus for preventing the conference on us. Request that Thailand and South Vietnam issue no public statements at this juncture on quadripartite conference and that they play down events in Cambodia. We should not provide Sihanouk with any external event which he can use as a diversion to focus attention of Cambodian people away from what may be a considerable negative internal reaction to the attacks. In short we prefer to await further developments before becoming committed to a future course.

5) RKG compensation—We should leave the initiative to the RKG on the question of compensation for destruction of property. Go slow on clean up and repair, allowing considerable evidence of damage and debris to remain for time being as reminder. Let the word get out informally that we are uncertain of the future and are still considering the shape of our future relations with Cambodia. If RKG pursues question of compensation we should discuss it, since a refusal to accept compensation might cause the RKG to stop payment on the Vinnell road machinery (approximately $1.8 million).

6) Contingency planning—Undertake urgent exploration, coordinating with other agencies and with UK future courses of action to follow in Cambodia.

End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 CAMB. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Hannah and Hirschfeld, cleared in draft with Harriman and Hilsman, and approved by Trueheart. Also sent to Saigon and Bangkok and repeated to London and Paris.

2 The memorandum from Trueheart to Hilsman, March 11, is ibid.

3 The Embassy in Phnom Penh stated in telegram 929, March 13, that it “found little to add” since the suggestions represented “the only reasonable courses of action.” The Embassy saw “little scope left for useful diplomatic initiatives in our relations with Cambodia.” (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 631 to Phnom Penh, March 11, in which Rusk informed Sambath of his shock and concern over the attacks and reminded him that U.S. draft proposals for the four-power conference were not intended as a substitute for those of Cambodia. Finally Rusk asked for assurance that American lives and property could be protected in Cambodia. (Ibid.)

117. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 117. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnom Penh, March 13, 1964, 6 p.m.

928. Following is Embassyʼs tentative evaluation of March 11 attacks on American and British installations: 1) March 11 demonstration was approved by RKG in advance, and government officials and organizations participated in advance planning and in actual demonstrations. Evidence for this is conclusive: Presence of high-ranking members of government, official equipment of Ministry of Information, and large numbers of men in khaki uniforms of type worn by low-ranking government personnel; police alerted in advance (but made no attempt restrain demonstration until long after violence had begun); trucks sent out previous night to provinces to bring crowds into Phnom Penh; first announcements over official Cambodian radio mentioned government officials, etc., etc. No demonstration this magnitude and character could have taken place in Cambodia without Prince Sihanoukʼs permission.

2) Demonstration apparently intended as noisy, impressive, but with only limited violence: Instructions passed around in schools for guidance of demonstrators stressed noise and non-violence; demonstration began in orderly fashion and remained relatively orderly until few small stones thrown by individuals apparently set off uncontrolled reaction among mob; it is conceivable that hard core group (possibly Communist sympathizers) took advantage of situation to increase violence to pitch exceeding original plans.

3) Police could have controlled demonstration at any time. In early phases police merely stood by and watched. Demonstrators were given sound signals by means of bugles, large bell, and whistles; when police really decided put end to demonstration, they were able to do so with comparative ease merely by blowing whistles and shoving demonstrators back behind barricades. Fact that violence went as far as it did may be due to failure of organizers of demonstration provide proper briefing to police as to precise point at which they were to restrain demonstrators.

4) Purpose of demonstration as originally planned was to impress US and British Embassies (and anyone else who was interested) with solidarity of Cambodian people behind Prince Sihanoukʼs policies, emphasize resentment against alleged American and British attempts block quadripartite and Geneva conferences, and, possibly, provide emotional outlet for frustrations and resentments among masses of Cambodians as result economic difficulties currently being experienced and for which some Cambodians beginning to blame Sihanouk.

5) Violence of demonstrations and extent damage brought source of embarrassment to many Cambodians and to Prince Sihanouk himself. Prompt expressions of regret and offers of compensation highly uncharacteristic of Sihanouk and not in accord with legend of peaceful Cambodian people and government under his wise and benevolent direction; at French ballet performance same evening, Sihanouk visibly ill at ease and avoided chatting with Diplomatic Corps as is his usual practice such occasions; many individual Cambodians have expressed regrets to me personally and to British Ambassador. (Ironic that SecState for Agriculture Chau Seng, who was one of principal organizers and directors of demonstrations, was sent by Sihanouk same evening to express Sihanoukʼs regrets to British Ambassador; no corresponding visit made to this Embassy.) Haste on part Cambodian authorities remove shattered vehicles from in front of Embassy and similar haste (thus far rebuffed by British) to remove damaged cars from UK Embassy compound indicate desire minimize evidences Cambodian destructiveness.

We cannot be certain no further acts of violence will occur, perhaps even spontaneously, since four monthsʼ virtually uninterrupted campaign hostility against United States, aided and abetted by fervent “hate American” propaganda of leftist [press?], cannot have failed produce some effect on even politically-passive Cambodians. Nor can we rule out completely possibility further demonstrations with or without violence might be employed by Sihanouk as device force United States and UK take initiative in breaking diplomatic relations. However, we believe likelihood, on balance, is in direction of attempt restore damaged image of Cambodia as peaceful, orderly state, which has been object Sihanoukʼs pride. Moreover, whatever cool heads Sihanouk may have around him at this moment, and perhaps even he himself, must be beginning have some dim glimmerings that uncontrolled mob violence of type which exploded at American and British Embassies Wednesday could on some future date be used against all foreigners, merchants, government, and institution of monarchy itself. First reactions from other foreigners here (including French) and upper class Cambodians indicate their uneasiness concerning this possibility, and inconceivable this uneasiness not communicated in some fashion or other to Sihanouk.

Spivack

1 Source: Department of State, POL 23–8 CAMB. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

118. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 118. Memorandum From Clifford L. Alexander of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Sihanouk has accused the U.S. of sabotaging his proposed four-nation conference. He has also said that we have been trying to kill a reconvening of the Geneva Conference.

Sihanouk has sent a mission to Hanoi to discuss South Vietnamese frontiers and supposedly is going to agree to establish diplomatic relations with North Vietnam.

The destructive rioting of March 11 from all indications was clearly sanctioned by the Cambodian Government and probably was carried out in order to impress Peking and Hanoi.

At present there seems to be some confusion at the Department as to what they should do next. Rusk is alleged to have said in an informal conversation last night that perhaps we should have a conference on Cambodian neutrality with either the 19542 or the 19623 participants. Harriman, on the other hand, is reported to be inclined to call in the Cambodians and express displeasure as only he can do it.

It would seem now more than ever that the reasons for not holding a 1954 or 1962-type conference are conclusive.

Cliff

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. II, Memos, 3/64–7/64. Secret. Copy sent to Komer.

2 Cambodia, North Vietnam, France, Laos, Communist China, South Vietnam, USSR, United Kingdom, U.S. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Burma, Cambodia, Canada, Communist China, France, India, Laos, North Vietnam, Poland, South Vietnam, Thailand, the USSR, the United Kingdom, U.S. [Footnote in the source text.]

119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 119. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, March 16, 1964, 12:58 p.m.

646. Following is summary of Nong Kimnyʼs farewell conversations with the Secretary, U. Alexis Johnson, and Hilsman March 14. Conversation with Secretary uncleared, FYI only, Noforn.

1. With Secretary: Kimny stated that although he leaving under instruction, real reason for departure was his forthcoming designation as Vice Dean Diplomatic Corps, position which his Embassy too understaffed to support. Secretary regretted Kimnyʼs departure noting his long service in Washington, raised question of identity real issues dividing USG and RKG and emphasized that we had had real interest in Princeʼs quadripartite proposal. Kimny said he groping for better understanding, leaving with heavy heart and that state of affairs perhaps reflection his inability make Cambodian attitudes and objectives well understood in US. Kimny noted that small countries like Cambodia with no armed forces to speak of must rely on international law and international public opinion for their defense.

He stressed that, rational or not, fear of Thailand and South Viet-Nam was very much reality after six centuries of war. Important central issue in quadripartite accords proposal was question of frontiers—essential references to pertinent treaties not included in US draft, thereby, by implication, calling Cambodiaʼs existing frontiers into question. Cambodiaʼs frontiers with Thailand firmly fixed by international agreement including 1946 agreement in Washington in which US participated (and for which RKG grateful) and Preah Viehar decision by ICJ for which Cambodia has American attorney Acheson to thank. In reply to direct question, Kimny replied that he was not sure if quadripartite accords question was still under consideration by RKG, Secretary replied that most countries live with past history including historical antagonisms, and noted that these relationships manageable. He added that neither Thailand nor South Viet-Nam had attacked Cambodia in recent years, but that for Cambodia to move toward Hanoi now without any clear reason raises problems of different order of magnitude which perhaps not as manageable as historical ones. Kimny countered by saying Cambodia had made maximum concession by calling for US to establish control posts on Cambodian soil, which, in effect, was abrogation of Cambodiaʼs sovereignty.

2. With U. Alexis Johnson: After long, warm expression of regret by Johnson at Kimnyʼs departure reflecting ten years of friendly personal association Kimny led to remark that we should not close door to any hope and that we must keep dialogue going. Kimny again stressed position of Cambodia surrounded by more powerful neighbors and “shock” at discovery that US draft contained no specific reference to frontier accords. Johnson stressed dangers to Cambodiaʼs self interest of course being followed by noting that Communists not willing tolerate diversity or divergence by nature while US willing live with plethora of different systems. Kimny reiterated often repeated line about Cambodian distaste for Communists, admitted that Cambodia would be even more uncomfortable with Communist Viet-Nam on her door-step but alleged that neighbors driving Cambodia to take present course. He admitted maintenance of Cambodiaʼs neutrality dependent on balance of forces in that Cambodia did not want US to leave region but that national leaders (i.e., Sihanouk) must live with day-to-day problems and cannot confine themselves to dreams. Kimny cited alleged Thai over-flights and SVN border violations as examples of day-by-day problems. To Johnsonʼs question of how rapprochement with the DRVN would help Cambodia, Kimny replied that he was not ready to speculate—that it might relate to the “psychological effect on certain countries” but that on balance only Sihanouk can answer.

3. With Hilsman: Hilsman said that he spoke as private citizen with only few more hours of Government service before him.2 He stressed his deep fear of results of threatened RKG course, wondered how Thais and Vietnamese would react to alignment with DRVN and reiterated our interest in quadripartite proposal. Hilsman mentioned possibility that GVN might cut Mekong and/or begin policy of hot pursuit. He said in passing that analogy often drawn between Laos and Cambodia not really valid since Cambodia unlike Laos has sea coast. Hilsman wondered if Prince had considered these grave possibilities. Kimny replied that this expose seemed “terribly threatening to my country” and much in line with what has always been Cambodiaʼs fears. Hilsman stressed again that above remarks made in his capacity as private person and friend of Cambodia who had favored and worked hard in obtaining some form of recognition for Cambodiaʼs neutrality. Kimny stressed RKG shock upon receipt of US drafts which failed to contain provisions for appropriate citation of frontier treaties which he insisted was essential question in same manner he had to Secretary and Johnson. Failure to recognize treaties, Kimny said, meant “death” for Cambodia.

In response to questions on departure Kimny told Department officer that as of March 18 (day of his departure from Washington) Embassy staff in Washington reduced to one officer, Charge Wongsanith. Kimny does not expect to reach Cambodia until May.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Hirschfeld, cleared by Trueheart, Green, and Sullivan, and approved by U. Alexis Johnson. Repeated to Saigon, Vientiane, Paris, London, Ottawa, and Bangkok.

2  Hilsman resigned as Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs on March 15 and was replaced by William P. Bundy on March 16.

120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 120. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Cambodia—Chantrea Incident

This memorandum is designed to bring you up to date on the state of our information about the Cambodian border incident as of noon today.2

We still have two entirely conflicting stories from Phnom Penh and Saigon. Yesterday our Phnom Penh Embassy reported that our Military Attaché accompanied the Canadian representative of the International Control Commission in Cambodia to the village of Chantrea, where they saw fifteen corpses of villagers killed by shrapnel, burns from napalm bombs and gunfire. They took testimony from the villagers that twelve amphibious personnel carriers accompanied by three American officers entered the village and questioned some of the inhabitants after the attack. The villagers also testified that an American light observer plane was shot down, crashing on the South Vietnamese side of the border.

The story from Saigon has been slow in coming, and the information is still very sketchy. We now know only that an operation was carried out on March 19 near the Cambodian border. An L–19 observation plane covering this operation was shot down, apparently by two Cambodian fighters. Its American pilot was wounded. Three columns of ARVN troops conducted clearing operations near the Cambodian border, but as yet we have no evidence from Saigon that any of these units actually crossed the border. At least three American officers participated in these operations, but we have a report of only one of them at the moment. In a matter of hours we should have the report of the other two. So far there has been no confirmation from Saigon that any Cambodian village was attacked. Four 500 lb. cans of napalm were used during the clearing operations in “open areas”.

In the meantime we have already expressed our sympathy and regret that this incident occurred and have told the Cambodian Foreign Minister that we are investigating thoroughly to see if there was any American involvement. The Cambodian Government has protested to the UN Secretary General, and the subject may come up in the Security Council on Monday.3

Needless to say, we are making the most intense effort here to extract more information from Saigon. We are not planning any further public comment or diplomatic action until we have the facts in hand. I will keep you informed of further developments.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. II, Memos 3/64–7/64. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

2  Rusk discussed the incident with the President on March 21, at 12:16 p.m. (Ibid., Recordings of Telephone Conversations) A transcript of this conversation is ibid., Transcripts of Telephone Conversations, Alpha Series, Dean Rusk.

3 March 23.

121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 121. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, March 22, 1964, 6:06 p.m.

6108. Secretary has arranged secure phone conversation with Butler Monday morning.2 London should deliver following letter immediately to FonOff. Other addressee posts invited to comment and may draw on parts of analysis in any consultations that take place prior to further specific instructions.

Text of letter:

Dear Rab:

In preparation for our phone conversation tomorrow, I am sending you a rather detailed picture of our thinking on the Cambodian situation, both its underlying aspects and the immediate problems we face.

1. Let me first review our analysis of the underlying situation. (a) Sihanouk has one legitimate objective—to underscore and reaffirm his territorial integrity and neutral status under the 1954 Accords. However, he also has two objectives that are much harder to accommodate. He wants to pillory the South Vietnamese (and indirectly the US) for their various incursions into Cambodian territory, even though these in fact have little to do with basic respect for either his territorial integrity or his neutral status. And he wants to rub the noses of the Thai in the series of treaties (and the ICJ decision) that established the Thai-Cambodian border and that were, in Thai eyes, imposed by the French.

(b) In South Viet-Nam, General Khanh and Foreign Minister Quat, in contrast to their predecessors, have shown a strong desire to work out their problems through negotiation. They were immediately forthcoming on Sihanoukʼs suggestion of a quadripartite conference, and have behaved admirably both in sending the present delegation to Phnom Penh speedily for bilateral talks and in apologizing and offering compensation for the Chantrea incident.

In general, the GVN is clearly ready to do everything it can to iron out its border problems with Sihanouk and would also like to work toward some form of bilateral policing of the border, which would help to control the use of Cambodian territory as a supply route and sanctuary for the Viet Cong. In this connection, we must recall that they do have a legitimate grievance; the evidence is now unmistakable that Cambodian territory has been used increasingly for both purposes. In this, I must say that our sympathies are wholly with them.

On the other hand, the prospect of a Geneva Conference is still anathema in Saigon, unless it could be based on agreements previously reached through the bilateral or quadripartite route. To Saigon, where the whole question of neutral sentiment is naturally acute, the prospect of a Geneva Conference, however distinguished in fact from that in 1954, must inevitably be interpreted as the harbinger of neutralization for South Viet-Nam itself. In short, Saigon would be deeply upset if a Geneva Conference were now convened, and I must say that we could not blame them. After all, keeping Khanh afloat is surely the very first order of business at the moment in the whole area.

(c) While the Vietnamese aspect is predominant, we must naturally also take account of the Thai position. We have kept in close touch with them, and there is every indication that they would be receptive to a Cambodian overture for resumption of relations and bilateral talks that might follow a successful outcome of the present Cambodian/Vietnamese discussions. Alternatively, they have continued to be willing to negotiate in the quadripartite framework, although they could hardly do so on the basis of Sihanoukʼs proposals and would probably also continue to have insuperable objections to Phnom Penh as a site. If it should come down to a question of a quadripartite conference either with no specific proposals as a basis or on the basis of proposals appropriately tailored from your British text, of January 9,3 I think that the Thai could be persuaded to accept. At the same time, however, they too have all along been most reluctant to attend a Geneva Conference unless the result were quite clear in advance. They fear, with some reason, as Sihanoukʼs proposals indicate, that there will be a major job to prevent any agreement from endorsing the obnoxious French-imposed treaties, and that this task can only be tackled in a smaller forum and not in the highly fluid situation of a Geneva Conference. This is not to say they do not accept the present boundaries de facto.

(d) Weighing the attitudes of these key parties, we still conclude that the best way to proceed is to give every encouragement to the present RKG-GVN negotiations. These may then lead to a second bilateral discussion between the Cambodians and the Thais, and Sihanouk has within the week dropped hints that he would accept this in the light of the difficulties he immediately encountered in dealing with Hanoi. Thereafter, or perhaps alternatively, the next move might be a quadripartite conference. However, the injection of a Geneva Conference, or even the flat-footed prospect of one, would almost certainly disrupt this preferred sequence and throw us all off. As we have indicated to you previously, the plain fact at the moment is that neither the Thai nor the Vietnamese would come to such a conference under present circumstances, and we ourselves would have great difficulty in doing so without their participation.

My understanding was that you and Couve and I had agreed that we should try to find a common position on the results of a large Geneva Conference before we agree to hold one. On this I gather that the Cambodians have said that your draft could be the subject of discussion in such a conference along with their own proposals. But we have not seen the Cambodian proposals for a Geneva Conference. We are not interested in a Geneva Conference which will merely resolve itself into acrimony, pressure on Saigon and Thailand, and an even more formal pretext for Sihanouk to link himself with the communist North. Those results can be achieved without a conference, and we want no part of contributing to them by participating in a conference which produces those results.

Moreover, by the time we got through, our position in Cambodia itself could not but be worsened, and it is difficult to see what the practical benefits would be for Cambodia.

2. Now, as to the present status: (a) Although our fingers are crossed, it looks now as if the Chantrea incident had not disrupted the bilateral talks in Phnom Penh. We still have a live horse in the race.

(b) On the quadripartite front, we have given a cautious response through the French, which they, and perhaps you as well, think will not materially help the situation. However, we simply did not feel that we could now explicitly withdraw our proposals without pulling the rug out from under both Saigon and Bangkok. Frankly, we were also a little leery of using the French channel to the full, partly because their interests in Cambodia do not wholly coincide with yours and ours and partly because the message has on occasion shown a tendency to be garbled, with our views melded with French initiatives and no clear distinction.

(c) Meanwhile, Sihanouk has made loud noises both about the UN and a Geneva Conference. Our UN people are fairly hopeful that the Secretariat will seek to dissuade any actual Cambodian complaint in the light of the Vietnamese admission and apology—and, I might add, our own admission of the presence of US personnel and our formal expression of regret, which we conveyed to Phnom Penh last night and will probably announce during the course of the day.

As to Sihanoukʼs March 23 deadline, we believe that this had been largely overtaken by events, and that in any event his present disillusionment with Hanoi is genuine and he would not in fact resort to any drastic action if we let the date pass at least briefly without some initiative. Nor do we see quite what his action could be at this point.

However, we fully recognize that you have a specific problem in not being upstaged by the Russians. Your position of January 28th that more adequate preparation needed to be made before a Geneva Conference does now need something that you can point to, and, although the existence of the bilateral talks can be a large part of that something, I agree that we should be trying to give you more ammunition than the sum total of the bilateral talks and our explanation of our quadripartite position through the French. But, basically, I hope we can all live with a measure of illicit peace-mongering by the Russians for the sake of the larger interest and for the sake of the Vietnamese in particular and to a lesser extent the Thais. They have deep and concrete interests, and I may say that we do also. We think for the moment these outweigh the difficulties you may experience, both domestic and external, in holding the line.

3. Let me finally throw out some thoughts on possible initiatives and actions to keep the situation from deteriorating and to move it in the right direction. (a) Our communications to Sihanouk have been in disrepair ever since November, and we have noted your Embassyʼs suggestion that we consider a high-level emissary. We think such a move would now be premature, although we are willing to move as fast as the Cambodians. We are ready to send a high-level emissary when the Cambodians will receive him, but as you know Sihanouk gave no response to our suggestion in this direction early this month. We could also act to strengthen our representation in Phnom Penh. As you perhaps know, our Ambassadorʼs illness has now proved to be more serious than originally thought, and we will get a strong replacement on the ground as quickly as possible.

(b) I think we urgently need a further review of various possible texts that could emerge in a quadripartite forum and perhaps thereafter be put through a Geneva Conference. The French are sending a medium-level man to Washington this coming Wednesday, and perhaps we should confer with you at the same level either concurrently or separately and either here or in London. I also have in mind that you and Couve and I had a useful session on this in Paris in December. Carrington, Couve and I could do so again at Manila in mid-April, but perhaps events will not wait that long, and we should consider following the medium-level discussions by my sending someone, perhaps Bill Bundy, to London and Paris in the week after Easter.

(c) To keep the pot from boiling over, we could conceivably be more forthcoming as to the conditions for a quadripartite conference. One possibility would be to announce flatly that we were ready to attend a quadripartite conference with no conditions whatever; however, I would have to caveat this one as to location, because our soundings in Bangkok make it abundantly clear that the Thai would not accept Phnom Penh.

A second possibility would be to firm up the very general message we sent through the French, that we might be willing to negotiate on the basis of your British proposals, appropriately tailored to the quadripartite framework. We would have to leave ourselves leeway to propose change in order to meet Thai and Vietnamese desires, but a message to this effect could well be conveyed through your channel and would fit fairly well into the framework you have created by your excellent note to Sihanouk earlier this week.

(d) In all the above, a fruitful outcome for the talks between the Cambodians and the Vietnamese remains a vital underpinning. We have found that Khanh and Quat need little urging on this front, but we will continue to point out to them how vitally important it is to have these negotiations succeed if we are to avoid overwhelming pressures for a Geneva Conference, of which, as I have said, they see the danger clearly.

To sum up, I think it is possible that your and my approach to these issues differs somewhat because of our different situations. We are heavily engaged in South Viet-Nam and are taking casualties every week in an effort to keep that country from going communist. Further, the Thais obviously rely more heavily upon our bilateral commitments than upon the general structure of SEATO in which they think non-regional members will be negligent of Thai security. Our regional stakes in Southeast Asia are so great that it is not easy for us to cooperate with the non-regional members of SEATO at the expense of South Viet-Nam and Thailand.

I do not see how the United States can come to a general Geneva Conference without Saigon and Bangkok. Since Sihanoukʼs initiative was aimed at both these countries, I do not see how a conference could produce any worthwhile result unless they were present. You may believe that we have unlimited influence in Saigon and Bangkok, but this is simply not the case. Were we to try to drag these two countries kicking and screaming to a Geneva Conference, the situation in Saigon might well collapse through fear of neutralization and Thailand might well decide that we are wholly unreliable and that their only course is to make their peace with the communists in the North. This is the heart of the matter as I see it, and should not be glossed over by purely procedural considerations as to whether it is congenial to have a conference. If the issue is whether an unbalanced Sihanouk will irrationally turn to the communist North, we must balance this against the impact of a complete loss of morale in South Viet-Nam and Thailand.

With warm regards. Yours ever,

Dean Rusk

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 CAMB. Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Verbatim Text. Drafted and approved by William Bundy, cleared in draft with U. Alexis Johnson and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok and Paris Eyes Only for the Ambassador.

2 See Document 122.

3 In telegram 649 from Phnom Penh, January 9, the Embassy stated that the British draft statement on neutrality appeared “virtually identical with ours quoted in Deptel 410.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB) Telegram 1039 to Bangkok, repeated to Phnom Penh as 410, January 4, contained the U.S. draft neutrality agreements. (Ibid.)

122. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation 122. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation1

March 23, 1964, 9:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. R.A. Butler, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Mr. Rusk noted that Sihanouk had postponed his deadline to March 30th, and Mr. Butler agreed.

Mr. Rusk said the main question was to work out an approach that would meet the needs of Thailand and South Viet-Nam, and Mr. Butler responded by picking up the suggestion that the United States go all out for a quadripartite conference. Mr. Rusk agreed that this should be the next move, and suggested that the British say to Gromyko that agreement among the four would resolve the issues among the non-signers of the Geneva Accords and thus would be an appropriate and essential step before the Geneva Conference was convened.

Mr. Butler said that the bilateral Cambodian-Vietnamese meeting appeared to have “broken down.” Mr. Rusk responded that it was not yet wholly clear what was meant by the joint announcement of “postponement”. The Vietnamese had been very forthcoming throughout, and it seemed to him worth waiting a day or two to see just where this did stand.

Mr. Butler said the British in general were rather impatient that measures must be taken to see that Cambodia did not “go Red.” At the same time, he recognized that it was difficult to summon a Geneva Conference unless the Thais and the Vietnamese were ready to participate and thought that he should tell Mr. Gromyko this point as well. Mr. Rusk responded that they should not quote the United States as the source on the Thai and Vietnamese attitudes.

Mr. Butler returned to the point that the next move should be for the United States to go all out on the quadripartite front, and Mr. Rusk responded that we would have “to turn this one around” with Bangkok before seeing just what the move would be.

Mr. Butler then said that the British would welcome a visit by Mr. Bundy to London and Paris next week, and that he also thought well of the suggestion for consultation at Manila between Carrington, Couve, and the Secretary. He also raised the question of a United States high-level emissary, and Mr. Rusk repeated that Sihanouk had given us no encouragement on this, but that we were ready to do it when and if it seemed the right thing. Mr. Rusk also noted that it was very difficult to have quiet talks with Sihanouk.

Mr. Butler said that one of the UK concerns was that they were very anxious to hold on to their position as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference. He indicated that there was some danger that the French might move in and try to take over this position.

Mr. Rusk repeated that we were prepared to go ahead and see what could be done on the quadripartite front. He thought it might be helpful if the British again reminded Sihanouk that we had never seen any texts of proposals that he might make at a Geneva Conference. He reminded Mr. Butler again of the agreement between Butler, Couve, and the Secretary that we would not let a Geneva Conference take place without firm prior agreement on what would be the outcome.

The conversation then turned briefly to the Prime Ministerʼs nuclear statement and to events in Libya. On the latter, Mr. Butler agreed that the British would go slow (I did not know the context, so am not clear what this signified).

Returning to Southeast Asia, Mr. Butler reminded Mr. Rusk of the general understanding that the UK would be as helpful as possible on South Viet-Nam, and that the US would be as helpful as possible to the British on Malaysia. He thought that they were doing their part, and hoped that we would continue to do ours. Mr. Rusk responded that of course we would.

Returning to the contents of the British message to Gromyko, Mr. Butler finally suggested they might take a quite clear line with Gromyko that the best they and the Russians could do at this point was to encourage the settlement of issues among the four powers, as a necessary prelude to a Geneva Conference. Mr. Rusk responded affirmatively to this.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–13 CAMB. Secret, Limdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in S on March 29. Rusk was in Washington; Butler in London. This conversation was on a secure line.

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 123. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnom Penh, March 26, 1964, 6 p.m.

1026. It may help to clarify complex considerations involving Geneva Conference, Quadripartite Conference, bilateral negotiations, etc., if we attempt place ourselves in Sihanoukʼs position and gain some idea of pressures he feels on him. Assuming always that we are dealing with basically rational individual, this may provide us with clues as to his twistings and turnings past few weeks. Basic elements of Sihanoukʼs world, then, as we see it, are: 1) He is genuinely fearful for continued survival his country. This factor has been stressed in Embassyʼs reporting over many months. Sihanouk is convinced Thais and Vietnamese (either Communist or non-Communist) will, unless externally restrained, inevitably attempt complete age-old process nibbling away at Cambodia.

2) While he is convinced Vietnamese Communists, backed by ChiComs, will eventually win war in Viet-Nam, he cannot be sure this will happen soon enough to prevent South Viet-Nam from inflicting considerable damage on Cambodia. Thus he has acute problem of timing in seeking some arrangement to hold SVN in check for time being while attempting consolidate his position with DRVN before latterʼs actual victory.

3) Only method he sees for assuring Cambodiaʼs future is to obtain commitments from each and every party likely to have significant role in SEA in foreseeable future, thus he desires assurances (guarantees if he can get them) from US, French, USSR, ChiComs, GVN, Thais and DRVN. He particularly wants US commitment as restraint on Thais and SVN and ChiCom and Soviet commitment as restraint on Hanoi.

4) Although by force of repetition Sihanouk has apparently come to look on holding of Geneva Conference as end in itself, he has consistently defined its major purpose as neutralization of Cambodia in some form of international framework.

5) Bilateral arrangements with SVN, especially bilateral arrangements which would involve a cooperative effort in preventing Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory, would be of value to him only for what he believes is the short period remaining before Viet Cong and Hanoi take over. Such arrangements could, on other hand, represent real danger to him after that expected takeover, since they could provide pretext for Communist Vietnamese regime (and it must be kept in mind that for Cambodians all Vietnamese are potential enemies) to punish Cambodia because of cooperation provided SVN.

6) Sihanouk realizes there will be no place for him in Communist Cambodia which would be inevitable result Communist victory in SVN.

7) We see no evidence yet that ChiComs and DRVN have shown willingness provide economic and military aid and guarantees to degree hoped for by Sihanouk, thus creating doubts as to their ultimate intentions toward Cambodia.

8) All else aside, Sihanouk cannot, anymore than any other ruler, continue to tolerate repeated violations his countryʼs territory and attacks on its people by outside forces.

Faced with above pressures pulling him in many different directions, little wonder Sihanoukʼs responses resemble those of small, intelligent trapped animal desperately seeking exit from trap, dashing back and forth all directions, and keeping up continuous high-pitched shrieking.

In face of all of this, would appear in our overall interest attempt steer steady course which, while not making concessions to Sihanouk at expense our commitments Thailand or Viet-Nam or damaging to latterʼs war effort, would equally avoid pushing Sihanouk against wall and driving him into desperation. Elements of such steady course might well be following: 1) Firm but dispassionate statement now that we shall not attend Geneva Conference on Cambodia in any circumstances. This statement would be designed reassure Thais and Vietnamese, while making clear to Sihanouk we are not going to be pressured into changing our minds. Even if we could trust Sihanoukʼs assurances, we cannot rely on his ability prevent ChiComs, USSR, or DRVN from introducing neutralization of Viet-Nam into Geneva conference, once it is underway.

2) Possibly simultaneous unilateral public statement our respect for Cambodiaʼs neutrality, independence, and territorial integrity within the limits of such boundaries as are agreed upon between Cambodia and its neighbors in accordance with equity and law.

3) Public expression of willingness to support some kind of agreed international mechanism to supervise and control Cambodiaʼs boundary with SVN; agreement on form of mechanism to be reached through diplomatic channels or possibly small meeting of parties directly concerned.

4) Genuine and effective effort prevent GVN and, above all, US advisors with ARVN, from penetrating Cambodian territory. (In this connection, incidentally, do not like to contemplate problem which might face us should an American advisor be captured by Cambodians while on Cambodian territory, which came very close to happening in case of L–19 downed near Chantrea.)

In regard to point 4 above, we cannot reconcile suggestion in paragraph 2 Saigonʼs 18182 that we reduce restrictions on Vietnamese military operations with objective expressed in that same message of seeking ways reconcile GVN-RKG differences. In fact, whole approach present message is predicated on theses that (a) use currently being made by Viet Cong of Cambodian territory is less than critical to GVN war effort and (b) that free hand for GVN in eliminating such use is not worth risk that this will drive Cambodia into intimate collaboration with Viet Cong or otherwise bring about escalation SVN war. If these are judged invalid, then we should logically write off Cambodia, remove all Americans from this country, and concentrate on winning war in Viet-Nam without regard to what happens here, provided, of course, we willing to accept damage this would involve to our world position as respector of rights of small nations.

Deptel 7253 received with serious garbles after this message drafted, being serviced and studied with view to commenting soonest.

Spivack

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–13 CAMB. Secret; Immediate; Limit Distribution. Repeated to Bangkok, London, Paris, Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, the White House, Department of Defense, JCS, and CIA. Passed to USUN.

2 Dated March 24. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 725 to Phnon Penh, March 25, contained a draft letter from Rusk to Sambath on assurances for Cambodiaʼs neutrality and territorial integrity which the Department stated “concedes nothing essential from the standpoint of RTG or GVN while at the same time giving us a defensible posture vis-à-vis French and British, as well as publicly.” (Ibid.) The letter was not sent.

124. Memorandum of Conversation 124. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 26, 1964.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Question

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

The Soviet Ambassador said that he had asked to see the Secretary under instructions to discuss the Cambodian question. He said that Mr. Khrushchev had received a cable from Prince Sihanouk who asked that steps be taken to convene a conference on Cambodia. Sihanouk had also informed the British that this was an urgent matter. He said that the Government of the Soviet Union expects the Government of the United States to take a positive attitude on this question.

The Secretary said that he assumed that we and the Soviet Union were agreed that Cambodia should be neutral. Dobrynin interjected to say that this was true of the Soviet Union and there was no need for any assumption.

The Secretary continued that the problem in Sihanoukʼs mind is with his immediate neighbors. He said these questions go back a very long time. They were somewhat akin to the type of problem that existed between Greece and Turkey over Cyprus, and he pointed out that problems in these relationships existed before Columbus discovered America. He said we were concerned because Sihanouk had raised the matter in antagonistic terms toward his neighbors. The United States was not opposed to international action, but thinks that the first step is for Cambodia to resolve its problems with its neighbors. If Cambodian relations with its neighbors could be settled on the basis of territorial integrity and independence, it would be fine with us, but if we were to go to a conference with no preparatory work, the conference would be like a bear pit. It would be highly inflammatory and the problem might well be worse than it had been before such a conference. He said that we had been trying to lay the basis for a successful solution of this problem. He said we would be glad to discuss the matter with the Soviet Union and would be particularly interested to hear any comments they might have on the British draft.

The Secretary said our only interest in Cambodia was its independence and neutrality. He pointed out that the problem of Viet-Nam has complicated the matter. The Viet Cong operate from Cambodia and infiltrators come down through both Laos and Cambodia. He repeated that our problem with the conference which had no prior preparations was that we did not know how it could move us toward the result that we could agree upon.

Dobrynin asked if we felt there was disagreement on existing borders. The Secretary replied that there was between Saigon and Phnon Penh. The Secretary pointed out that Sihanouk seems to conduct policy through public speeches. There was a possibility that if the two countries could get together, they could settle the matter.

With respect to Thailand, the matter was different. Here it was a question of the formal recognition of treaties imposed by France during the Colonial period. The Thai Government was apparently prepared to accept the borders but not the French treaties. There might be minor questions, but no Thai attempt to seize or claim Cambodian territory. The Thai object, however, to having their noses rubbed into the French treaties. We thought that the British draft took care of this problem. The Secretary said he thought our objectives and the Sovietsʼ were very close, but he pointed out that we did not think we could get the Thais and Vietnamese to come to a conference at this time.

Dobrynin said that Sihanouk wanted a status of neutrality and a guarantee on the basis of the existing border.

The Secretary pointed out that the British draft would do this, but the Soviet Government had said it could not go into these matters except at a conference. He said we were prepared to have a Four-Power meeting, but Sihanouk had now withdrawn this proposal. We thought a Four-Power conference might be a good idea as quadripartite agreement could go far toward reaching a solution. The Secretary emphasized that what he had said was not a formal reply to the Ambassadorʼs remarks but was simply to give him an idea of our position. He said it would be very difficult for us to go to a conference without Saigon and Bangkok being represented, and it was doubtful whether such a conference without them could lead to agreement.

Dobrynin said that if there were no substantial differences on borders, then why was it not possible to meet Sihanoukʼs request?

The Secretary said Sihanouk had postponed his deadline and we knew that all three capitals had some interest in resolving these questions in the neighborhood. He pointed out, moreover, that this would be in line with Mr. Khrushchevʼs New Yearʼs message

Ambassador Dobrynin said he would report the Secretaryʼs remarks to his Government.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on March 26. The Department of State sent an account of this meeting to the Embassy in Moscow in telegram 2845, March 30. (Ibid., POL 27–14 CAMB)

125. Memorandum of Conversation 125. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 1, 1964.

SUBJECT

Cambodia; Brazil; Zanzibar; Germany

PARTICIPANTS

US Secretary of State Rusk

Raymond L. Garthoff, G/PM

UK Ambassador Ormsby Gore

Cambodia

The Secretary noted that discussions on Cambodia had been overtaken by events. Sihanouk had just held a press conference,2 following shortly after a meeting with Ambassador Murray of the UK. Ambassador Ormsby Gore did not know anything about the background to the press conference statement. The Secretary continued that he was not inclined at the moment to attempt to nail down the situation with a joint message, although we were still considering the question. He suggested that among the possible reasons for Sihanoukʼs new line were: that Pei-ping and Hanoi may not have been as forthcoming as Sihanouk had expected; or Sihanouk may have felt he was giving too much opportunity to the Left in Cambodia; perhaps at last some of Sihanoukʼs more solid advisors were having some influence; or maybe Sihanouk was just bored.

The Secretary raised as speculation the question whether perhaps the Soviet Ambassador had spoken to Sihanouk. The Secretary remarked that he had briefed Ambassador Dobrynin a week ago on our policy toward Cambodia, and Dobrynin had agreed that Soviet policy also favored non-injection into Cambodian affairs.3 Dobrynin had seemed receptive to the Secretaryʼs point that the most important thing was to improve Cambodian relations with its neighbors. Perhaps the Soviets also were worried about Sihanouk coming too much under the influence of Peiping. Ambassador Ormsby Gore agreed that there was a probable Soviet interest in not having Cambodia become a satellite of China. The Secretary expressed his appreciation for Butlerʼs very helpful assistance in the situation.

It was agreed that the earlier draft message to Cambodia had been overtaken by events and would be dropped.

[Here follows discussion of Brazil, Zanzibar, and German reunification.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Raymond L. Gartoff of G/PM and approved in S on April 15.

2  Sihanouk announced that he would postpone any further action on a Geneva conference on Cambodia until after his visit to France, June 2–July 20.

3 See Document 124.

126. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 126. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 1, 1964.

SUBJECT

Cambodia-Chantrea Incident

According to Bill Sullivan, Max Taylor has declined to send a message to Harkins following up the Chantrea incident to determine what steps are being taken to avoid this sort of thing in the future and asking some questions about the tactics used. I have not seen the message which was drafted in General Anthisʼs office for Taylor to sign, and I doubt if I can get ahold of a copy.

As the matter now stands, there has been no effective reaction from Washington on this matter. Probably State could get Defenseʼs concurrence to send a message simply saying that this sort of thing must not happen again, at least during the next few months; but all the Saigon experts tell me that this will have no effect on the field. If there is to be an effect, some sort of action has to be taken to bring home to the officers involved that this kind of mistake could affect their careers.

One handle we could use is to ask Taylor to pick up the statement at the end of Harkinsʼs long telegram describing the incident.2 Harkins said that the error in navigation was inexcusable and that the failure of the two officers involved to report the incident was being investigated. As a first step, could we at least ask Taylor to query Harkins on what action he has taken with respect to the Chantrea incident, and what action he proposes to take to prevent these incidents from happening in the future?

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of McGeorge Bundy, Luncheon Meetings with President, Vol. 1. Secret.

2 Reference is to COMUSMACV telegram MAC J3 2154, March 21. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

127. Editorial Note 127. Editorial Note

On April 2, 1964, President Johnson met with the National Security Council at its 525th meeting at noon to discuss U.S. policy towards a number of countries and issues. The meeting began with a briefing by Director of Central Intelligence McCone. President Johnson then asked Secretary Rusk if he had any matters he wanted to add. According to a summary record, prepared by Bromley Smith on April 2, Rusk made the following points on Cambodia: “Cambodia—Sihanouk has made a turn-around, and, therefore, the critical situation in Cambodia is improved. Developments will slow down because Sihanouk is taking a vacation and visiting France. Ambassador Bohlen is seeing De Gaulle today in an effort to persuade the General to issue a statement clarifying French policy in Southeast Asia. The hope is that De Gaulle would issue a statement that his support of neutralization applies in the future and the immediate present.”

Cambodia was not discussed further at the meeting according to Smithʼs account. (Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC, Meetings Files)

128. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 128. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, April 6, 1964.

SUBJECT

Possible Invitation to Sihanouk to Visit the US (your memo of April 2)2

We feel rather strongly that an invitation to Sihanouk is not indicated at this time. No doubt it would be salutary for the President and you to talk to him in Dutch-uncle fashion, but we think the advantages of this would be more than offset by the disadvantages outlined below. Moreover, there is good reason to doubt that anything short of clear evidence of victory in Viet-Nam will cause Sihanouk to veer from his course—which we believe is grounded on his firm conviction that we are going to lose.

The principal objection to inviting Sihanouk here is that it would tend to confirm in his eyes and, perhaps more importantly, in the eyes of influential Cambodians that the course he has been following has been a wise one and even that it pays to kick Uncle Sam about. This would happen at a time when these same elements of Cambodian society are having real doubts about where Sihanoukʼs polices are leading the country. Any satisfaction which Sihanouk might derive from the invitation would at least be matched by irritation in Bangkok and Saigon. There would even be those who would try to portray the invitation as evidence that we were leaning toward a neutral solution for South Viet-Nam. Finally, I wonder about the US public reaction to inviting Sihanouk so soon after the attack on the Chancery.

A lesser but important difficulty with having Sihanouk here in the near future would be that the visit would either precede or follow his visit to France in June. Given our meager facilities for catering to the likes of Sihanouk, we would suffer by comparison. What is more serious, we would be unable to prevent unfavorable press notices and these would be certain to infuriate the Prince. He has complained bitterly about his press treatment on previous visits and seems quite unable to accept that the Government could not prevent bad notices if it wished.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 CAMB, Confidential. Drafted by Trueheart. A note on the source text reads: that “Secretary Saw.”

2  Ruskʼs April 2 memorandum, which was attached, reads: “Should we invite Sihanouk to come through the United States on his way to France in order to have a talk with the President?”

129. Memorandum of Conversation 129. Memorandum of Conversation1

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5:45 p.m.

US/MC–2

UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE NINTH COUNCIL

MEETING OF THE SOUTHEAST ASIA TREATY ORGANIZATION

Manila, April 13–15, 1964

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary of State

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Carl F. Salans, Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs

France Maurice Couve de Murville, Minister of Foreign Affairs

Jacques de Beaumarchais, Director of the Ministerʼs Cabinet

Robert Gillet, Assistant Director of Political Affairs

SUBJECT

Cambodia

Couve said Cambodia was the only country in Southeast Asia that had national leadership, was not divided, had no Communist party and was sincerely trying to be noncommitted. [1 line of source text not declassified] He said Sihanouk has an obsession that the Chinese Communists are going to extend their power to one side or another of Cambodia. He therefore wants a “guarantee” of Cambodiaʼs neutrality—which means a guarantee by the United States and China.

In substance, Couve continued, there are two problems: 1) “guaranteed neutrality,” and 2) settlement of boundaries with Viet-Nam and Thailand. With respect to Cambodia-Thai borders, there seemed to be no question of substance because there was no dispute. The Secretary agreed. Regarding the Vietnamese-Cambodian border, the disputes over certain islands and the Khmer Krom problems were not insoluble.

Couve informed the Secretary that Sihanouk had sent DeGaulle another letter (Couve received a copy in Tokyo), the substance of which he would relate to the Secretary. In the letter Sihanouk said his aim remained the convening of a conference of nine powers of the 1954 Geneva type. But, he continued, the opposition of the United States, Viet-Nam and Thailand to a Geneva conference where they feared to be criticized had led him to look to the conclusion of an agreement with those powers. Today, he believed, such a restricted meeting was impossible. Sihanouk said he would facilitate DeGaulleʼs task by making a new attempt to reach bilateral agreements with Cambodiaʼs two neighbors if the French can obtain the agreement of the United States to get the Thais to agree to bilateral talks either at Phnom Penh or Bangkok. There can be no question, Sihanouk continued, of contesting Thai-Cambodian boundaries as established by relevant treaties and the decision of the International Court of Justice. Sihanouk suggested that in the agreement to be negotiated between Thailand and Cambodia, the two countries could affirm mutual respect for present frontiers which are immutable. (The Secretary and Mr. Bundy suggested that these words used in Sihanoukʼs letter might be acceptable to Thailand. Couve said it was not clear from Sihanoukʼs letter whether the Prince was suggesting a precise formula of words to be put in an agreement and abandoning his position that all the treaties and the ICJ decision must be cited in any such agreement.) With respect to Viet-Nam, Sihanouk reiterated in his letter his desire for boundary regulation and for a resumption of normal relations. However, he said, he must take into account the precarious situation of the Saigon Government. He could not mortgage the future of Cambodia by an agreement with that government unless such agreement is rapidly confirmed by a Geneva conference (i.e., by North Viet-Nam and the Communists). Negotiations with Saigon are thus dependent on the fixing of a date for a Geneva conference.

Couve thought it would be a good thing to keep the dialogue going with Sihanouk. Couve said that when he saw Thanat he was going to discuss this with him, if the Secretary thought it would be useful, in the hope that Thailand could do something to this end, apart from a conference. Couve added that a conference without the United States, Thailand and Viet-Nam would be meaningless.

The Secretary said one of our problems has been that we donʼt know what to expect from Sihanouk from week to week. Another has been that we canʼt have private conversations with Sihanouk; everything is public. Sihanouk thinks that we control the Thais and Vietnamese and can tell them what to do. Of course, this is not the case. Cambodiaʼs problems are with its neighbors; but they are not insurmountable. The Thais are reluctant in an agreement to cite treaties which they say the French imposed on them. The Secretary thought it would be good for Couve to talk to Thanat about Cambodia. With respect to Viet-Nam the problem is control of the borders and the use by the Viet Cong of Cambodian territory. Cambodia and Viet-Nam must work out joint border controls. The Secretary thought the prospect of Viet-Nam and Cambodia getting together was good.

The Secretary said the United States had responded favorably to Sihanoukʼs quadripartite proposal 1) because the problem was primarily between Cambodia and its neighbors and 2) to satisfy Sihanoukʼs desire for some assurance from us regarding Thai and Vietnamese behavior. If bilateral agreements were reached, Thai and Vietnamese presence at Geneva would become unimportant. In no event will Viet-Nam go to Geneva; and we canʼt make them. The Vietnamese are afraid that a Geneva conference would get involved in the discussion of the “neutralization” of South Viet-Nam. They donʼt know what that means and neither do we, said the Secretary. Unless we know what the result is going to be, we canʼt go to a Geneva conference for fear that the Thais and Vietnamese will think we let them down in a very important way.

Couve thought it essential that the United States attend a Geneva conference or at least sign a Geneva agreement, which is the same thing. The Secretary replied that if Sihanouk was really interested in substance, he could cover the various countries concerned in different ways. He could have a Geneva conference and the United States might stay away from Geneva.

The Secretary said we have no problem with the end in view for Cambodia, namely, neutrality. But we are not going to guarantee Cambodian neutrality. The Secretary asked Couve whether France was prepared to put three divisions into Cambodia to guarantee Cambodiaʼs neutrality. Couve replied that France didnʼt have three divisions. He said a guarantee is not necessarily undertaken by a commitment of military forces. The value of an agreement guaranteeing Cambodiaʼs neutrality, Couve thought, was that if China violated Cambodian neutrality in the future, it would be an international matter which the parties could raise rather than resorting to the use of military force.

The Secretary said that we have a formal agreement regarding Laotian neutrality. Still the Viet Minh keep troops in Laos and use Laos as a corridor to South Viet-Nam. What good is such an agreement?

Couve said the situation in Laos was dominated by the situation in Viet-Nam; as long as the latter remained unsettled, so would the former. Secondly, Couve stated, the Geneva settlement didnʼt change much on the Pathet Lao side or on Phoumiʼs side. (The Secretary interjected that it changed the United Statesʼ side. We got almost completely out of Laos, but the Viet Minh didnʼt.) Thirdly, Laos was divided into three factions. Cambodia is not so divided.

The Secretary thought a very constructive next step would be bilateral talks. The United States would do what it could to assure success of such talks. Couve agreed that for the time we could stop at that. We would see later about any further developments. However, Couve warned that Sihanouk had put a condition on bilateral talks—that there be prior agreement to hold a Geneva conference.

The Secretary asked Couve whether he considered Sihanoukʼs talk about security arrangements with China a bluff. [1 line of source text not declassified]

Couve indicated that Sihanoukʼs visit to Paris was set for June 23.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3. Secret. This memorandum, part I of a two-part conversation, was drafted by Salans and approved by S on April 16. The meeting was held at the Embassy chancery.

130. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) 130. Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green)1

Washington, April 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

Viet Cong Use of Cambodian Territory

As requested by FE/SEA and S/VN we have examined the airgrams, CAS report [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and the photographic intelligence report mentioned in Saigonʼs telegram No. 1898 of April 3, 1964, as well as other materials relating to Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory for the past 18 months.2 On balance we believe that the conclusions of RFE Research Memorandum No. 35 of August 7, 1962 (attached) are still substantially valid: i.e., there is still no firm evidence to substantiate numerous official GVN charges and reports the Viet Cong make extensive use of Cambodian territory as a base for operations in Vietnam; there is, nevertheless, no doubt that the Viet Cong make limited use of Cambodian territory as a safe haven and for infiltrating cadres, supplies, and funds. The Viet Cong probably cross the frontier with somewhat greater frequency and ease at present since they control areas along the Vietnamese side of the frontier more effectively than they did in 1962. They also probably bivouac in Cambodian territory for varying periods of time. However, evidence that the Viet Cong have established and maintain permanent bases in Cambodia has not been effectively substantiated.

Saigon Embassy Airgrams No. A–686 of May 6, 1963 and A–728 of May 16, 1963, as well as Airgrams No. 296 of December 3, 1962 and several CAS documents contain numerous reports alleging illegal movements back and forth across the border by various groups, including Viet Cong. These reports, particularly those found in South Vietnamese newspapers may be somewhat exaggerated, but they are so frequent and consistent as to be probably true in large measure. US advisors have reported seeing Viet Cong units fleeing into Cambodia, and the Cambodian Government has announced that Viet Cong and other border crossers, have been repulsed or captured occasionally.

Embassy Airgrams No. A–808 of June 20, 1963 and A–251 of October 10, 1963 report the flow of munitions material and arms and ammunition from Cambodia into Vietnam, during the period March 30 to September 23, 1963. During this period, 16 tons of explosive materials were reportedly seized by the GVN. Since that time only two seizures have been made (December 1963 and March 1964) producing a total of three tons (Saigon telegram No. 1985 of April 14, 1964). Whether this indicates that the flow of materials really has dropped or that the Viet Cong have now found means of avoiding GVN surveillance is not clear.

Reports that the Viet Cong maintain logistical installations, training camps, concealed bivouacs, rest camps, and even farms on the Cambodian side of the border are contained in Airgrams No. A–296, 686, and 728, and in CAS reports. GVN military commanders on the border areas and their US advisors are convinced that the Viet Cong maintain permanent bases on the Cambodian side of the frontier. CAS report [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] of October 28, 1963 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] stated that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the Viet Cong were maintaining military training bases and workshops in an area covering approximately 25 square kilometers of the “parrotʼs beak” area of Cambodia opposite Long An and Kien Tuong Provinces. (XS 290 950) According to Saigonʼs 1898, aerial photography of this region “confirmed the existence of what appears to be a military base straddling the border in this area,” although the installations photographed are not exactly at the same locations as those given in the CAS report. The Detailed Photographic Interpretation report of this photography (attached) contends that “a heavily defended military area,” covering 9 square kilometers, is located in this area, including command, storage, and supply facilities, numerous foxholes, AW emplacements and trenches. However, the detailed annotations indicate that most of the identifications are only “possible” and do not confirm that these installations are in fact Viet Cong. According to Saigonʼs 1898, Cambodian officials have told the Army Attaché at Phnom Penh that this area has been abandoned, which may either indicate that the Viet Cong have left or that these were former RKG installations. Thus the report that the Viet Cong have a base in this area does not seem to be confirmed. Saigonʼs 1898 indicates that other reports of Viet Cong installations inside Cambodian territory have not been substantiated.

Conclusions: While it seems clear that Viet Cong use the Cambodian border area as a sanctuary and probably bivouac there for varying periods, we have as yet no effective confirmation of reports that they have permanent military bases there. A well-publicized attempt in late 1961 to prove that the Viet Cong had established bases in Cambodia was unsuccessful and caused embarrassment to both the GVN and the United States, setting back GVN efforts to enlist RKG cooperation in control of the border.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

2 All references are ibid.

3 There is a note at the end of the source text that reads: “Marshall. As you know, we may have more information shortly. T[homas] H[ughes].”

131. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 131. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, May 15, 1964.

SUBJECT

Security Council Action on Cambodian Complaint

You may wish to inform the President at lunch today of the nature of the Cambodian complaint to the United Nations about the recent border incidents and our plans to make the Security Council session as constructive as possible. As you know, we are embarking on a new course by proposing that the UN get involved actively in observing and patrolling the RKG-South Viet-Nam border.

On May 13, the Cambodian Government requested an urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider alleged acts of aggression by US-South Vietnamese armed forces against Cambodia. In particular, the complaint cited incidents on May 7 and May 8 in which GVN armed forces allegedly invaded Cambodian territory and killed seven Cambodians. The Cambodians also asserted that U.S. officers participated in these attacks. Cambodia requested that a UN group of inquiry be sent to investigate charges of Cambodian complicity with the Viet Cong. (Tab A.)2

Our best information is that SVN forces did violate the border as charged but that no Americans were involved.

We will seek to turn the Cambodian complaint against us and the GVN into a positive move to improve the security situation in the critical areas along the border. As a first step, we urged the SVN to revive its proposal for a GVN-Cambodian border commission, which they did. However, since a bilateral approach has consistently been rejected by the Cambodians, we have sought to add a sweetener in the form of a UN involvement in border control. As a starter, we have suggested that UN representatives be added to the bilateral commissions or, alternatively, that the bilateral commissions report to the Secretary-General through his representative in the area (Gussing), who was assigned to deal with the Cambodian-Thailand dispute. Secretary-General U Thant is cooperating with us in pursuing this idea and will talk to the Cambodians about it today. The French Representative (and Security Council President) Seydoux will also try to help with the Cambodians.

If the Cambodians balk at the foregoing proposals because they involve bilateral cooperation, we are prepared to consider another possibility:UN teams (in lieu of bilateral groups) charged with patrolling that part of the border where there is the highest risk of incidents. Such teams might also have investigative powers. We are still examining the details of size, logistics and costs of such an operation.

The GVN has reacted positively to a UN role. It is still uncertain, however, whether Sihanouk will accept any of these proposals, since his main objective seems to be a Geneva Conference to guarantee his neutrality. Even if he does not agree, we feel that by supporting these constructive moves we will be in the best possible posture in the Security Council.

The Communists may give us trouble on these proposals, alleging that the ICC has responsibilities for the area (and recognizing that the ICC serves their purposes better than would a UN observation group since the latter is likely to be more effective than the ICC). Also, we recognize that the border cannot be sealed even with a much larger UN group than would be feasible. Nevertheless, a UN observer group with substantial mobility should be helpful to us without serious risk that the UN will become immediately involved in the broader political issues of Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum and concurred by William Bundy. A note on the source text reads: S[ecretary] saw.”

2  UN Doc S/5697, May 13, attached, but not printed.

132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 132. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, May 21, 1964, 9:15 p.m.

901. As you know, Stevenson in major speech today,2 while leaving open possibility of Committee of Inquiry as suggested by Cambodia, made three practical suggestions for possible UN peacekeeping machinery designed to meet security problem along Cambodian-Vietnamese border. He mentioned as possibilities: (1) bilateral force which might report to Secretary-General;

(2) bilateral force augmented by UN observers; or

(3) an all UN force.

Thus far, Cambodians have laid great stress on convening Geneva conference as immediate objective while continuing to reaffirm their desire for Committee of Inquiry which would look into past incidents. They also have stressed Geneva conference should authorize ICC to cope with border problems between Cambodia and Viet-Nam. Cambodian Del appears to have rejected or at least ignored US concrete proposals cited above in his intervention before Council.

It is clear that if Cambodians were serious about desiring useful solutions at UN, they should be prepared to support kind of practical on-the-ground UN instrumentalities suggested in Stevenson speech. Positive action by Council could result in situation where Cambodiaʼs stated concern for its territorial integrity would be met in quick and practical way which could not be done through repetition of Geneva conference.

If Cambodia can be brought to see possibilities of constructive action in UN, RKG must be disabused of idea that SC will endorse convocation of Geneva Conference. We understand SYG has already informed Sonn that Cambodia could not expect to get required majority for res endorsing Geneva conference.

We do not believe Cambodians have come to SC to seek any practical arrangements for coping with border problem, but we feel that if facts are made clear, their position will be smoked out and onus put on them for helping transform SC consideration into propaganda show rather than practical exercise in peacekeeping.

For Phnom Penh: We recognize our credit with Cambodians almost non-existent and that direct approach in Phnom Penh probably futile. Nevertheless, if you feel it advisable, you might approach suitable level RKG to discuss foregoing. In doing so, you might wish draw attention to following passage of Stevensonʼs speech:

“Let me emphasize, Mr. President, that my government has the greatest regard for Cambodia and its people and its Chief of State, Prince Sihanouk. We believe he has done much for his people and for the independence of his country. It is our very clear impression that his overwhelming purpose is merely to assure conditions in which his people can live in peace, secure from outside intervention, and work out their own destiny in their own fashion. My government wishes no more than to associate itself explicitly with these aims. If the people of Cambodia wish to live in peace and security and independence—free from outside intervention, and free from external alignment if they so choose—then we want for them precisely what they want for themselves. We have no quarrel whatsoever with the Cambodian desire to go its own way.”

In drawing attention to this passage you might add that we would be prepared to consider other practical suggestions for UN action which the RKG might wish to make in order to meet the frontier situation. You should add that USG would be prepared to help finance kind of UN operation we are talking about and would affirmatively support provision in a Security Council resolution which would call on all states to respect territorial integrity and political independence of Cambodia.

For USUN: In view fact you have good contacts with Sonn request you make approach to him along foregoing lines.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by Hirschfeld, Buffum, and Patrica M. Byrne of UNP, cleared by Trueheart, and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Saigon.

2 Printed in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 848–851, and in full in Department of State Bulletin, June 8, 1964, pp. 907–913.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 1

Washington, May 25, 1964, 8:45 p.m.

3058. Re SC Consideration Cambodian-Vietnamese Border Situation. For Ambassador Stevenson. We have considered carefully various alternatives for UN involvement which you discussed with Harlan Cleveland Sunday2 night. Subject to any further views you may have, following are our conclusions on how we should now proceed in SC. We should seek to shift debate back for time being to narrow issues of Cambodian-Vietnamese border, now that you have made our main case on Southeast Asia in your speech Thursday.3

1. We should take a firm line that Cambodia, which took matter to SC, can get what it seeks to protect its territorial integrity and political independence and in safeguarding its frontiers through practical and effective UN arrangements rather than through repetition of Geneva exercise. Cambodia will not come to this unless it is convinced it has no possibility of obtaining SC endorsement of Geneva conference on Cambodia.

2. To this end, suggest you press in your informal consultations with other SC members our preference for a resolution for either (a) UN-organized peacekeeping force of effective size; or (b) substantial Cambodian-Vietnamese force augmented by UN observers under SYG.

3. Advantages of consulting on this basis are: (a) it is by far most constructive and effective result of SC consideration; (b) it will demonstrate to Vietnamese we have made more than perfunctory attempt to get effective UN peacekeeping machinery on the border; (c) if majority of SC members see merit and are prepared support either of above proposals it might soften Cambodians negative attitude; and (d) it will prepare groundwork both with SC members and South Vietnamese and Cambodians for fallback position given below which we believe will prove only feasible course.

4. We see serious disadvantages to pressing for a UN observation group of a very modest character (200 to 400). We would strongly prefer no observation group at all rather than symbolic presence which would not be effective re Viet Cong. Such limited group might tend to confirm Sihanoukʼs position because it could not operate effectively. Of equal importance, acceptance such proposal would have serious demoralizing effect on Vietnamese who, as you know, feel very strongly that only peacekeeping mechanism they want is an effective force.

5. If it proves impossible to get agreement on an effective UN border observation mechanism, we should seek a UN commission made up of non-permanent SC members mandated to discuss border situation with Cambodia and South Viet-Nam and to make recommendations. Terms of reference such Commission are important. Original terms of Cambodian request for an investigative commission were limited to past charges of RKG complicity with the Viet Cong. This is inadequate. UN Commission should be empowered to look into entire question of violations of the border between Cambodia and Viet-Nam, past and future, and recommend ways in which problem can be met. It should be free to move in both countries and to examine prisoners of war.

6. A mandate for UN Commission to make recommendations for ways of easing the situation would be helpful in a number of ways. A. Such a group could, for example, come up with proposals that would ultimately involve an effective UN border patrol of kind you suggested in your speech.

B. Fact there is ongoing activity with regard to this problem would help demonstrate that Geneva Conference is not only means of dealing with Cambodiaʼs neutrality. Latter objective could also be served by including a reference in the resolution calling on all States to respect Cambodiaʼs political independence and territorial integrity.

7. Composition of group would be critical. While a number of combinations of membership could be devised, perhaps most simple, straightforward and acceptable from our viewpoint would be to ask non-permanent members of Council (Morocco, Ivory Coast, Norway, Brazil, Bolivia, and Czechoslovakia) to designate one or two representatives each to serve on such commission. While this means that Czechoslovakia would be represented, balance of membership is strongly in our favor, and we assume that Sihanouk would want Communist participation to demonstrate that group is “impartial.” This might also make it more acceptable to USSR.

8. We are sending USUN in separate tel kind of resolution we have in mind embracing UN Commission idea.4 Assume you will wish to discuss with Vietnamese, and depending on their views, subsequently with UK, and SYG before broadening out to other SC members.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sisco and Buffum; cleared by Meeker, William Bundy, Sullivan, and Cleveland; and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Abidjan, La Paz, London, Moscow, Oslo, Paris, Phnom Penh, Prague, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro, Saigon, Taipei, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 March 24.

3 See footnote 2, Document 132.

4 See Document 134 for the resolution favored by the United States.

134. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 134. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 1

Washington, May 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

Security Council Resolution on Cambodian Complaint

We are now in the last round of negotiations on a resolution winding up the Cambodian complaint against South Viet-Nam and ourselves. Morocco is still carrying the ball, but it is clearly the French who are calling the signals. While France has been consistently opposed to any continuing UN involvement in this dispute, Charlie Yost was told by Seydoux Saturday morning that he had tracked down Couve in Madrid by phone and that Couve was becoming concerned at the extent to which this exercise has been played up as a US-French split. It was under these circumstances, apparently, that the French Government (“at the highest levels”) drafted a paragraph which would give the UN a limited forward-looking role as defined in operative paragraph 5 below.

The text of the Moroccan draft resolution, as amended by the French, is shown below. Portions in brackets are those we wish to delete. Portions in parentheses represent additions or substitutions we are seeking.

Begin Text

The Security Council,

Considering the complaint of the Government of Cambodia contained in document S/________,

Noting the statements made before the Council on the subject of this complaint,

Noting with regret the incidents which occurred on Cambodian territory and the situation existing on the Khmer-Vietnamese border,

Taking note of the explanations and the regrets which have been expressed to the Royal Government of Cambodia on the subject of these incidents and the loss of human life which resulted,

Noting also the desire of the Governments of Cambodia and of the Republic of Viet-Nam to undertake to re-establish a peaceful and normal situation in their relations;

1. Deplores the incidents [provoked]2 (caused) by the penetration of elements of the army of the Republic of Viet-Nam into Cambodian territory,

2. Requests that just and equitable compensation be offered to the Royal Government of Cambodia [by those responsible for these incidents],

3. Invites the parties to take all appropriate measures with a view to avoiding the renewal of such incidents,

4. Requests all states (and authorities) and in particular the members of the Geneva Conference to [bring about the recognition and respect of] (recognize and respect) the neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia,

5. Decides that three of its members will visit (the two countries concerned, including) the places where the recent incidents took place in order to examine measures capable of preventing their renewal and to report to the Security Council within 30 days.3

End Text

The reasons for our suggested changes in the foregoing text are as follows: 1. In operative paragraph 2, deletion of the phrase “by those responsible for these incidents”. First preference is total omission but if necessary, something along the lines of “by the responsible party” could be substituted. This revision is required inasmuch as Cambodia has charged us with responsibility along with the Vietnamese and has consequently demanded compensation from the United States.

2. In operative paragraph 4, insertion of the words “and authorities” is designed to deny to Communist China and the “Democratic Republic of Viet-Nam” any implication of our recognition of them as “states.” Deletion of “bring about the recognition and respect of” is necessary because the phrase suggests some action on the part of the states and Geneva Conference members beyond “respecting” and could thus be interpreted as an implied Security Council endorsement of the Cambodian request for a new Geneva Conference. Our acceptance of operative paragraph 4 even with these changes is conditional upon Vietnamese agreement thereto.

3. In operative paragraph 5, the insertion of “the two countries concerned, including” is desirable to insure that the scope of the committeeʼs inquiry is not restricted to the Cambodian villages which were the scene of the incidents of the complaint but is wide enough to permit activity in the two capitals and in particular the interrogation of Viet Cong prisoners of war in Saigon. At a minimum we would insist on a prior understanding that the present wording “the places” (“sur les lieux”) is to be interpreted in the foregoing sense.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by Buffum and Patricia M. Byrne of UNP. There is an indication on the source text that Ball saw it.

2 All brackets are in the source text.

3 For the resolution as adopted by the Security Council, June 4, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 856–857.

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 135. Telegram From the Embassy in Cambodia to the Department of State 1

Phnom Penh, June 3, 1964, 4 p.m.

1238. Sihanoukʼs departure on June 1 for what may prove to be six week stay in France provides convenient occasion for broad survey Cambodiaʼs present situation and status its relations with the United States.2 With Sihanouk out of country, unlikely any major decisions or changes will occur locally, all the more so since he has taken with him his closest political and economic advisers. If any important decisions are made during his absence, they will be made by him from wherever he happens to be, and we cannot rule out such decisions relating, for example, to current Cambodian case in UNSC, negotiation for French aid, and Cambodian attitude toward developments affecting Laos and Viet-Nam.

On internal scene, we expect period of inactivity. As he has done prior to his previous visits abroad, Sihanouk attempted during weeks immediately preceding his departure frighten all possible disaffected elements into immobility. We suspect General Lon Nol, Minister for Education Sirik Matak, and Minister of National Security Kou Roun have been given mandate to deal speedily and decisively with any sign of internal dissension. While this means that no overt acts of internal opposition are likely to occur, it does not mean there are no problems; Sihanouk is long way from having found solutions to problems of government finance, foreign trade, unemployment, agriculture marketing, and dissatisfaction among educated youth which have been the subject of reporting by Embassy in past six months. In his predeparture speech on May 31, Sihanouk admitted that gap created by withdrawal American aid has not been filled and is source anxiety to him. He made clear once more his intention seek from France wide range and substantial quantities of aid as wherewithal to fill part of that gap, but Embassy has seen little evidence his expectations will be fully borne out. It is fairly safe estimate that same internal problems which have been plaguing RKG in past six months will continue to face it after Sihanoukʼs return from Europe.

Compared with his internal problems, Sihanoukʼs external concerns can be stated in relatively simple terms: He must make sure that his small, relatively defenseless country does not end up on the losing side of whatever emerges from the current turmoil in SEA and he must do this without exposing Cambodia to serious injury during period while events are still in doubt. As has been pointed out frequently, he is faced with a delicate problem of timing which requires him to make gestures of friendship to what he believes will be winning side (Communists) while not going so far in this direction as to invite reprisals from losing side (free world) while latter still has ability strike seriously at him.

Special mention needs to be made in any survey of this nature of Cambodiaʼs relations with France. We here are obviously not in position (if, indeed, anybody is) to speculate on what France is aiming at in its current policy line in SEA. On Cambodian side problem is easier: France represents to Sihanouk his last effective link with free world, his best hope of substantial military and economic assistance, and his potential protector in political settlements which he expects will be inevitable outcome of present strife in SEA. In light these considerations, would be unwise anticipate (as some French themselves appear to be doing) sharp deterioration Franco-Cambodian relations if forthcoming economic and financial talks in France do not result complete satisfaction Cambodian aspirations. As long as Sihanouk believes he stands to gain political benefits from holding to France as his great and dear friend, he will greet even meager amounts French aid as proof Franceʼs unbounded generosity and unfaltering solidarity with Cambodia.

Cambodian-US relations are at lowest point since Cambodia achieved independence, and there seems little prospect for improvement as long as Sihanouk believes we are neither capable of insuring survival non-Communist regimes in SVN and Laos nor willing provide guarantees he desires for Cambodiaʼs independence, territorial integrity, and neutrality whatever may happen to remainder SEA. On other hand, in view his problem of timing mentioned above, Sihanouk unlikely break off relations entirely by ordering or forcing Embassy out until he judges Communist victory at hand and Cambodia has nothing to fear in way of retaliation. Should it appear, contrary to his expectations, that GVN has turned corner in its struggle against Viet Cong and is on way to defeating them, we might expect cautious gestures in direction better relations. If it should be considered judgment of USG that use being made of Cambodian territory by VC is significant enough to warrant all-out action prevent such use, even at risk bringing Cambodia fully over to side of VC, then, of course maintenance of any sort of Cambodian-American relations would probably be negligible consideration for both parties.

To sum up: A. Nothing is likely to develop inside Cambodia during Sihanoukʼs absence which will significantly affect either countryʼs internal or external orientation.

B. Basic motivation Sihanoukʼs policies, both foreign and domestic, is to achieve viable adjustment to coming shape of affairs in SEA as he foresees it.

C. Character our relations with Cambodia will be largely determined by developments outside this country and by Sihanoukʼs reaction to them.

Spivack

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Saigon, Vientiane, USUN, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In a CIA Intelligence Cable, distributed on June 2, the following assessment of Cambodia on the eve of Sihanoukʼs departure for France was presented: Sihanouk left “a political-economic situation in a state of deterioration” and he feared possible moves against his government from the left. In almost all segments of Cambodian society, especially in the Royal Cambodian Government, there was opposition to Sihanouk and his policies. During the next few months, there could be an effort from studentsʼ group and others to try to modify his current policies. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. II, 3/64–7/64)

136. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk 136. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, June 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Complaint in the Security Council

The Security Council this afternoon approved unanimously a draft resolution concerning Cambodia which was co-sponsored by the Ivory Coast and Morocco (attached).2 However, the Soviet Union had stated it could not support operative paragraph five regarding the establishment of a three-man commission of the Security Council to visit the two countries, and asked that this paragraph be put to a separate vote. (During the day the Soviets had sought unsuccessfully to get a sentence added to paragraph five reading “no additional expenses to the UN will be involved.”) Paragraph five was approved by nine votes to two abstentions (USSR and Czechoslovakia).

The Moroccan representative thought that the expenses of the commission could be met from the Secretary-Generalʼs contingency fund. This was later confirmed by U Thant who added that he would nevertheless request a supplemental appropriation from the next General Assembly to help cover the costs which he estimated at $39,000.

The Soviet representative repeated his charges of aggression by the United States and its “puppet” Saigon regime against the territorial integrity of Cambodia. However, he said he wished to talk today of the positive aspects of the draft resolution, and alleged that even the “moderate” wording of the resolution showed U.S. responsibility for the act of aggression. Ambassador Stevenson vigorously refuted the Soviet charges.

I believe we came out very well with the adoption of this resolution and achieved some of the constructive results which you suggested we seek. This resolution is a far cry from the type which the Cambodians sought, since it neither endorses a Geneva Conference nor accepts the Cambodian-Soviet thesis that the ICC should handle the border situation. On the contrary, for the first time, the UN has been given a role in trying to ameliorate the border problem between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam.

While I doubt that the Commission will recommend a major and continuing UN involvement, the Security Council has now at least put its foot inside the Southeast Asian door.

A more thorough analysis of the Soviet motivation will be required. However, it is significant that despite the Communist bombast and railing against UN involvement, the USSR wound up by voting affirmatively for the resolution.

Also worthy of note is the fact that—as in the Kashmir case—the non-permanent Security Council members played a remarkably energetic, constructive, and independent role.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, UN 3 SC. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Buffum and John W. Kimball of UNP. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it on June 5.

2 The resolution was attached, but is not printed; see footnote 3, Document 134.

137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 137. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the United Nations 1

Washington, June 12, 1964, 9:28 p.m.

3278. USUNʼs 4401.2 Dept appreciates excellent analysis contained reftel and concurs therein with following additional comments: 1. Re first objective of insuring SC Missionʼs report opens door to more permanent UN involvement along Cambodian-Vietnamese frontier, we must be careful to see that any such further UN engagement is of kind to serve our interests and does not on contrary result in GVNʼs getting short end of stick. We continue favor establishment substantial and effective UN presence which could measurably reduce, if not eliminate, Viet Cong operations across border. Given history of debate in Council, however, present commission unlikely recommend UN force of size to do proper job. In these circumstances, while we wish work for helpful UN involvement, we must avoid recommendations for type of UN presence which would find easy target in GVN border violations but in effect whitewash Viet Cong activities because of inability detect them.

2. On border demarcation, we believe UN involvement should be left to GVN discretion in view potentialities this problem for further exacerbation GVN-RKG relations. We are opposed in any case to injection US in matter of determining basis of frontier delineation and therefore do not wish influence Vietnamese to accept border as in USUN 4273.3 Apart from technical difficulties involved in use of Service Geographique maps, suggested formulation is Cambodian position pure and simple.

3. We agree GVN must demonstrate Vietnamese forces under strict orders not enter Cambodian territory and we trust Embassy Saigon will attempt insure no slip-up in ARVN statements to Mission this regard. For duration mission it will be doubly important every effort be made by both ARVN and US personnel to avoid crossing Cambodian border.

4. To demonstrate Viet Cong use Cambodian territory, we believe GVN should inundate SC Mission with prisoner interrogation reports and white papers (including any material scheduled for publication July 20 anniversary), arrange for “best” POWʼs talk to Mission, and provide information on chemicals imported via Cambodia for munitions manufacture. Re aerial photos or other documentation, evidence must be irrefutable. If Saigon or GVN believes photos its possession reveal presence Viet Cong installations in Cambodia, request they be sent soonest to National Photo Interpretation Center for evaluation as to whether evidence good enough to give to SC Mission. We concur emphasis should be placed on Viet Cong activity and RKG convenience played down.

5. It is essential that commission not recommend reconvocation Geneva Conference as solution to border problems. Again given history of debate and composition of Mission, we consider it unlikely such recommendation will be made; at same time, RKG can be counted upon continue put its position forward, and constant vigilance on our part will consequently be required. It may prove necessary settle for less forthright statement on some points favoring GVN in Missionʼs report in return for absence mention Geneva Conference.

Request action addressees work toward bringing about report in sense of USUNʼs 4401 as modified by foregoing; Embassy Saigon in particular should assist GVN in every possible way to present reasonable and convincing case.

Also request any ideas action addressees may wish advance in connection SC Mission, and specifically comments on relative merits and feasibility following measures within range of those Mission might suggest: A. Resumption GVN-RKG talks with view finding ways to ease or resolve border situation.

B. Establishment permanent GVN-RKG border commission to keep border situation under constant review, jointly investigate border incidents, and develop measures designed to reduce and if possible eliminate such incidents.

C. Establishment UN presence in form senior representative of SYG supported by small staff whose function would be look into alleged incidents and report to SYG. Such UN rep would need freedom of access to GVN and RKG territory and mandate broad enough enable him make thorough investigation and recommendations to SYG.

D. A and/or B above supplemented by presence of UN rep either as observer or as active third party.

E. Technical mission organized by SYG to supervise marking of those parts of border where incidents occur and where border markings nonexistent or obscure.

F. SYG maintenance of “watching brief” on GVN-RKG border situation, receipt of information on developments from both governments, and consultation with parties as he deems appropriate in continuing effort resolve problem.

G. Establishment Gussing-type mission4 with mandate not limited to border (but left vague in order not conflict with terms SC resolution) to serve as general point of contact between two governments in order assist them in solving various problems in their relations.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted by William G. Jones and Patricia M. Byrne of UNP; cleared by Buffum, Trueheart, Mendenhall, Salans, and Stephen M. Schwebel of L/UNA; and approved by Cleveland. Also sent to Saigon and Phnom Penh and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD, London, Paris, Abijan, Rabat, Rio de Janeiro, Oslo, Taipei, and La Paz.

2 In telegram 4401 from USUN, June 8, the Mission suggested that the Security Councilʼs decision to send a three-man mission to Cambodia and Vietnam to report on border friction, while only a small step, was an opportunity to involve the UN more actively in South Vietnamese-Cambodian border issues. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 4273, May 27, the Mission reported that South Vietnamʼs UN Delegate suggested a commission of experts with the participation of the two parties to fix the frontier. The U.S. Mission believed this would be unacceptable to Cambodia as challenging the existing frontier, so suggested a commission of experts to physically mark the existing frontier as delineated on maps done in December 1954. (Ibid.)

4 Niles Gussing was the United Nations Secretary-Generalʼs personal representative sent in October 1962 to try to mediate Thai-Cambodian border differences.

138. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) 138. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart)1

Washington, June 30, 1964.

The attached is a proposed message to convey to Sihanouk through an intermediary2 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. I think it is good as far as it goes. The only question in my mind is whether—if the intermediary is sufficiently sophisticated—we should say anything about the Khmer Serei or any other specific problem that has haunted our relationship. Whether or not we put it in the letter, I wonder where we do stand about the KS. Certainly Kidder should have a good line to take on this subject before he walks into the lionʼs mouth.

Please give me a quick answer on the letter and let me know at more leisure about the KS problem generally.

W.P.B. 3

Attachment

Washington, June 30, 1964.

Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Neubert) to the Director (Trueheart)

The attached memo from Mr. Bundy covered a draft letter from the Secretary to John McCone dictated by the Secretary himself. This had to be returned promptly to the Secretaryʼs office so we do not have a copy. The letter suggested that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] go back to Sihanouk with a broad general view of Washington thinking on the subject of Cambodia which the Secretary then outlined. He noted our desire for good relations with Cambodia and restated our respect for Cambodian independence and neutrality. He also mentioned our hope that Cambodian relations with Thailand and South Viet-Nam could be improved and professed to be unable to understand why Cambodia felt communism was the wave of the future in SEA in view of our stated determination to help the countries of the area defend themselves from communist aggression. He made the point that once North Viet-Nam left its neighbors alone, US forces would leave the area. He expressed the hope that the UN mission now in the area would be able to obtain constructive suggestions from Cambodia and SVN on how to resolve the problem of Viet Cong violation of Cambodian territorial integrity. In closing, he noted the confusion which had been caused in the past by diplomacy through public speeches and press releases and hoped that we would be able to work out some way of having frank discussions on a personal face-to-face basis. We would welcome any suggestion the Prince had for achieving this. (I assume this may have been designed to enhance the possibility of Kidder gaining useful contact with the Prince.)

I told Bundy that I agreed with him that the message was well designed to make the broad general points which Sihanouk must understand before the specific problems at issue between us can be attacked. If the Prince were to accept the broad outlines of our policy, there should be no difficulty with the minor details. Therefore, I thought the message should avoid the contentious questions such as Khmer Serei, US aid termination, etc.

At some point we should get a come-back copy of the letter as sent to McCone.4

JWN

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret.

2 The draft message was not attached.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Bundy initiated the original.

4 The following note by Trueheart is on the source text: “JWN[eubert] 1. Fully agree. 2. Letʼs get definitive rundown on Khmer Serei status. 3. All this should be brought to Kidderʼs attention. WT”

139. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Director of Central Intelligence McCone 139. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Director of Central Intelligence McCone 1

Washington, June 30, 1964.

Dear John:

Regarding our conversation about Prince Sihanouk,2 I would make the following suggestions. The Princeʼs friend might find an occasion to see him again in order to comment on some of the things Sihanouk had told him in their last conversation. Obviously the friend would not have had a chance to visit Washington but he could say that he knows something of the atmosphere in Washington and would like to pass on to the Prince his own impressions.

1. The United States is both puzzled and distressed by the deterioration in relations with Cambodia. There has never been any doubt in the Kennedy or Johnson Administrations about the desirability of Cambodian independence, neutrality, security and prosperity. The United States has no national ambitions of any sort with respect to Cambodia except normally good relations.

2. The people in Washington are convinced that there is no serious obstacle in the way of significantly improved relations between Cambodia and its immediate neighbors, South Viet-Nam and Thailand. Indeed, the United States has used its influence in both the other capitals to assist in creating a receptive attitude toward such improved relations with Cambodia and is prepared to do more in that regard if an opportunity arises.

3. The people in Washington are under the impression that Prince Sihanouk is convinced that Peiping will inevitably dominate or overrun Southeast Asia. They are puzzled by this because they are determined to support in every way the security and independence of the free countries of that region. Therefore it is hard for them to understand attitudes or policies which might be based upon any notion that communism is the wave of the future in Southeast Asia.

4. The only interest of the United States in Southeast Asia is that the independent countries of that area be left alone by their neighbors and be permitted to work out their own policies in their own way as envisaged in the United Nations Charter. The United States wants no bases or military presence in the area. If there were full compliance with the Geneva Accords of 1954 and 1962 and no interference by illegal actions, American forces would go home.

5. The people in Washington are very much concerned about the abuse of Cambodian neutrality and territory by the Viet Cong. They recognize that Prince Sihanouk does not have the military forces necessary to enforce its neutrality against these unlawful bands but they hope that the United Nations Commission might be able to make suggestions which would protect the frontiers of Cambodia and avoid the incidents which occur back and forth across that border because of Viet Cong activity.

6. The people in Washington also feel that much of the misunderstanding between Washington and Phnom Penh could have been avoided, or could now be removed, if it were possible to have friendly, frank, but private conversations with Prince Sihanouk. They have felt that too much of the dialogue between the two governments has been carried out through public speeches and press releases on both sides and that what is needed is a thoughtful discussion of the situation. If Prince Sihanouk had any suggestions on this, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be glad to try to get them to the right people.

Sincerely,

Dean Rusk 3

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI Executive Registry Files (McCone), Job 80–B01676. Secret.

2 Not further identified.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

140. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 140. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 1

Paris, July 4, 1964, 6 p.m.

85. Reference: Deptels 7098 and 25; Embtel 82.2 I had half-hour conversation with Sihanouk July 3 and will set down briefly what he said.

After Sihanouk expressed appreciation for the Presidentʼs message and proposed a toast to his health and that of U.S. to which I reciprocated, I mentioned to Sihanouk that arrival of Kidder as new Ambassador would be good starting point for improvement of relations with Cambodia which U.S. genuinely desired. Sihanouk agreed and said he looked forward very much to receiving Amb Kidder and added he greatly regretted departure of “my good friend Sprouse” whom he had found “understanding and sympathetic”.

After this exchange of courtesies Sihanouk went into description or dissertation (there was no heat or excitement in any of his statements) regarding what he termed chief interest of his country. He said that for centuries past Cambodia had had traditional enemies, Vietnamese and Thais. During French period frontier between Vietnam and Cambodia had been marked out. With Thais there had been formal treaty negotiated and signed in Washington in 1947. All he was asking for these countries was that they formally accept frontier which had been drawn up. He referred in this connection to case brought to International Court of Justice which had been decided in Cambodiaʼs favor. He said in addition to “military intrusion” into Cambodian territory, Vietnam had also at some point during recent past attempted to move its frontiers four kilometers into Cambodia, he said difference in architecture between houses in Cambodian villages and those in Vietnam was quite distinctive. If he had been able to obtain Vietnamese and Thai agreement to what he termed to be legal frontiers of Cambodia, he would not have ever proposed conference. Conference was necessary because he had not gotten anywhere with Vietnamese or Thais. In this connection, he mentioned letter from Diem to him in 1960 laying claim to certain islands in Cambodiaʼs possession of its coast. This letter, he said, should be withdrawn. I told him I was not sufficiently up on all of details of frontier question but it seemed to me that while it was very important matter and I could understand his concern nevertheless there was the greater danger of communism emanating from north which was our chief preoccupation. I pointed out that we had no interest in area and certainly supported Cambodiaʼs doctrine of neutrality. Sihanouk then said that in his view whether the country was red or white made little difference. It was matter of relative unimportance to him whether he continued as ruler of Cambodia or was assassinated by Communists, provided that nation of Cambodia continued. It was for this reason that he had put so much emphasis on establishment of the frontiers of his country. He said that if frontiers were recognized there would be no need for Geneva Conference. He added that he had never envisaged any such conference in and even dealing with anything but Cambodia. He appeared to attach difficulties with U.S. entirely to frontier question, pointing out that while he could understand why we were supporting non-Communist govts of area, nevertheless this automatically put U.S. on side of countries hostile to Cambodia and under such circumstances we could hardly expect good relations with Cambodia. He also mentioned some subversive broadcasts against him and when I questioned this thesis, he mentioned that the Cambodians had “proof” that an “American diplomat” of Japanese descent, Matsui or Watsui, was involved. I told him I would like to warn him against acceptance of unverified stories involving intelligence and all other matters, and I felt that they could not help situation.

When I told him in regard to previous point that U.S. was nevertheless not in position to dictate policies to other countries, since we did not go in for “satellites”, he said that he had heard this before and therefore was forced to accept it. In reply to my statement that U.S. was fully determined and conscious of all risks involved, to prevent takeover by Communists of entire area, Sihanouk said he understood this but that he must state frankly he thought we could not succeed. Conversation then ended on very agreeable and friendly manner.

Comment: I do not know all of intricacies of frontier question but it seemed to me that to him this was most important element in situation. I found his emphasis on nation as against regime of interest and a thesis which must have been music to De Gaulleʼs ears.

Bohlen

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 CAMB. Confidential. Repeated to Phnom Penh, Saigon, and Bangkok.

2 In telegrams 7098 and 25 to Paris, June 30 and July 2, the Department suggested that Bohlen use the transmission of a greeting from President Johnson thanking Sihanouk for a similar message to discuss prospects for U.S.-Cambodian relations. (Both ibid.) In telegram 82 from Paris, July 3, the Embassy reported that Bohlen met Sihanouk at 6:30 p.m. that day and that a report of their conversation would follow. (Ibid.)

141. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 141. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 29, 1964.

SUBJECT

Mr. McConeʼs Letter to you of July 23, 1964

Discussion

Mr. McConeʼs letter (Tab B) states that it would be worthwhile to follow up on the channel to Sihanouk which [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has developed and therefore suggested that he call upon you, Governor Harriman or me and that he be authorized to report on such a meeting in a letter to Sihanouk. Mr. McCone suggested further that in his letter to Sihanouk [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] could convey his “impressions” as being views derived from this meeting and other contacts since his return to Washington. Although we agree that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] might provide a useful second channel of communication, we should avoid developing what might turn into an alternative channel of communication outside the normal diplomatic framework. If Ambassador Kidderʼs mission is to be a success, the Prince should be convicted that his contacts with Ambassador Kidder provide the best means of contact with the US Government.

Although we see considerable merit in providing Sihanouk with an occasional channel of communication through [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we do not favor the development of an alternative channel to Ambassador Kidder.

Recommendation

1. That I see [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and that his contacts in the Department be confined within the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs.2

2. If you approve, that you sign the attached letter to Mr. McCone. (Tab A)3

Tab B

Washington, July 23, 1964.

Letter From Director of Central Intelligence McCone to Secretary of State Rusk

[2 pages of source text not declassified.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Hirschfeld and cleared by Trueheart.

2 See Document 144.

3 In this brief draft letter, attached but not printed, Rusk thanked McCone for his letter of July 23 and the “useful proposals.” He welcomed William Bundy speaking with [text not declassified] in the expectation that the results of their talk would be transmitted to Sihanouk.

142. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 142. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

Talking Points for Your Forthcoming Conversation with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

1. The President is sending Ambassador Kidder to Cambodia in the hope of establishing a more effective, rapid and useful channel of communication with Prince Sihanouk and his government. It is the Presidentʼs hope that Ambassador Kidderʼs mission will provide occasion for a frank and continuing exchange of views.2 In this connection, it is our hope that the Royal Government will see fit to reconstitute its Embassy in Washington. We have found with Cambodia and other countries that this double channel of communications has been most useful. To quote Ambassador Nong Kimney on several occasions before his departure—“Diplomats should keep talking regardless of what happens.”

2. We were frankly shocked at Huot Sambathʼs letter to the Secretary3 wherein we and the Government of Vietnam were jointly accused of having caused the death of Cambodian peasants through dropping powders over Ratanakiri province. I would like to stress that the most careful investigation of all available sources shows that there were no defoliant operations in any of the Vietnamese provinces bordering on Ratanakiri, nor have we any knowledge that any herbicide operations have ever crossed into Cambodia. Further, and particularly important, it is common knowledge that the chemicals used in herbicide/defoliant operations in Vietnam are common garden weed killers which are sprayed as a liquid and never as powders. The liquid does not evaporate to form a white or yellow powder and is harmless to humans as used in Vietnam. It is difficult for us to escape the impression that the RKG may have formulated its accusations hurriedly on the basis of information which may have been supplied by persons or elements desiring to harm our relations with Cambodia. In addition, we consider the tone in which these accusations were formulated particularly unfortunate and inopportune.

3. We have for many years been aware of Prince Sihanoukʼs unhappiness with the treatment he has received from the American press. We have for an equal number of years attempted to convince him, his former Ambassador and other Cambodian officials that statements made in the press do not reflect the opinions and attitudes of the government. We are surprised that Prince Sihanouk, who is no mean journalist himself, appears to be unwilling to draw a distinction between official American policy and articles which appear in a free press. It is unfortunate, but many of these articles are reflections of journalistʼs attitudes toward some of the means which the Prince has employed to achieve the goals we share. The Prince must nevertheless be aware that several important journals, notably the Washington Post, the New Yorker and the National Geographic Magazine, have often given Cambodia very sympathetic treatment.

4. We recognize, appreciate and acknowledge the attachment of the overwhelming majority of the Cambodian people to the Prince. We consider Prince Sihanouk to be one of the most popular leaders in Southeast Asia and the acknowledged and effective leader of his country. We understand that the Princeʼs speeches and the commentary thereon in the press, the press bulletin and on the radio are the principal opinion forming organs of the kingdom. For this reason, we are somewhat startled at the Princeʼs stated fears that he might be overwhelmed by “public opinion” and therefore be forced to realign himself. We understand Prince Sihanoukʼs concern with assuring the survival of Cambodia within the present frontiers. We regret the loss of life resulting from the frontier incidents that have occurred and consider an effective demarcation and effective international observation as suggested in the Security Council report could provide a means of reducing, if not eliminating them. It is for this reason that we consider the recommendation for the initiation of bilateral talks with the Government of Vietnam of particular importance and would be happy to do whatever is necessary to achieve an outcome acceptable to both parties.

5. We have read with interest the Princeʼs proposal for broader regional arrangements of neutral states guaranteed by outside powers. Although this idea is well worth exploring, we have strong reservations as to the good faith of other powers which have agreed to similar undertakings in the past, notably in the case of Laos, and have abrogated them at their convenience. We have no clear image of what guarantees or controls could be provided.

6. The Prince has on a number of occasions expressed doubt as to our determination and ability to hold in Vietnam. He should have no doubt as to either. A somewhat similar and far simpler revolutionary war was won in Malaya after almost 12 years of effort and the issue was in doubt for many years. As long as the Government of Vietnam desires our presence and cooperation, we intend to stay.

7. We are sorry that the Prince continues to hold us directly responsible for events which flow essentially from operations directed against the Viet Cong. All available technical means are being used to prevent incursions but in the heat of battle regrettable mistakes have been made. We would hope that Cambodiaʼs completely understandable desire to prevent the continuation of frontier incidents would not lead the Cambodian Government into undertaking the kind of acts which would force the Government of Vietnam into a position where it has no recourse but sharp retaliation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Hirschfeld. Trueheart added a covering memorandum noting that these points had been approved by Kidder and passing on a request from CIA that they receive a copy.

2  Randolph A. Kidder was appointed Ambassador to Cambodia on July 9 and proceeded to Phnom Penh. Prince Sihanouk refused to accept his credentials, and Kidder left the Cambodian capital on September 18.

3  UN doc. S/5894, July 28, 1964. For the U.S. denial at the United Nations, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 863–864.

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 1

Washington, July 30, 1964, 1:33 p.m.

299. Ref: USUN 235, info Saigon and Phnom Penh 21.2 SC Mission Report. We have developed following tentative strategy re SC Mission Report on Cambodian-South Viet-Nam border question on which appreciate receiving addressees prompt comments.

Despite Correiaʼs efforts, Report is unbalanced in favor of Cambodia. Its failure to mention explicitly Viet-Cong use of Cambodian territory, its endorsement that Observer Group should be limited to Cambodian territory, and its tendency toward rigid definition of how Observer Group should function (in effect endorsing some of Sihanoukʼs conditions), present difficulties, though not necessarily insurmountable. Moreover, Report goes out of its way in patting Cambodians on back for proposal which it characterizes as a real contribution, sliding over fact that Sihanouk has injected some obviously unacceptable pre-conditions. Finally, Mission displayed poor judgment and poor taste by including gratuitous, if not insulting, Cambodian remark that cost of Observer Group should be borne by the “rich countries which say that they are anxious that Cambodia should not be used as a base for the Viet-Cong.”

On the other hand, US and SVN have made it clear in SC meetings establishing Mission desire to have effective UN presence to deal with border problem. There are a number of constructive elements in Report which may make it possible to achieve a desirable result from any SC consideration. Mission has suggested parties get together to discuss re-establishment of relations and matters in dispute, including delimitation and marking of common frontier. It has recommended establishment of UN Observer Group in Cambodia. If we concentrate on the five principal recommendations in Report3 (USUN 235) they might offer us sufficient flexibility to explore whether progress can be made.

Our choice is to push for an acceptable UN Observer Group or otherwise place onus on Sihanouk for failure to find practical way to implement UN recommendations. Our judgment is that best possible result of negotiations in UN would be Observer Group along lines described para 8 of USUN 2164 repeated Saigon 16 and Phnom Penh 16: An Observer Group of about 100 or 150 personnel, stationed on Cambodian side, dispersed among several posts along sensitive border areas, highly mobile, with freedom to travel on its own initiative to any point of its own choosing on Cambodian side of border, and with own means for rapid communication with GVN and RKG authorities. (GVN could, for example, appoint liaison officer who might be in contact with UN Observer Group.)

Before making final determination our attitude such an Observer Group and our strategy, we wish Saigonʼs and Phnom Penhʼs assessment urgently its military and political relevance to US objectives in SVN and SEA generally. This is key question in influencing our strategy, since if such a Group is considered useful, it will put us in good position to try achieve this result—or if we fail do this, our opposition to an Observer Group would be on strong political grounds that RKG conditions so stringent as to make impracticable establishment of a UN presence.

Our tactics in New York would be: a. To ascertain whether SYG would be willing initiate informal consultations to work out agreed detailed arrangements for UN involvement on border with interested parties before any formal SC consideration; and

b. If SYG unwilling do so, we or possibly SC President could undertake such consultations within context of normal behind-the-scenes discussions among SC members and principal parties concerned. Both Narasimhanʼs visit to area and SYGʼs meeting here in Washington (August 6) will give us opportunity to determine clearly whether SYG is willing to play kind of pre-Council role we envisage.

Above consistent with recommendations contained in USUN 246, received this morning.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Kimball and Sisco, cleared by Green, Cleveland, and Forrestal, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to USUN and Phnon Penh and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 235 from USUN, July 27, contained a summary of the Security Council Mission Report, made public as UN doc S/5832, July 28. (Ibid.) The conclusions and recommendations of the report are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 860–863.

3 These were: 1. the Security Council should send an Observer Group to Cambodia; 2. the Secretary General should recommend to Cambodia and South Vietnam whatever measures necessary to bring out resumption of political relations; 3. that a high-level person be appointed by the Security Council to bring about the reconciliation; 4. the Security Council should note South Vietnamʼs assurances against further frontier violation; and 5. the Security Council should note South Vietnamʼs statement of its respect for Cambodiaʼs neutrality and territorial integrity.

4 Dated July 24. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S/UN)

5 In USUN telegram 246, July 29, the Mission recommended that the United States refrain from reacting negatively to the report; encourage private discussions among the interested parties before agreeing on the Observer Group details; work with the Secretary General or Security Council President to formulate proposals for the Observer Group; and see whether Sihanouk would either accept or reject an effective Observer Group. (Ibid.)

144. Memorandum of Conversation 144. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, August 12, 1964.

SUBJECT

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Correspondence with Prince Sihanouk

PARTICIPANTS

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

[name deleted]

[name deleted]

Charlotte W. Peters, Cambodian Desk Officer

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] opened the discussion with a brief background on the project, adding that [1 line of source text not declassified] has been well received by the Prince. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] further stated that in the current situation an optional channel of communication with the Prince appears to be more and more useful; [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] activities will be under the control and direction of the Department of State.

The discussion focused on the proposed letter from [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to Prince Sihanouk.2 [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said they would especially like [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to be able to say that he had talked to Mr. Bundy. Mr. Bundy mentioned the memorandum from Mr. Trueheart dated July 30, 1964,3 stating that he would like the points in it incorporated in the letter; he cautioned that the tone should not sound like a démarche. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] repeated Sihanoukʼs comment to him that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is the only American who understands the Prince.

Mr. Bundy asked [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] opinion on Sihanoukʼs view of Communist China. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] replied that Sihanouk looks upon Peiping as his friend, the only one he can really count on. Since he feels he cannot get border guarantees from South Vietnam, he will get them from Peiping at whatever price he has to pay, in spite of Peipingʼs failure to be forthcoming in the past. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] mentioned the report that while in Djakarta August 17 Sihanouk may sign a treaty with North Vietnam, the Pathet Lao and the Chinese to guarantee Cambodian borders. He commented that although the Chinese have backed off before, Sihanouk continues to press for the treaty. Mr. Bundy added that at this point the State Department has little power of suasion with the Indonesians.

At the close of the discussion [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] stated that they will begin drafting the letter to Sihanouk. The question was raised as to whether or not the letter should be drafted in the anticipation that it may be made public. Although Sihanouk has not published any previous correspondence with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] this will be the first time [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] will say that he has been in contact with the State Department. With this in mind the letter should be consistent with our public statements.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Peters and seen by Bundy.

2 Not found.

3  Document 142.

145. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk 145. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Possible Security Council Meeting on Cambodia-Viet-Nam

At the moment, although the GVN Observer in New York appears anxious for a Security Council meeting, we have no indication yet that the GVN Foreign Ministry desires such a meeting on the Cambodia-Viet-Nam border problem. In examining the advantages and disadvantages of requesting a meeting to consider the recommendations made by the SC Mission to Cambodia and Viet-Nam, we have concluded that it would not be advisable to take or encourage any initiative for formal Council consideration at this time.

We expect both the Soviets and the French to work against any constructive implementation of the Missionʼs proposals for an Observer Group or a border demarcation unit. There are indications that Morocco and the Ivory Coast would be reluctant to support the recommendations in the face of the French attitude and the clear Cambodian rejection of the recommendations.2 A lukewarm or negative attitude on the part of Morocco and the Ivory Coast would be particularly damaging, of course, since they were two of the three nations represented on the Mission which formulated the recommendations.

Nevertheless, while it is tempting to again seek the establishment of UN machinery along the Cambodia-South Viet-Nam border and to box Sihanoukʼs ears, I believe the advantages would be outweighed by the following disadvantages: 1. Explicit failure to agree on the Missionʼs recommendations might reinforce the view that the United Nations cannot play a useful role in Southeast Asia in the absence of a general political settlement.

2. A meeting now would give the Soviets, the Czechs, Cambodia, and the French a further opportunity to demand a reconvening of the Geneva Conference.

3. A meeting would give the Soviet Union another occasion to air its position about U.S. actions in the Tonkin Gulf. We consider such a move manageable from our point of view; nevertheless, as you know we thought it best to quit in the Council while we were ahead on this subject.

4. We have been inching the Indians along toward a more constructive effort in Southeast Asia. There are signs of a possible constructive initiative in the future by the Indians to replace the ICC in Laos with UN inspection machinery. A propaganda exchange in the Security Council at this time could slow down or complicate this process.

For the above reasons, we believe it best not to have a Council meeting on Cambodia-Viet-Nam now. We do, however, see merit in a GVN letter to the Security Council President for the obvious propaganda purposes and shall urge the Vietnamese to proceed in this sense.

USUN shares these views. Embassy Saigon states that it sees no advantage in convoking a new Security Council meeting on the RKG charges.

Recommendation:

That the United States neither take nor encourage any initiative to reconvene the Security Council on the Cambodia-Viet-Nam border question.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Kimball and cleared by Green and Corcoran.

2  Sihanouk and the National Assembly of Cambodia jointly and formally rejected the findings of the report of the Security Council Mission on August 30. For the rejection as transmitted to the Security Council, September 9, see UN doc S/5952. Therefore, although a meeting would not result in constructive action on the Missionʼs proposals, the debate would offer opportunity to contrast in dramatic fashion the GVNʼs willingness to cooperate with the UN and the RKGʼs intransigence on the matter. It would thus bolster the GVNʼs morale and make its case better understood in the world. We could also bring out in the debate the incongruity of the Cambodian position in bringing their complaints to the attention of the Security Council and then refusing to permit the establishment of any impartial international body either to investigate the charges or to protect them against the alleged attacks and incursions. We would also hope, thereby, to stem the still incessant flow of Cambodian complaints of border violations or at least reduce the complaint to a subject of ridicule in the eyes of most UN members. With respect to the “toxic powders” accusations, the Council might obtain for us an impartial investigation and/or the reduction in credibility of the RKG statements.

3  Rusk initialed his approval.

146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 146. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 1

Washington, November 15, 1964, 1:42 p.m.

2817. Subject: US-Cambodian Relations. Following is based on uncleared memcon, Noforn, subject to review and FYI.

Calling at his request November 13, Ambassador Alphand informed Secretary GOF had done its best in intervening with RKG to eschew rash and unwarranted action in relations with US over recent frontier troubles.2 He felt “at least worst had been avoided and door not closed”.

Secretary thanked Ambassador for helpful French efforts and said troublesome feature in US-Cambodian relations seems to stem from loss of contact with Sihanouk who refused receive our Ambassador or Charge. Secretary wondered if such genuine misunderstandings as exist between two countries might perhaps be dispelled by discreet, unpublicized meeting between specially designated US and Cambodian representatives in some appropriate capital. Commenting that on whole Sihanouk has done constructive job within Cambodia, Secretary thought it would be unfortunate if he came to grief as result misguided action against Vietnam under influence of ChiCom poison and ancient national rivalries. U.S. at such meeting could, for instance, help assure Cambodia its real or pretended fears about Vietnam or Thailand aggression are groundless in absence of provocative or unneutral acts. In view French expertise on Cambodian matters, we would appreciate benefit of Quaiʼs views whether quiet US-Cambodian talks might be useful.

Ambassador stated he glad obtain Quai reaction without, however, approach to Cambodians, and inform Secretary of results. He agreed meeting to be effective would have to be confidential, which posed problem given Sihanoukʼs impetuous, mercurial nature. He felt Sihanouk, however, not entirely disingenuous, did not wish become Communist or satellite and while he still favored 14 Power Conference, it was to settle Cambodian problems and not as preliminary to some Communist inspired conference.

Secretary thanked Ambassador for offer sound out Paris on matter.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 CAMB–US. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by David H. McKillip, Director of Western European Affairs, cleared by Trueheart, and approved by Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs William R. Tyler. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and Vientiane.

2 Those incidents included Cambodiaʼs shooting down of one of three U.S. C–123 aircraft that strayed into Cambodian territory on October 24. Eight U.S. crewmen died in the crash. A second incident was the accidental bombing of the Cambodian village of Anlong Kres by the South Vietnamese Air Force on October 20. The third major incident occurred on October 22 when a fire fight erupted between a Vietnamese unit with two U.S. advisers and the Viet Cong across the Cambodian border near the village of Banteay Chakrey. Three Vietnamese soldiers and one U.S. adviser were killed. (Circular telegram 839, November 5; ibid., POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 147. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, November 15, 1964, 2:57 p.m.

265. In view developments reported your 314,2 we consider that it may be useful to make complete record US willingness to try work out problems between USG and RKG. As Deptel 264 reports, we have already expressed to French our willingness consider meeting at some neutral point between USG and RKG representatives to find improved basis for normal diplomatic relations. French may or may not pass this on (which we did not specifically ask them to do), but we consider that urging French to do so at this late stage would be both difficult and uncertain whether message would get though in proper tone. Although such message might conceivably give Sihanouk handle to postpone break, we consider this unlikely and are thinking largely in terms of full record.

Accordingly, you are authorized convey to appropriate RKG official that USG hopes RKG can take time to consider implications any break diplomatic relations and that one possibility that might assist the problem would be to designate representatives to meet at a neutral point to discuss our differences.

If circumstances such that any such approach prior to Assembly meeting would have dramatic flavor (e.g., public setting), you should seek occasion later in day—assuming that no break announcement has come—to convey message.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret; Flash. Drafted and approved by Bundy and cleared by Rusk.

2 In telegram 314 from Phnom Penh, November 15, the Embassy suggested that judging from the tone of Sihanoukʼs speeches and his actions, “we are closer to break [in diplomatic relations] than ever before.” (Ibid.)

3 The Cambodian Government accepted “with alacrity” the idea of a meeting of representatives at a neutral site. It proposed as its representative Son Sann, private counselor to Sihanouk, and suggested New Delhi as the site. (Telegram 1093 to Saigon, November 16; ibid., POL CAMB–US) The Department of State agreed and designated Ambassador Phillip W. Bonsal to conduct these talks as Special Representative of the President. (Telegram 284 to Phnom Penh, November 24; ibid.) Printed from an unsigned copy.

148. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 148. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, December 3, 1964, 8:27 p.m.

1081. We conceive of the forthcoming talks at New Delhi between Cambodian and US representatives as affording opportunity for broad exchanges of views on whole range of relations between two countries. We have avoided setting formal agenda both in order allow maximum flexibility and to deny to Cambodians pretext for preconference statement of position which might reduce usefulness these talks. (Sihanouk, however, has attempted set preconference conditions on his own initiative in recent public statements, as anticipated.)

In general we view conference as providing opportunity for discussions following items: A. Invitation to resumption more normal RKG/US relations, including assignment RKG representative to Washington and lifting of restriction on social contact by Cambodians with US personnel in Cambodia.

B. Renewed statement US determination prevent communist take-over SVN with view convincing RKG its anticipation imminent or eventual Viet Cong victory unjustified.

C. Renewed assurances to Cambodians that we do not support Cambodian dissidents and that we have not sought and do not seek overthrow of present Cambodian government

D. Make clear to RKG that formal recognition by it of DRV or NLFSVN would inject grave new element into situation and cause us re-examine whole status US/RKG relations while making it more difficult continue exercise restraining influence on GVN.

E. Exploration possibility resumption GVN/RKG talks broken off last March by Chantrea incident; we are prepared offer good offices this connection while avoiding becoming involved substantively.

We assume that RKG delegation will raise points which Sihanouk has put on record in recent speeches and press conference and which were outlined in RKG note (Phnom Penhʼs 350).2 Since USG proposed conference, we anticipate RKG tactic may be wait for our initiatives and use these points in countering.

Recognizing that our inability offer very much in way concrete proposals in line expressed RKG desires severely limits results we can except from New Delhi talks, following is list of objectives we might attempt to achieve.

1. Resumption normal diplomatic relations with RKG involving staffed missions in both capitals as well as normal contact between US Embassy personnel Phnom Penh and Cambodian public.

2. Resumption, possibly though our good offices, of bilateral RKG/GVN talks with view resolving as first step questions indemnification for damage caused by GVN incursions for which GVN has offered compensation, marking agreed frontier, and arranging for appropriate RKG/GVN collaboration to prevent VC use of border area.

3. Avoiding RKG recognition of DRV or NLFSVN.

4. RKG willingness to discuss indemnification for damage to US property resulting form March 11 demonstrations.

5. RKG willingness allow our Embassy continue in Phnom Penh (assuming point one could not be achieved) i.e., RKG would not carry out threat to break relations completely.

6. Emergence from Delhi conference with acceptable public position and placing of blame on RKG for current and future deterioration US/RKG relations.

Points 5 and 6 may prove to be mutually exclusive, inasmuch as our attempt, as minimum result of conference, to achieve world understanding and approval our position may require us make public statements which could provoke Sihanouk into ejecting Embassy forthwith. (We would, of course, make further effort at talks to get Cambodian agreement to regard talks as confidential, but are not hopeful they will agree.)

In any discussion with friendly powers of US views on New Delhi talks, extreme care should be taken avoid any possibility of leaks (especially in regard to point D above) which might reach RKG and cause immediate public reaction prejudicing success of talks.

Harriman

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Spivack and Hirschfeld, cleared by Bundy, Trueheart, Corcoran, and Bonsal, and in draft with Eric L. Fox of L/FE, and approved by Harriman. Sent to Bangkok, London, New Delhi, Paris, Phnom Penh, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 November 23. (Ibid.)

149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 149. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Cambodia 1

Washington, December 17, 1964, 7:38 p.m.

318. Taking account of outcome of Delhi talks and array of evidence RKG anti-American attitude (Embtel 398)2 we reluctantly conclude that there is no reasonable prospect of resumption normal operation of US mission in Phnom Penh for foreseeable future. It is likewise clear, we believe, that essential US requirements in Cambodia can be met by more modest staff, and that US mission of present size is positive irritant in RKG/US relations. It has therefore been decided that mission be reduced drastically with object of retaining only sufficient staff to carry out essential functions and to provide a cadre around which mission could be rebuilt when conditions permit. Insofar as is consistent with this, we wish to make US presence in Phnom Penh as inconspicuous as possible and to eliminate all but essential reporting and operations. In considering what follows, you should have in mind our willingness to accept a very markedly reduced level of reporting and related activity by all elements of mission.

We conclude, subject your views, that following staff would meet this requirement: Bergesen, Perry, Pinckney, Arnold, Sherry, Birrer, Thomas, Wolfe, Ochs, Lewinsohn, plus two C and R personnel and personnel operate receiving/transmitting equipment. This staffing is predicated on use of off-line communications, transfer of Marine Guards, and transfer to Bangkok of responsibility for budget and fiscal servicing.

As to timing, we would like to see staff reduced as above within 60 days, but would be prepared to have you retain administrative personnel beyond that date if they are required in connection with shipment of household effects, consolidation of US property in chancery building, etc.

We do not plan to inform the RKG officially of this reduction but we would wish you to make our intentions clear in informal conversation with diplomatic corps and RKG officials. Object would be to make sure that action is not thought to be beginning of complete close-down of mission, with possibility that this might prompt some unpredictable reaction by RKG.

Request your comments soonest.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by Marshall P. Jones, Director of FE/EX, and approved by Green. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 398, December 15, the Embassy described what it called a “flood tide of anti-Americanism which more and more has become principal element RKG foreign policy.” (Ibid.) For an account of the talks in New Delhi, see Document 150.

150. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 150. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

United States Relations with Cambodia

Here is where U.S. relations with Cambodia now stand in the wake of the New Delhi talks.

1. The Basic Problem:

Sihanouk deeply fears Cambodiaʼs traditional enemies, the Vietnamese and the Thais; his fears of South Vietnam are compounded by recurrent border violations that result from the war. Sihanouk also believes that the U.S. will fail in South Vietnam; and regardless of the outcome in Vietnam, he believes that good relations with Communist China are the key to Cambodiaʼs survival as an independent state.

Improved U.S. relations with Cambodia are therefore tightly tied to the struggle in South Vietnam: if the U.S./GVN position improves—and if the Vietnamese are forthcoming on border problems and certain other bilateral issues—Sihanouk will probably decide that friendly relations with the U.S. would make sense for Cambodia. The best we can expect from him, however, is a somewhat more neutral left-leaning “neutralism”.

2. U.S. Attempts at Conciliation:

Our relations with Cambodia began to deteriorate severely in the autumn of 1963 as the Vietnam situation entered a period of deterioration. Sihanouk suspected U.S. backing for his Cambodian political opponents in Thailand and Vietnam, the “Khmer Serei”; he was convinced that the CIA planned the assassination of Diem and Nhu; and he assumed that a large U.S. presence in Cambodia might lead to his downfall through CIA plots. In November–December the Cambodians requested an end to all U.S. aid, called for a Geneva conference on Cambodian neutrality, and closed their Embassy in Washington.

While resisting Cambodiaʼs periodic calls for such a conference—mainly because of our desire to avoid a Geneva conference on Vietnam—we have taken several steps toward conciliation with the Cambodians since January 1964.

—We encouraged Philippine efforts to mediate our dispute, but these efforts failed.

—We offered to send Dean Acheson as a confidential emissary to Sihanouk, but the offer was publicly spurned.

—We made proposals for four-power talks in response to Sihanoukʼs initiative, but our proposals were rejected.

—We supported the UN Security Council Commissionʼs recommendations for the establishment of UN civilian observers in Cambodia, but Sihanouk denounced these recommendations.

—We supported a sympathetic new Ambassador (Randolph Kidder) to re-open the dialogue, but Sihanouk refused to receive him.

Most recently, in November, we proposed that representatives of both countries meet in a neutral nation to discuss our differences. To our surprise, the Cambodians accepted at once, and the New Delhi conversations were held in December.

3. The New Delhi Talks:

Our negotiators—Ambassadors Bonsal and Koren—met with the Cambodian representatives on December 8th; although the atmosphere was relatively friendly, the talks were adjourned inconclusively on December 17th.2 (Sihanouk had simultaneously authorized negotiations in Peking which were equally inconclusive; these talks will be resumed in January.)

The key to the failure of the Delhi talks was the Vietnam situation: the Cambodians concentrated on their grievances against South Vietnam; we replied that we could not speak for the GVN—with whom the Cambodians refuse to talk.

Four major Cambodian demands dominated the talks, each involving aspects of the Vietnam war and, inevitably, Cambodia-GVN relations: 1) that the U.S. accept responsibility for all the incidents on the Vietnam border; 2) that the U.S. provide substantial compensation for these incidents (Cambodia suggested a “face-saving” device by which the U.S. would provide a “gift” of 100 heavy tractors and bull-dozers in lieu of such compensation); 3) that the International Control Commission be expanded, at U.S. expense, to control the entire length of Cambodiaʼs borders; and 4) that the U.S. Government publicly absolve Cambodia of all responsibility for aiding or harboring the Viet Cong, and that we pledge to refrain from any further public or private (i.e., newspaper) accusations along these lines.

4. Where To Go From Here:

The chief obstacle to improved U.S.-Cambodia relations remains the bad condition of Cambodiaʼs relations with South Vietnam. Here the major and most difficult problem is the frontier. But there are a number of lesser issues which could be resolved with relative ease.

Ambassador Bonsal believes that the door remains open to further talks with the Cambodians, although further border incidents could close that door. But such talks will be useless unless we can press the GVN to be forthcoming on Cambodiaʼs lesser grievances.

State is now working along the following lines: a) As soon as the immediate political crisis in Saigon is resolved, we will strongly urge the GVN to take action on the lesser grievances. This should include renunciation by the GVN of Diemʼs groundless claim to two useless offshore islands; a proposal to exchange prisoners; and an offer of compensation for damages to certain Cambodian villages on the South Vietnam border. We will also urge that the GVN publicly accept certain mutually satisfactory maps as the correct designation of frontiers (there is no dispute about the maps, only about where the markers should actually be located on the ground).3

b) Once the GVN has indicated its good faith by taking these initiatives, we should approach the Cambodians for further bilateral talks in Phnom Penh on the frontier problem. If the atmosphere had improved, the GVN might participate in such talks.

c) On the specifics of frontier control, we might re-examine Cambodiaʼs proposal for an expanded ICC but stress that the costs must be shared by all the Geneva powers, including Communist China. (Although we should expect renewed demands for re-convening the Geneva conference as a result of this proposal, our legal experts are convinced that the ICC could be expanded on the frontiers without resort to a conference.) We might also offer Army Mapping Service assistance in the clear demarcation of the border under the terms of an aerial mapping agreement that we negotiated with the Cambodians in the mid-1950ʼs.

d) We should consider new efforts to persuade the Thai and Vietnamese Governments to cease their support of the dissident Khmer Serei exiles whose clandestine broadcasts enrage Sihanouk.

e) Meanwhile, we are continuing to stress to our military in Saigon the urgent need to take special precautions to avoid further incidents on Cambodian side of the border.

We are now pressing State to develop on an urgent basis the specifics of such a general approach to the Cambodian problem. We shall keep you informed of Stateʼs progress.4

JC Thomson Jr.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos 8/64–6/65. Secret.

2 Bonsal and Korenʼs memorandum to Harriman, January 4, 1965, reporting on their talks is in Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US.

3 Bundy wrote the following note next to this paragraph: “Chet [Cooper] & Jim [Thompson]: this.”

4 Bundy wrote the following note next to this paragraph: “OK, Iʼd like.”

151. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 151. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 6, 1965.

SUBJECT

Sihanoukʼs letter-to-the-editor2

1. If you did not see this, it may be interesting as a demonstration of the problem of dealing with Sihanouk.

2. We are continuing to press the State Department on this subject, but my own inquiries so far indicate that we have been as reasonable as possible, in the circumstances. The one thing we can do better is border control, but that requires cooperation from Vietnamese generals, who are only too well aware that Cambodia is a “privileged sanctuary” for the Viet Cong.

There remains the problem of the public explanation of this matter, and there it is clear that Ambassador Bonsal was outdone by the Cambodians. On the other hand, the attached letter suggests that a slanging match with Sihanouk is not something we want.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/64–6/65. No classification marking. The source text indicates that the President saw it.

2 In the Herald Tribune, copy attached, but not printed, Sihanouk claimed that Cambodiaʼs stability and neutrality was in spite of U.S., Thai, and South Vietnamese attempts to subvert it. He took the Herald Tribune to task claiming he was obstructing peace efforts in South Vietnam, blaming instead the United States and Great Britain.

152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 152. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 1

Washington, January 27, 1965, 7:10 p.m.

1513. Embtel 1980.2 Appreciate your detailed account January 14 conversation with Nong Kimny. Points he raised were of considerable interest, particularly Sihanoukʼs reported hope continue US/Cambodian dialogue and desire seek accords with Thailand and SVN.

At same time, juxtaposed to Nong Kimnyʼs forthcoming presentation, is continuing negative and difficult atmosphere created by Sihanouk, as you pointed out to Nong Kimny. Atmosphere made particularly difficult currently by preparations underway for “Indochinese Peoplesʼ Conference” which as presently contemplated will bring together in Phnom Penh assorted communist, pro-communist and other elements united in determination to destroy GVN and frustrate US (and Thai) objectives in SEA. Unreasonable to suppose that in such atmosphere RTG and GVN could credit RKG with sincerity in desiring rapprochement or that we could influence them to approach Cambodians in conciliatory spirit.

Nevertheless we would not wish have you break off dialogue with Nong Kimny. At this stage we primarily interested in testing this channel of communication to see whether any results produced in Phnom Penh. Therefore believe you should follow up Nong Kimnyʼs initiative by expression to him, at next suitable occasion, our interest in professed Cambodian desire to reach accord with RTG and GVN. You should indicate that, as Ambassador Bonsal made clear in December talks, USG stands prepared lend its assistance in bringing RKG and neighbors into negotiations, although obviously we cannot speak on behalf of the latter as to substance. You should reiterate, however, without seeming to be laying preconditions, that major problem in our efforts to bring parties together is negative atmosphere created in Phnom Penh especially by preparations for Indochinese Peoplesʼ Conference which can only make rapprochement more difficult.

Believe at this point your talk with Nong Kimny should continue to be general and exploratory in nature, expressing our attitude that resolution of bilateral questions between these neighbors is crux of problem and is first priority business, and seeking to draw Nong Kimny out on what his government, especially Prince Sihanouk, has in mind re reaching accord with its neighbors. We would want to be assured in our own minds, before approaching Thais or Vietnamese, that Sihanouk genuinely interested in rapprochement. We are of course far from this stage now and Nong Kimnyʼs words will have to be backed up by concrete manifestations from Sihanouk before we will be prepared undertake politically delicate approaches to RTG and GVN. If he really sincere, it should not be too difficult for RKG to create atmosphere which would be conducive to initiation bilateral negotiations.

During exploratory phase your talks with Nong Kimny, you should avoid as much as possible being drawn into discussion substantive issues, particularly those involving Thailand and South Vietnam, and for this reason we not now suggesting any specific response or rebuttal to points raised by Nong Kimny January 14—although his version of issues obviously highly partisan and should be received with utmost reserve.

Also suggest you tell Nong Kimny that, though we welcome any opportunity to exchange views in Delhi, we would not wish this to be regarded as substitute for normal diplomatic channels. You may recall that RKG itself has elected block direct communications by withdrawing Embassy from Washington, declining receive U.S. Ambassador Phnom Penh and imposing arbitrary restrictions on contacts with our Embassy staff Phnom Penh.

In your talks with Nong presume you will bear in mind Sihanoukʼs propensity for ex parte public revelation in Cambodia of even most “confidential” of his diplomatic exchanges as illustrated by his January 24 speech (Phnom Penhʼs 59 to New Delhi)3 in which he discussed his version of portion your January 14 conversation with Nong Kimny. It would probably be inadvisable to mention Princeʼs speech but you may remind Nong Kimny it was Cambodian side that proposed your conversations be confidential and your willingness continue and to speak frankly will depend upon confidential character being respected in Cambodia as well as U.S.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential. Drafted by Dexter and Salans, cleared with Trueheart, in draft with Corcoran and Bonsal, in substance with Albert A. Lakeland, Jr. of SOA, and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and Saigon.

2 In telegram 1980 from New Delhi, January 14, Ambassador Bowles reported that he had spent an hour in “frank discussion” with Nong Kimny, Cambodian Ambassador to India, about U.S.-Cambodian relations in which Nong Kimny did 90 percent of the talking. Nong Kimny expressed the hope that he and Bowles could continue a U.S.-Cambodian dialogue on a confidential basis. (Ibid.)

3 Dated January 24. (Ibid., POL 15–1 CAMB)

153. Memorandum of Conversation 153. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 15, 1965, 2:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

US Secretary of State Rusk

Assistant Secretary Tyler

UK Prime Minister Harold Wilson

Minister of State George Thomson

Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean

Minister of Embassy Michael Stewart

Secretary of Cabinet Sir Burke Trend

Private Secy to the PM Oliver Wright

The Secretary told the Prime Minister that we wanted to move forward. We must avoid having a conference which would fall on its face, and getting Sihanouk mad. He thought that Gordon Walker might explore what would satisfy Sihanouk. If Sihanouk was thinking of endorsement of the French treaties then this would upset Thailand and South Vietnam. Another possibility was that the co-chairmen might invite members of the 1954 Geneva conference for discussions at high official level.

The Prime Minister commented that this would be “a kind of pre-conference conference.” The Secretary said he thought we faced serious difficulties in a Cambodian conference. We must avoid allowing things to blow up over strictly Cambodian problems. He said a third possibility might be a straight acceptance of the Russian invitation.

The Prime Minister speculated that it might be possible to combine something by pulling various elements together. The Secretary said we wanted to avoid saying no to the Russian invitation. The Prime Minister said that we did not know if the Russians are moving in cahoots with Peiping and Hanoi, or by themselves. The Secretary said the thought that a door to a possible conference on the Vietnamese question would be easier through Cambodia than through Laos or Vietnam itself. He wanted to assure the Prime Minister that we were trying to do our best not to say no to the Russian invitation. We would be in touch with the Prime Minister through the British Ambassador in Washington within 24 hours.

The Prime Minister said he wanted to keep the door open. He thought that maybe a top level ambassadorial group in Geneva could be convened. The Secretary said that if the going in South Vietnam were to get rougher in the next few weeks, there might be an advantage in having a conference already in being. He said we had the impression that the Russians were not too happy about extending an invitation. The Prime Minister said that HMG was worried about this too. He felt that we really must move and not lose the present opportunity. He wondered whether HMG could try to do anything useful through the two co-chairmen. The Secretary said that we would be interested in the replies to the appeal of the 17 nations and attached importance to this. We would, so to speak, paste the replies up on the wall and put red circles around the elements which might be useful to us. The Secretary also mentioned the expected reply from Souphanouvong,2 which might constitute a possible third channel.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Tyler and approved in S on April 27. The meeting took place at the White House.

2 Prince Souphanouvong, Deputy Prime Minister of Laos and leader of the Pathet Lao.

154. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 154. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, April 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Handling of Cambodian Conference Proposal

I had roughly a half-hour with Ambassador Taylor on this subject in Honolulu. He read carefully your Nodis message of Monday2 and we in effect went on from there. During the earlier discussions on other issues, he had indicated that his initial reaction had been that he did not see the point of getting into a conference in any way, shape, or form, but I think his view was substantially altered by the reading of the cable and by our discussion.

The only point I made to him that is not in the cable is that a Cambodian conference could be a very long drawn-out process and give us a continuing safety valve against the interventions of U Thant, Pearson, Shastri, etc. We would be able at all times to point to the existence of the conference and the proximity of US and DRV representatives, to argue that we were leaving no stone unturned in channels of communication.

I have also seen the cable from Saigon3 suggesting that Gordon Walker see Quat before we attempt to sit down with him and go over the whole range of issues involved. Ambassador Taylor confirmed that he and Alex have been trying for some time to have a quiet talk with Quat on the general subject of the political track, and that Quat has been putting this off. No doubt the Gordon Walker visit will be a strong factor in getting Quat to talk on the whole set of issues, including the question of taking a position now on eventual free elections.

We left it that the best course of action would probably be to tell the British that Gordon Walkerʼs instructions for Bangkok should stand the same for his conversations in Saigon. However, we should be prepared to follow up and to indicate to Quat the following US position with respect to a Cambodian conference: a. The US is not enthusiastic about such a conference in itself, but cannot well be negative when the Communist side has agreed and we have taken the position of favoring “unconditional discussions” on Vietnam.

b. In terms of world and US criticism making the continuation of pressures against the North more difficult over time, the existence of a Cambodian conference forum would have great defensive value as a safety valve.

c. In any discussions on Cambodia either in the conference or connected with it, the US would take the following positions: 1. We would insist that SVN interests be safeguarded and that any agreement be subject to agreement on the borders reached directly between the RKG and GVN.

2. We would oppose any “guarantee”, since our own Constitutional problems alone make this impossible.

3. We would oppose any expansion of the ICC role to police whatever assurances are included in a general agreement.

4. We would cooperate fully in defending border violations by GVN forces as being due entirely to the VC, as we had done last spring in the UN.

5. We would do everything possible to exclude and brand as irrelevant any Cambodian accusations against SVN based on Khmer Serei or any other allegations

d. In keeping with our position on “unconditional discussions” we would be available to all parties on this subject outside the conference forum, as indeed we are now through diplomatic channels. However, we would stick rigidly to the position that “unconditional” meant no conditions on either side. If the question were to come up what we would accept in return for cessation of bombing of the DRV, we would be in close touch with Quat before making any response in any case, and our present tentative thinking is along the lines of the tough position stated in the Nodis cable.

If this line of action commends itself to you, I think we should draft a cable along these lines to Saigon today to confirm.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Secret;Exdis.

2 Apparent reference to telegram 2363 to Saigon, April 18, in which Rusk asked Taylor to raise with Quat the question of a Cambodian conference as a possible means of initiating a settlement between North and South Vietnam. (Ibid., POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

3 Telegram 3459 from Saigon, April 20. (Ibid.)

4 Circular telegram 2025, April 22, (sent to Saigon as well as 10 other posts). (Ibid., POL 8 CAMB)

155. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 155. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 30, 1965, 7:31 p.m.

[Here follows a brief discussion unrelated to Cambodia.]

McGB: Iʼm calling on another matter. Have you got a minute? One of our aircraft has dropped bombs on a Cambodian village. I donʼt know whether youʼve seen the reporting on that? Itʼs been in some of the papers. Well it did do it, 2 or 3 days ago, April 28—2 days—and we now have a full report from Saigon saying that it did. The operational question is whether we admit it to the Cambodians who are now accusing us of it, and the Department is, on the whole, inclined to think there is no real alternative, that the United States Government canʼt very well, that it will come out, and we canʼt get anyone else to take the responsibility; it is very irritating. And we would have to, if we do the normal thing in an international situation, [Bundy is apparently reading from an unidentified telegram:] “we would regret the loss of life, injuries to individuals and damage to property. And extend deepest sympathy to the families affected by losses, and express our preparation to discuss appropriate compensation.” Obviously we are also obviously annoyed because they broke windows in our Embassy on account of Newsweek, but that is not the same thing as loss of life. This is a flat violation of standing target rules. They gave a target that was nearer the border than we normally allow, and then the fellow bombed the wrong village and it was in the wrong country. Apparently the damage according to our Army Attaché in Phnom Penh is one young man killed and four civilians wounded. [Bundy apparently reading and paraphrasing an unidentified telegram:] “And there is a pilot error, an air operations acceptance of the target which violated specific instructions which Westmoreland had promulgated at my direction in the wake of a border operation last October. This violation” etc., describes the violation, “incident resulted from a most regrettable combination, failure of the US officer to follow clear and explicit MACV orders, and secondly pilot error in identifying the target. It has occurred to us that since Cambodia initially and mistakenly identified the aircraft as GVN, we could perhaps ask the GVN to accept responsibility for the incident. However, since it is so widely know that the VN Air Force was not operating in the area, and since General Ky or some of his officers would object to be publicly charged with incidents for which they were not responsible,” he doesnʼt see how we could do that.

Dean Rusk feels it would be terrible to try to off load the responsibility on any other country. We could, of course, pretend it never happened, but there is a real question as to whether, and this is really what Max [Taylor] would prefer to do. [Bundy is apparently reading or paraphrasing an unidentified telegram:] “We see two other possibilities: promptly accept responsibility and offer compensation; second we might say nothing publicly and have the GVN comment that no GVN Air Force aircraft were in the area. The question is whether we can hold this position in Saigon, Phnom Penh, and Washington. General Westmoreland has appointed a board of officers to fix responsibility of individuals directly and indirectly concerned. The board will complete its investigation and submit its recommendations to Westmoreland within the next 48 hours.”

Now you might prefer to wait thereto until that board has reported. But it will report, I suspect, what Max warns us of. The immediate question is whether you are clear enough in your mind to authorize us to seek an appointment in Phnom Penh, or do you prefer to wait?

LBJ: Iʼll wait until the board comes in.

McGB: If I were in your position, that is what I would do. Right, sir.

[Here follows discussion of the Dominican Republic.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts of Telephone Conversations and Meetings, Tape F 65.1, Side A, PNO 1. No classification marking. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

156. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 156. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 3, 1965.

You may have seen in the morning news that the Cambodians have broken diplomatic relations with us. Our people are not surprised. The initial recommendation for a prompt apology on the accidental air attack was based on a hope that it might marginally affect this Cambodian decision, but my own judgment is that relations were about to break anyway. Moreover, it is good that the Cambodians have put the burden equally on Newsweek and on the air attacks.

This Cambodian decision makes a proposed apology irrelevant. We will deal with the air matter by saying that it is still under investigation. We will further say that this break of relations does not affect our position on a Cambodian conference (we have no relations at all with North Vietnam and China, who would also be in such a conference). Finally, we will say that we are still reviewing the question whether we wish to keep a consulate in Phnom Penh, which the Cambodians have apparently suggested.2

More generally, if we get any flak on this air accident, now or later, we will point out in reply that Cambodia has provided a variety of facilities for the Viet Cong over a long period of time and is therefore in a poor position to criticize a single Air Force error, however tragic it is for those who were hit.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. III, Memos, 8/64–6/65. No classification marking. The source text indicates that the President saw it.

2 For text of the response to this effect, see the May 6 letter from Rusk to Cambodian Foreign Minister Koun Wick in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 716–717.

August 1965–June 1966: Concern Over Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Use of Cambodia; Policy Debate; Decision To Try for ReconciliationAugust 1965–June 1966: Concern Over Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Use of Cambodia; Policy Debate; Decision To Try for Reconciliation

157. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 16, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Cooper. Secret.

158. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, September 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

159. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 12, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 5127, Cambodia 000.1—, 1965. Top Secret.

160. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 20, 1965, 8:22 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a telephone conversation between Johnson and McNamara, Tape 6511.06. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume. No classification marking.

161. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 20, 1965, 10:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by McNamara, Wheeler, and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to Rio de Janeiro for Secretary Rusk only.

162. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Goldberg)

Washington, November 21, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Secret.

163. Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, December 1, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret. Drafted in the Office of Current Intelligence, Directorate of Intelligence.

164. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 3, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by George H. Aldrich of L/FE and Ewing.

165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Saigon, December 9, 1965, 1149Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–LAOS. Top Secret. Also sent to JCS and Department of State, which is the source text.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 11, 1965, 2319Z.

Source: Department of Defense, Official Files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 9155.1 (14 Oct. 65) IR 6231 S. 2. Top Secret; Exdis.

167. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Paris

Washington, December 14, 1965, 8:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted and approved by William Bundy. Repeated to Ottawa. Rusk was in Paris for the Ministerial Session of the North Atlantic Council, December 14–16.

168. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson

Washington, December 18, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel, Mansfield Trip to Southeast Asia, November 1965. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

169. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 23, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on December 23.

170. Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, December 28, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence.

171. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Top Secret.

172. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, December 29, 1965, 9:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 THAI. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Saigon as telegram 1831.

173. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Under Secretary of State Ball

Washington, December 30, 1965, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Ball Papers, Cambodia [12/9/63–6/26/68]. No classification marking.

174. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 4, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Conlon and approved in S on January 5.

175. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 5, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. V, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret.

176. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Ball to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 17, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Ewing and John M. Kane of SEA on January 12.

177. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of State McNamara

Washington, March 3, 1966.

Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155.1 (14 Oct 65). Top Secret.

178. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson

Washington, March 11, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Robert Komer, Vol. XXI, 3/2–30/66. Confidential.

179. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson

Washington, March 12, 1966, 4 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Robert Komer, Vol. XXI, 3/2–30/66. No classification marking.

180. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, April 2, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret. Rostow sent this memorandum to Johnson on April 11 recommending that “we get Ruskʼs personal judgment on the matter” and noting that if the United States had to engage in cross-border operations into Cambodia, “our record would be better.” Johnson wrote the following note on Rostowʼs memorandum: “see me about this.”

181. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 18, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–VIET N. Confidential. Drafted by John M. Kane of FE/SEA and Meyer Feldman of L/FE. A note on the source text indicates that Bundy saw it.

182. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Komer) to President Johnson

Washington, May 28, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert Komer, Memos to the President, March–June 66. Secret.

183. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, June 21, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Read sent a memorandum to Rusk, Ball, and U. Alexis Johnson, June 22, informing them that he had asked the Policy Planning Staff to coordinate a response to Thompsonʼs memorandum by June 28. Readʼs memorandum is attached, but not printed.

184. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, June 25, 1966, 4:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. LV, Memos A, 6/66. Secret.

185. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson

Washington, June 29, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson and Berger.

157. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 157. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 16, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Week in Asia

[Here follows information on Vietnam, Burma, and Japan.]

Cambodia

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has accidentally uncovered anti-Sihanouk Khmer Serei leader Son Ngoc Thanh somewhere in Saigon, now wants to establish a dialogue. State is properly skittish as this guy has the political future of Harold Stassen but drives Sihanouk crazy. We are permitting one or two more “contacts” with him—but we may be risking a further Cambodia blow-up (our relations with Sihanouk are currently euphoric relative to the recent past).

[Here follows information on Taiwan and Singapore.]

T 2 RC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Cooper. Secret.

2 Initialed by Thomson, Donald Ropa, and Chester Cooper.

158. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 158. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Weekʼs Developments in Asia

There follows a summary of significant developments in Asia during the past week. Information classifications are given in brackets.

[Here follows information on Vietnam.]

Cambodia

The departure of Sihanouk from Cambodia for three months will likely mean a lull in Cambodian diplomatic initiatives. However, he will probably continue his soundings in various capitals, notably Moscow and Peiping, regarding international guarantees of Cambodiaʼs territory. He is currently undergoing medical treatment in France. The French report some Cambodian annoyance with the Chinese for frequently ignoring their position and making them feel their small power status. Paris warns, however, that this doesnʼt imply any willingness on the part of the Cambodians to move closer to the West. They still see in the Chinese their only friend in a hostile regional sea.

[Here follows information on Burma, Thailand, Singapore, Laos, Indonesia, Philippines, Korea, Okinawa, Japan, and Chinese representation at the United Nations.]

CLC

McGB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. XV. Confidential. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

159. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 159. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, November 12, 1965.

JCSM–812–65

SUBJECT

US Policy and Actions to Deal with Cambodian Support of the Viet Cong (S)

1. (TS) Recent studies by both the United States Intelligence Board (USIB) and the Defense Intelligence Agency (Appendix A)2 conclude that the Viet Cong (VC) use Cambodia for a source of supply, for a sanctuary, and for temporary military facilities. Supplies in the form of weapons, ammunition, medicine, and chemicals used in munitions have been captured during actual infiltration into South Vietnam (SVN) from Cambodia. There is considerable evidence, including reports of US Special Forces advisors, that the VC use Cambodian territory in some areas along the 600-mile border for sanctuary. There is also evidence that the VC have established temporary military facilities, such as rest camps, training areas, hospitals, workshops, and storage depots on Cambodian soil. Recent reports3 from Phnom Penh disclose that Prince Sihanouk may start trading openly with the VC. Cambodiaʼs deteriorating financial position may have led Sihanouk to reason that the advantages of trade arrangements with the VC would outweigh any sanctions brought to bear against him by Saigon or the United States.

2. (TS) Although the Cambodian Government has been careful not to provide the VC military support and has asserted its neutrality. Cambodians do permit the use of their territory and resources by the communist insurgents. This VC use of Cambodian territory is made possible by some active cooperation with the VC at lower Cambodian Government and military levels, an indifferent attitude by other officials, and the inability or failure of the Government to control or even patrol its frontiers. By permitting its country to be used as a source of supply, as a sanctuary, and for military facilities, Cambodia has forfeited its claim of neutrality.

3. (TS) Recent reports indicate a continued buildup of VC/Peopleʼs Army of Vietnam (PAVN) troops in SVN. The increased requirements of this larger force (including a significant increment of regular troops), the determined Government of Vietnam/United States(GVN/US) efforts to seize the initiative in Southeast Asia, and the resulting higher level of military activity are causing the VC, as the USIB study points out, to place increasing dependency on outside sources of supply for arms and ammunition, technical equipment, medical supplies, cadre personnel, and trained technicians. With the GVN/US efforts to minimize infiltration through other land and sea routes being intensified, the importance of Cambodia to the VC insurgency can be expected to increase as the one remaining unimpaired support route available to them. The Cambodian sanctuary provides the VC with a decided military advantage and has a detrimental effect on the war effort in SVN.

4. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have weighed the pros and cons of the specific actions that would be required to minimize Cambodian support of the VC and consider that the following factors are important to a resolution of the problem: a. Cambodia is the only contiguous source of VC support against which no action is being taken. Since control of the insurgency involves seeking out and destroying the VC/PAVN forces and their sources of support, the reasons for taking action in this remaining area are militarily clear.

b. From a political viewpoint, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize a risk of antagonizing Prince Sihanouk by any forceful action, with a possibility that Cambodia may seek a closer relationship with Communist China. Although Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) and/or ChiCom intervention appears unlikely, some increase in ChiCom military assistance to Cambodia may be expected.

c. The possible benefits derived from GVN/US observance of the inviolability of the Cambodian border must be weighed against the violation of South Vietnamese sovereignty by VC incursions into SVN and their use of Cambodia as a sanctuary. SVNʼs fundamental right of self-defense is compromised by a policy that prohibits effective counteraction. Further, the use of Cambodian territory by the VC, with immunity to pursuit, unduly inhibits field commanders in the defense of their areas and forces.

5. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the military requirements are of paramount importance and that forceful action must be taken to stop the use of Cambodian territory for VC logistics and sanctuary despite possible adverse political and military reaction.

6. (TS) It is understood that the Department of State is now in the process of reviewing US policy toward Cambodia. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that this revision should be conducted on a priority basis. They have observed that relations with Cambodia have not improved as a result of current and past policies and that support of the VC is continuing. They consider that the present state of affairs, in which Cambodians are supporting the VC, is inconsistent with continued US recognition of Cambodian neutrality.

7. (TS) US policy toward Cambodia should provide for GVN/US action which will result in minimizing Cambodian support of the VC, including the reduction of infiltration of war materiel into SVN from Cambodia. In this regard, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered courses of action to accomplish that objective. Although there are risks associated with the application of the more severe courses of action, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that Cambodiaʼs political and military reactions will be insignificant in relation to the gains made possible through suitable application of the pressures and actions recommended. These courses of action are: a. Course of Action A. Expand and intensify the over-all intelligence collection program for Cambodia.

b. Course of Action B. Conduct a political/psychological campaign to persuade the Government of Cambodia to take actions to stop support of the VC.

c. Course of Action C. Encourage third country participation in actions designed to bring pressure against Cambodia to stop support of the VC.

d. Course of Action D. Increase surveillance of the sea lines of communication (LOCs) between the RVN and Cambodia and increase controls on the Mekong and Bassac waterways.

e. Course of Action E. Conduct covert paramilitary operations into Cambodia to reduce the infiltration of personnel and materiel and to collect intelligence information.

f. Course of Action F. Conduct low altitude aerial reconnaissance into Cambodia.

g. Course of Action G. Authorize GVN/US operations into Cambodia in immediate pursuit of VC forces which are withdrawing into Cambodian territory.

h. Course of Action H. Conduct military operations to prevent entry of maritime shipping carrying contraband goods into Cambodian ports.

i. Course of Action I. Conduct overt air and/or ground cross-border operations into Cambodia against confirmed LOCs and facilities which support the VC insurgency.

Details of each course of action are contained in Appendix B.

8. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that Courses of Action A through G are appropriate and necessary for immediate implementation and that Courses of Action H and I may be necessary at a later date.

9. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. US policy toward Cambodia include, as an objective, the denial of Cambodian territory for the support of the VC insurgency.

b. Courses of Action A through G be approved for immediate implementation.

c. Courses of Action H and I be reserved for consideration pending the outcome of Courses of Action A through G.

d. A memorandum substantially as contained in Appendix C be forwarded to the Secretary of State.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David L. McDonald 4
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 5127, Cambodia 000.1—, 1965. Top Secret.

2 All appendices are attached, but not printed.

3 Amembassy Bangkok msg 041125Z (JCS IN 36637) and CIA msg [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] (JCS IN 40032). [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Printed from a copy that indicates McDonald signed the original.

160. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara 160. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, November 20, 1965, 8:22 p.m.

McNamara: Mr. President, the North Vietnamese forces and the Viet Cong forces in that Plei Mi area have been moving back and forth across the Cambodian border attacking the South Vietnamese troops and our troops in that area. Lodge sent a cable to you today2 in which he recommended that our troops and the South Vietnamese troops be authorized to fire on the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese forces in self-defense, even though they might be on the Cambodian side of this ill-defined border area. George Ball, Mac Bundy, Bill Bundy, Buz Wheeler and I all recommend acceptance of Lodgeʼs request.

Johnson: “All right.”

McNamara: Secondly, we believe it would be wise tomorrow to report to U Thant that the border incidents are occurring and urge again that the UN ask Cambodia to authorize the assignment of a UN force to that area to patrol the border. In the spring of 1964 incidents of this kind occurred. At that time we joined with other members of the UN in approving the assignment of about a 3,000 man United Nations force to patrol that Cambodian border. Sihanouk at the time refused to allow that force to be installed. We think it would be wise to report increasing border violations by the Viet Cong and to ask U Thant to again consider the matter.

Johnson: Are you all together on that?

McNamara: We are all unanimous on this. The only possible difference was that Mac and I would have done it tonight and the others all preferred to wait until tomorrow.

President: All right. Just go ahead.

McNamara: Fine. Thank you very much.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a telephone conversation between Johnson and McNamara, Tape 6511.06. This transcript was prepared by the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume. No classification marking.

2 Unnumbered telegram from Saigon (No. 333 for the President from Lodge), November 20. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

161. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 161. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 1

Washington, November 20, 1965, 10:35 p.m.

1399. State/Defense message. With reference to your unnumbered message concerning authorization for certain operations in Laos and Cambodia:2 1. Intensified air campaign in Laos appears to us desirable but less urgent than question of immediate operations into Cambodia. In view of recent agreements re Steel Tiger3 between MACV and Embassy Vientiane, not clear that additional authorization needed. If you consider present arrangements inadequate, let us know.

2. We concur in tactical air and B–52 strikes along Cambodian/SVN border up to border itself. These may be authorized in the field of tactical operations and in accordance with existing procedures for B–52 strikes.

3. We further believe that both GVN and US forces must have all authority necessary for self-defense. We also recognize that present engagement is special case involving major PAVN/VC units who have been re-grouping and attacking again throughout Pleiku area since engagement began. While doctrine of hot pursuit can be strongly supported by analogy, there is no possible doubt on justification of self-defense.

4. Accordingly, separate message through military channels4 will contain authorization for self-defense measures applicable to existing Silver Bayonet5 situation. This will include authority to US/GVN units to return fire, to eliminate fire coming from Cambodia, and to maneuver into Cambodian territory as necessary to defend selves while actively engaged in contact with PAVN/VC units. This authority includes artillery and close air support operations against enemy units as long as such units are actually engaged with US or GVN forces. It excludes authority to engage Cambodian forces, if encountered, except in self-defense, to conduct tactical air or artillery operations against populated Cambodian areas, or to attack Cambodian base areas other than in circumstances where justification of self-defense exists in terms of continuing engagement and direct threat to GVN or US forces. We recognize these distinctions might be most difficult to preserve, but from political standpoint it is essential that this be done.

5. The foregoing discussion has direct bearing on handling of any press announcements of operations. This will require careful advance preparation by the Embassy and MACV with following guidelines in mind: a. While location of action should not be stated incorrectly, we should avoid as long as possible any express statement that GVN and US forces have been in Cambodia. This might involve stating that exact locations being checked further. Obviously, we would be forced to eventual admission, but point should be got across that border terrain difficult and boundary lines hard to check completely against reported positions. (We do not here understand that border in this area is disputed, so that this rationale should not be advanced unless we have very solid evidence to support it.)

b. Stress should be placed on theme that GVN and/or US forces were under attack and that measures taken were in self-defense. Term “self-defense” should be driven home, and terms such as “immediate pursuit” or “hot pursuit” should not be used.

c. Spokesman should not be drawn into legal basis and justification for action taken. Tentatively, we would probably prefer to handle this here, but in any case justification might depend heavily on circumstances, whether we argued in terms of terrain and border difficulty or frankly admitted Cambodian territory involved and went on to justification in terms of self-defense. We also need to think further, and are doing so urgently, on just how we frame our justification in terms of Sihanoukʼs reaction. This could depend heavily on evidence obtained form prisoners or during action itself that tended to negate his assertion, repeated only this week, that Cambodian territory has never been used even as a sanctuary. Evidence of physical installations would of course be particularly useful, and in general we would like to have a special report from you or MACV tomorrow on this subject as it stands now, and the same on a continuing basis particularly if border actually crossed.

d. Question of Washington authority should be met solely by statement that Washington had given general authorization for forces to take actions necessary for their self-defense. Exact terms of authority should under no circumstances be discussed.

We believe above covers your immediate need and urgent problems which might arise if authority were used. Please keep us advised, if necessary on flash basis. Exdis heading will be sufficient for messages in this channel if sensitive, and of course military operation reports should come on regular channel with appropriate limits or distribution.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by McNamara, Wheeler, and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to Rio de Janeiro for Secretary Rusk only.

2 See footnote 2, Document 160.

3 Steel Tiger was the code name for U.S. Air Force and Navy air interdiction of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos.

4 Not further identified.

5 Silver Bayonet was the code name for US–GVN military operations in Plei Ku Province of South Vietnam.

162. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Goldberg) 162. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Goldberg)1

Washington, November 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Possible Cambodian Complications

As you perhaps know, the continuing action in the Plei Me area has moved closer and closer to the Cambodian border. As of this moment, based on operations reports through November 21 (Sunday), the border has not been violated by US or GVN forces. However, at least two GVN battalions are operating extremely close to it and the action could at any moment move across the border.

In the light of this situation, the President on Saturday night approved an instruction to Westmoreland2 giving him authority to take the necessary measures for the self-defense of US and GVN forces, to the point of returning fire coming from across the Cambodian border, maneuvering ground forces into Cambodian territory if necessary to defend themselves, and conducting close air support and artillery operations to protect forces actually engaged in combat. At the same time, the authority explicitly excluded any military involvement with Cambodian forces, unless required for self defense, any air or artillery operations against Cambodian-populated areas (there is only one village on the map anywhere near the area), and any attack on base areas unless such areas were a direct part of an immediate military threat to our forces. Our message to Lodge and Westmoreland underscored these exclusions and the political implications of adhering to them.

At this moment, the authority has not been used. If it were to be used, we would stress above all the rationale of self defense, since our lawyers tell us that any “hot pursuit” justification does not have, for ground forces, explicit support in international law. We would make maximum use of the fact that the border is extremely difficult to identify in relation to ground force positions or close air support targets, although we do not, as of now, believe that we can argue that the location of the border is actually disputed (as some other sections are). We have given careful directions that any announcement from Saigon be purely factual and lay maximum stress on the self defense point, not using “hot pursuit” or “immediate pursuit.”

Nonetheless, it is already clear that Sihanouk may react sharply. He put out a statement only this week attacking the Vietnamese and ourselves and also asserting that Cambodian territory had never been used, even temporarily, as a refuge by VC forces. On this point, recent evidence from prisoners taken in the Plei Me area has been that they arrived in Vietnam via Cambodia and were given help by local Cambodian elements during their transit. We have asked Saigon for a full reading of this intelligence and for immediate reports of any other intelligence that may come in on the use of Cambodian territory by the VC. We probably do not wish to argue that Sihanouk has behaved in an un-neutral way, but we do want to have the best possible evidence to support contentions that the VC did in fact use Cambodian territory (with or without Cambodian consent) and, above all, that in the nature of the military action in Plei Me, involving constant regrouping and new attacks by substantial regular North Vietnamese forces, it was unavoidable for US and GVN forces to maintain contact, even into Cambodian territory, with hostile forces constantly seeking to destroy them.

Subject to confirmation from George Ball Monday, we may very well be asking you to take this matter up urgently with U Thant, to draw on the above in presenting the situation as it stands, to emphasize that we are taking every precaution to avoid hitting Cambodians and to emphasize that we continue to have no hostile feelings towards Cambodia but that this kind of border problem will continue as long as there is no effective system for patrolling the border and controlling the real villain of the piece, the North Vietnamese and the VC. In this connection, Charlie Yost and others in your staff can readily dig out the excellent record that was made in the spring of 1964. At that time, Ambassador Stevenson made a most eloquent statement3 of our friendly feelings toward the Cambodians, and we fully supported the three-country investigating group that went to the area and that recommended a substantial international force to patrol the border. We endorsed this recommendation completely, and Sihanouk then proceeded to turn it down. You might therefore be asked to call this record again to U Thantʼs attention and to suggest that one possible action might be a sounding by him whether Sihanouk would now change his position. This would markedly get us off the defensive if the fur really starts to fly, even—as it might—to the point of a Security Council complaint by Cambodia.

Parenthetically, we have just received a Peiping broadcast making vague threats of what Communist China would do if we “attacked” Cambodia. Our first reading is that this is couched in “normal” terms and does not really indicate anything more than a desire to show verbal support for Cambodia.

William P. Bundy 4

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron. Secret.

2 November 20; see Document 161 and footnote 4 thereto.

3 See footnote 2, Document 132.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

163. Intelligence Memorandum 163. Intelligence Memorandum1

Washington, December 1, 1965.

OCI No. 2946/65

CAMBODIAʼS FOREIGN POLICY

1. The often unfathomable, sometimes senseless and frequently amusing fluctuations which have characterized the day to day conduct of Cambodiaʼs foreign policy over the past 12 years have obscured what, in fact, has been a remarkably coherent and consistent policy. The discrepancy lies in the fact that Cambodiaʼs policy has Prince Sihanouk as both its author and chief practitioner. The confusion between style and substance, between neurotic fantasies and logically reasoned arguments, [1 line of source text not declassified] has put in question the credibility of Cambodiaʼs foreign policy.

2. The primary motivation of Cambodiaʼs foreign policy is the preservation of Cambodia as a nation state. Although survival is, in the final analysis, the root policy of all nations, the difference is that Cambodia feels that its continued existence is in real and constant jeopardy. In recent years this preoccupation has been in part an expression of Sihanoukʼs emotional response to factors beyond his control—the discrepancy in population and power between Cambodia and its neighbors Thailand and Vietnam—but it also has been based on certain historical facts which no Cambodian nationalist can ignore.

3. To Sihanouk and other Cambodians, the key factor in the modern history of the Indochina peninsula has been the unrelenting pressure exerted on Cambodiaʼs territory from Thailand and Vietnam. Other factors, French colonialism and the shadow struggle between the US and Communist China, have been important too. In the final analysis, however, these latter are overlays to the fundamental problem of Vietnamese and Thai imperialism.

4. In fighting for its territorial integrity, Cambodia has been handicapped by its relative weakness; it simply cannot match the power of Vietnam and Thailand. The Cambodians therefore have been forced to rely on the less reliable skills of diplomatic maneuver. In the nineteenth century, with its back to the wall, Cambodia called on France to protect it from its more powerful neighbors. The French protectorate, from the Cambodian perspective, was no euphemism. If France exacted a high price for its protection, if its control impinged heavily on Cambodiaʼs sovereignty, that was unfortunate. It was more important that Cambodia be preserved.

5. The situation changed in the 1950s. The postwar wave of nationalism which swept Indochina also claimed many young educated Cambodians, including Sihanouk. Cambodia could not continue as a French colony forever. More important, however, was the fact that the power realities in Indochina were changing. To the Cambodians, France was a spent force, and a new constellation would have to be brought into being if Cambodiaʼs integrity was to be preserved.

6. Sihanouk is no ideologue, and when he espoused “neutralism” as the right path for Cambodiaʼs foreign policy, it was from practical rather than theoretical considerations. “Neutralism” was a fashionable posture for the newly independent nations in the early fifties and Sihanouk undoubtedly thought it prudent to keep Cambodia in step. More importantly, in its emphasis on diplomatic rather than military solutions to problems, and its emphasis on avoiding entanglement in the cold war, “neutralism” was consonant with Cambodiaʼs traditional position and the realities in Indochina. Sihanouk put his own stamp on “neutralism,” however. As he viewed it, neutrality enabled the small nation to exert a disproportionate amount of influence by playing off one great power against another.

7. Sihanouk played this game adroitly for ten years. He managed to keep his relations with the US in good repair, although he felt that the US was involved with Thai and South Vietnamese plotting against his government. At the same time, however, he was slowly improving relations with Communist China. This balance began to be disrupted in the early sixties by the growing strength of the Communists in South Vietnam.

8. At some point, perhaps as early as 1961, Sihanouk became convinced that the Viet Cong were going to win in South Vietnam. He viewed with alarm what he regarded as US obtuseness to the real situation in South Vietnam and continuing US reliance on the Diem government, which he regarded as doomed to failure. His prescription was negotiation with the guerrillas while their strength was still limited. The object of the negotiations would be to “neutralize” South Vietnam, which in Sihanoukʼs terms meant to keep Vietnam divided. His persistent calls for a Geneva-type conference from 1962 to the present reflect this policy.

9. Cambodiaʼs swing to the left, underway from at least 1961, became more pronounced in 1963. Phnom Penhʼs relations with the US deteriorated, principally because the US would not support negotiations with the Communists. At the same time Sihanouk was laying the groundwork for what he was coming increasingly to believe was a necessary accommodation with Hanoi and Peking. The problem for Sihanouk was shaping up as one of timing—when the Diem government fell in November.

10. The reverberations in Phnom Penh were almost totally unexpected. It is still unclear why Sihanouk acted as he did. The most persuasive theory is that Sihanouk was frightened by what he regarded as the US-sanctioned murder of Diem, and his most immediate concern was to reduce drastically US presence in Cambodia. Sihanouk may also have calculated that the disruption in Saigon would shorten the time before the Viet Cong victory; hence there would be less time for Cambodiaʼs accommodation. At any rate, Sihanouk renounced US military and economic aid, sent home the 100-man US military advisor contingent and encouraged a cut-back in the size of the US Embassy in Phnom Penh. A 17-month period of strained relations ensued which culminated in Cambodiaʼs breaking relations with the US in May 1965.

11. One of the problems resulting from the termination of US aid was the necessity of finding an alternate source of military hardware. Sihanouk naturally turned to France, the one country in the West with which Cambodia has maintained good relations, to the Soviet Union, which had already supplied Cambodia with four obsolescent jet fighters, and to its new “number one friend,” Communist China. In late 1964, Peking agreed to supply Cambodia with enough small arms to equip 27,000 men, in effect agreeing to supplant the US as the quartermaster for the Cambodian armed forces. In the past week, Peking has agreed to supply small arms for an additional 10,000 men as well as some antiaircraft weapons and 11 obsolescent planes, including a few jet fighters.

12. For Sihanouk, Chinese military aid serves two purposes. It has enabled the Cambodian armed forces to improve its defensive posture along the Thai and South Vietnamese borders. It also underscores, in a material way, Pekingʼs not entirely convincing public promises for “all-out support” if Cambodia is “invaded.” Sihanouk has been willing to pay for Pekingʼs support by taking the Chinese line on a whole series of international issues of secondary interest to Cambodia. He has been far less responsive on matters directly affecting Cambodian interests.

13. He took an exceptionally hard line with the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong, for example, during talks in Peking late last year. When the Communists refused to knuckle under to some of Sihanoukʼs more extravagant demands, the talks broke down. To Sihanouk, the episode was but another example of Vietnamese perfidy, a warning that the Vietnamese, whatever their political persuasion, were a threat to Cambodia. In a remarkable speech in Phnom Penh early this year, at a time when he was hosting the leftist Indochinese Peoples Conference, Sihanouk warned the Cambodian military that “Vietnamese imperialism” of whatever political coloration was the real danger to Cambodia.

14. As long as Sihanouk believes that the Viet Cong will win in South Vietnam, and that the US will be forced to negotiate its way out, we can expect Cambodia to hold to its present leftward course. By continuing to call Cambodia “neutral,” however, Sihanouk indicates that he is not yet ready to burn all his bridges. He has already discovered that breaking relations with the US and curtailing his contacts with the West have severely reduced his room for diplomatic maneuver. There are strong indications that Sihanouk hopes to repair some of the damage by improving Cambodiaʼs relations with Great Britain and Australia. A more fundamental change in Cambodiaʼs course will depend to a great extent on the course of the war in South Vietnam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret. Drafted in the Office of Current Intelligence, Directorate of Intelligence.

164. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 164. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 3, 1965.

SUBJECT

US/GVN Action Against VC/PAVN Forces in Cambodia

Background

1. During the recent Silver Bayonet Operation, Ambassador Lodge requested (Tab A)2 authority for actions in self-defense in Cambodia. In response to that request authority was granted for the duration of that operation to return fire across the border and to maneuver across the border when necessary in self-defense against enemy units in continuing engagement with US/GVN forces (Tab B).3

2. The Department of Defense has asked for State concurrence in a draft JCS message (Tab C)4 which would authorize US and GVN forces in general to take extensive counteraction against VC/PAVN forces in Cambodia. This draft message would grant authority to strike “known or suspected” troops, lines of communication, and bases inside Cambodia by ground forces, including close air support, and by air attacks using B–52ʼs. The Defense Department informs us that this draft message resulted from a decision by Secretary McNamara to provide all necessary authority for operations involving Cambodian territory.

Discussion

3. The proposed JCS draft goes considerably beyond the authority requested by Ambassador Lodgeʼs telegram and the authority granted for Operation Silver Bayonet. It also exceeds greatly existing or requested authority for operations in Laos. In view of the lack of convincing evidence that Cambodian territory is being used as a major base or major infiltration route, the requested authority would be difficult to justify. This is particularly true since the actions envisaged include, in effect, acts of war against Cambodia.

4. We believe that authorization for actions in Cambodia should be limited to major operations in which it is clear that the US/GVN armed forces involved require such authority for their adequate self-defense. We believe that it is preferable that decisions to confer such authority be taken in Washington, at least under present circumstances, rather than to delegate authority to the field. We would wish, in any case, to limit such grants of authority to actions similar to those authorized for Operation Silver Bayonet. The GVN would be urged to follow a similarly cautious policy and to coordinate closely with the US.

Recommendations 5

1. That you approve the draft message at Tab D which would summarize the authority which we would be prepared to grant in appropriate situations and would keep final authorization in Washington. We would propose to DOD that this message be substituted for the JCS proposed message at Tab C.

2. An alternative proposal would be to delegate final authorization to COMUSMACV if you consider that military requirements of the situation are such that it would not be feasible to retain this in Washington. A draft message which would adopt this alternative is placed at Tab E: para. 4 contains the alternative language.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by George H. Aldrich of L/FE and Ewing.

2 Attached, but not printed; see footnote 2, Document 160.

3 Not attached and not identified.

4 Tabs C, D, and E are attached, but not printed.

5 There is no indication on the source text which recommendation Rusk approved, but see Document 166.

165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 165. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Saigon, December 9, 1965, 1149Z.

43199. Subject: Cross Border Combat Operations—Cambodia.

1. Based on DIA Intelligence Studies, our experience during operation Silver Bayonet, and our observations and intelligence, it is perfectly clear to us that the border areas of Cambodia now contain motorable infiltration routes, command centers, base, training and supply areas along the pattern of the long development of a similar nature in Laos.2

2. The buildup in Laos started in the late 1950s and owing to the skill of the North Vietnamese in hiding their activities, their ability to control completely this corridor area and restrictions against intelligence collection, it has only been recently that the full scope of their effort has become apparent. We now have arrived at a point where entire divisions are being infiltrated through this corridor.

3. Now that we are confronted with a similar situation in Cambodia, we must face up to the facts of life and recognize that we face a major threat and that we will not be able to produce the kind of evidence which would stand up in court against those who insist on such proof! Although to us it is painfully clear and quite obvious what has happened; Sihanouk does not control his border area any more than Souvanna Phouma controls his. Furthermore, there is nothing Sihanouk can do about it even if he desired to do so, which is highly doubtful. Therefore, it is in our national interest to draw the obvious conclusion and take what measures are necessary to reduce the utility of this area to the PAVN/VC and to mount offensive air attacks against them as necessary.

4. We are now in a target development phase in this area in connection with B–52 strikes.

5. We intend to resume offensive operations in the border areas of Pleiku, Kontum and Darlac in late December, January and February.

6. In order to foresee and forestall the problems which stem from the use of a Cambodian sanctuary, request the following authorities be granted as standard operating procedures whenever US troops operate in areas adjacent to the Cambodian border in Darlac, Pleiku and Kontum provinces. A. Artillery and air strikes may be made against enemy weapons firing from the Cambodian side of the border against US troops. This authority would not exceed light artillery range of 10 kilometers into Cambodia.

B. Ground troops engaged with an enemy on or near the border may maneuver into Cambodia up to two kilometers if such maneuver is necessary for the preservation of the force or the attainment of the objective within South Vietnam.

C. Observation aircraft and airborne FACʼs in support of US operations may fly reconnaissance and surveillance missions within a 10 kilometer strip on the Cambodian side of the border. They may direct air and artillery strikes from in-country resources against enemy forces and installations positively identified by group reconnaissance elements and against enemy forces when their movements or actions clearly indicate they are hostile.

D. Specially trained ground reconnaissance elements may operate to a depth of 5 kilometers on the Cambodian side of the border. These specially trained reconnaissance elements may be composed of a mixture of US and Vietnamese or CIDG Montagnard personnel as required. Infiltration may be on foot or by helicopter and extraction will be in the same manner.

E. No Cambodians will be engaged except in self-defense nor will any Cambodian village be attacked with air, artillery fire or ground forces.

F. These authorities have been requested only because they are necessary in connection with the defense of South Vietnam. They do not indicate that we seek a wider war nor will they be so applied.

7. The US Ambassador concurs with this message and adds the following comment: “I approve the proposed action. But I believe we should be clear in our own minds that we are taking it as an integral part of our effort for the defense of South Vietnam and not because we seek a wider war. Whereas and if the time comes to discuss these matters publicly, it will be well to have this self-limiting statement as a part of the record.”

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–LAOS. Top Secret. Also sent to JCS and Department of State, which is the source text.

2 In telegram 1622 to Saigon, December 10, the Department of State stated that while it was also concerned about Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory as limited safe havens and logistical bases, it noted that there were extensive intelligence gaps on the issue. It asked for additional intelligence to bolster Westmorelandʼs assertion of widespread VC use of Cambodia. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S) Joint Embassy/MACV telegram 2149 from Saigon, December 15, contains a synopsis of selected intelligence on VC use of Cambodia. (Ibid.)

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 1

Washington, December 11, 1965, 2319Z.

1634. State/Defense message. Deptel 1399;2 JCS 6900;3 MACV 43199, DTG 091149Z.4 Subject: Authorization for Operations Involving Cambodia.

1. We have given careful thought to question of extending authorization of Deptel 1399 and accompanying JCS message to further situations that may arise in areas of Pleiku, Dar Lac, and Kon Tum provinces. We recognize that resumption offensive operations in these areas, as foreshadowed MACV 43199 is virtually certain to raise this issue in much same form it faced us at time of Silver Bayonet operation.

2. MACV 43199 has suggested some modifications in the Silver Bayonet authorization and we have also given thought to whether to authorize air strike against base areas and other targets if firmly located.

3. On balance, we conclude that authority should not be granted as standard operating procedure, but that your planning may proceed on assumption that in any situation approximating that of Silver Bayonet similar authorization will be extended promptly from Washington. If emergency arises, you should advise Washington and are authorized meanwhile to proceed on assumption Washington approval will be forthcoming.

4. As to terms or such authorization, we are reluctant to go beyond authority summarized Deptel 1399. This authority limits maneuver objective to self-defense purposes but at same time does not impose rigid 2-kilometer territorial limit which we believe would in practice be virtually impossible to follow in any case. As to observation aircraft and airborne FACʼs, we believe that such operations were necessarily implied in Deptel 1399 from our authorization for close air support and artillery in defined circumstances; such operations are therefore considered as authorized to extent required for these purposes, but again without arbitrary 10-kilometer limit.

5. We do not believe authority described para 6D of MACV 43199, concerning ground reconnaissance elements should now be granted. Such action might readily be picked up and would not have clear self-defense justification of other actions contemplated by form of authority.

6. Thus, we concur in para 6A of MACV 43199, accept 6B as modified by earlier authorization, accept activity under 6C as discussed above, reject 6D and accept 6E and 6F. Finally, we reiterate necessity justifying of such actions, when and as taken, on basis self-defense. Concur that we must make clear in any appropriate manner that this is purpose and that we are not seeking a wider war.

7. Do not believe any change in existing general limitations should be discussed with GVN. As a practical matter, we assume that, in connection these three provinces at least ARVN forces would in effect be under US command. We have impression any apparent change in general authority might lead GVN to take actions not clearly justifiable under self-defense rationale.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of Defense, Official Files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 9155.1 (14 Oct. 65) IR 6231 S. 2. Top Secret; Exdis.

2  Document 161.

3 Not found.

4  Document 165.

167. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Paris 167. Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Rusk at Paris1

Washington, December 14, 1965, 8:24 p.m.

Tosec 26. For Secretary from Bundy.

1. In accordance with your instructions I talked to Ritchie today at length about possible ICC role in Cambodia.2

2. Just prior to our talk we received text Sihanouk December 13 speech asking ICC to investigate shipments through Sihanoukville including suggested detailed investigation RKG military installations and accounts, by implication to verify that all military equipment designed for legitimate RKG use. We agreed this speech in any event precipitates need for ICC consultation whether to assume such role.

3. I told Ritchie we had two main areas of concern. First was continuing border area problem in which we continued receive evidence at least some VC use of Cambodia and believed that PAVN/VC forces must have retreated into Cambodia during Plei Me action. We reviewed history UN recommendations for 3000 men to do effective job of policing frontier to deter and inhibit VC use of Cambodia. I said that while we had generally agreed in past with Canadian position that border investigations dubious under particular ICC Charter for Cambodia and in practice tended to result in RKG requests and cooked cases, we nonetheless felt subject needed reexamination to see if ICC could move more effectively.

4. I said our second area of concern was possibility that, as PAVN strength increased and Laos route made more difficult by our air actions (which I frankly admitted off the record), Hanoi might put pressure on Sihanouk for more extensive use of Sihanoukville. (This possibility highlighted in current intelligence community study.) I therefore said there might be real and immediate usefulness in following up on Sihanoukʼs own request for supervision, although we would have to weigh carefully whether such supervision might only result in whitewash and concealment of illicit traffic.

5. Ritchie responded on preliminary basis that they believed Sihanoukville military installations project fitted much more readily into current ICC terms of reference, and that their ICC man had already become engaged in inspecting manifests of ships calling at Sihanoukville since October. (We agreed this in itself proved very little.) We agreed that, whatever possibilities might be for developing necessarily extensive project on border areas, Canadians should get judgment from their ICC representative of manpower it would take to do Sihanoukville installations job adequately and thus at least to inhibit future extensive use this supply route.

6. We further agreed that any action to augment current extremely limited ICC capabilities (only four men total) might require consultation among ICC members and with Co-Chairmen. I said that we had not come to any firm conclusions on this, but would be prepared to talk quietly to British and would not rule out possibility our making some financial contribution.

7. Our discussion of course represents only first step toward engaging ICC effectively in Cambodia problem. Sihanoukville installation is probably much the lesser problem for now from our standpoint, but it seemed to me, especially in light of Sihanoukʼs speech, a real entering wedge. I frankly continue to feel that, even as to Sihanoukville project but especially as to border areas problem, half a loaf may be worse than none. Inadequately staffed inspections could produce phony results or be used, as they have been in the past, to indict GVN and ourselves without getting at the VC as the root of the matter. Nonetheless, the Sihanoukville project does seem worth following, and I am reporting the conversation to you currently in case you should have further conversations with Paul Martin or conceivably with Michael Stewart.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted and approved by William Bundy. Repeated to Ottawa. Rusk was in Paris for the Ministerial Session of the North Atlantic Council, December 14–16.

2 The memorandum of conversation, December 14, is ibid.

168. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson 168. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 18, 1965.

SUBJECT

Brief Impressions, listed country-by-country2

[Here follows impressions on countries other than Cambodia.]

Phnom Penh

1. Phnom Penh extended the warmest welcome to the mission of any on the trip.

2. Prince Sihanouk is the most able, hardworking and effective non-Communist leader in Southeast Asia. He works continuously at leading his people and is fully supported by them.

3. Cambodia is the most peaceful and, in many ways, the most progressive nation in the region; still gives us credit for our economic aid in the past and has used it well.

4. Sihanoukʼs only concern is Cambodia. He doesnʼt care what happens elsewhere so long as Cambodia is left alone.

5. He is afraid of the Thais and the Vietnamese (north and south) in particular, and of the United States, to the extent that we are tied to the Thais and Vietnamese.

6. Sihanouk stated that he did not care what the U.S. did in South Vietnam so long as his borders were respected and there were no border incidents. He further stated that Cambodian independence would be endangered should U.S. influence leave Southeast Asia.

7. He wants present borders (the old French administrative borders) acknowledged. But he has been unable to get an acknowledgment from any nation—from the United States, or the Communist nations or other nations in the region.

8. Sihanouk has legitimate grievances as well as some that are not so valid. He is thin-skinned and emotional (which he acknowledges) and he has been regarded and treated with disrespect by American officials in the past. The Thais and South Vietnamese, moreover, are sponsoring and supporting a trivial Cambodian dissident movement (Serai Khmer) which has plotted against his life in the past and is still operating. Suggest all support of Serai Khmer movement by Thailand, South Vietnam and U.S. be withdrawn.

9. Sihanouk wants to keep contact with the United States, short of regular diplomatic relations. He suggested, however, that friendly American visitors would always be welcome in Cambodia. Eugene Black would be an ideal visitor because of his demeanor and because Sihanouk is for the Mekong project.

10. No sense restoring diplomatic relations, as the British have recently done, unless (1) we are prepared to renounce the Cambodian plotters in Thailand and Viet Nam and press the Thais and Vietnamese to do the same; (2) unless we can find an Ambassador of exceptional astuteness and tact to send; and (3) unless we and the Vietnamese can be a lot more careful about border incidents.

11. There is a lot of sense in keeping contact with Cambodia short of full diplomatic relations. We certainly ought to accept in good faith his request that I.C.C. investigate the charges that Sihanoukville is used as supply source for the Viet Cong because we are associated with the raising of these charges in the first place.

[Here follow impressions on other countries.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel, Mansfield Trip to Southeast Asia, November 1965. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

2 From November 18 to December 19 Senators Mike Mansfield and George Aiken visited 16 countries and territories including the Southeast Asian nations of Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, South Vietnam, and the Philippines. On January 11, 1966, Mansfield and Aiken briefed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on their trip. The transcript of that briefing is printed in U.S. Senate, Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Historical Series), Vol. XVIII, 89th Congress, 2nd session, 1966, pp. 3–38.

169. Memorandum of Conversation 169. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, USSR

Llewellyn E. Thompson, Ambassador-at-Large, Department of State

I gave the Ambassador a copy of our press release on the question of actions our troops were authorized to take in self-defense along the Cambodian border.2 I said that I thought the American press had great exaggerated and distorted the significance of this development.

Dobrynin said, from the statement in the press release, what did this really mean, that our troops would be making deep incursions into Cambodia or bombing Cambodian targets?

I replied in the negative and said that this was actually confined to situations in which there was a real need to shoot back in self-defense in order to preserve the lives of our troops involved.

Dobrynin asked how he should report this. Was this an official statement?

I replied that it was purely an informal explanation of our policy but that I could tell him, for his own information, that it was done at the suggestion of the Secretary. He expressed his appreciation and said that he had been confused, and he thought that the diplomats in Washington with whom he had discussed the matter, had also misunderstood what was involved.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Thompson and approved in S/AL on December 23.

2 Apparent reference to a press release based on a statement made by the Deputy Director of the Office of News, Department of State, on December 21. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 919–920.

170. Intelligence Memorandum 170. Intelligence Memorandum1

Washington, December 28, 1965.

No. 3183/65

CAMBODIA AND THE VIET CONG

Summary

The problem of Cambodiaʼs relationship with the Viet Cong centers on two broad but related aspects. One is Sihanoukʼs foreign policy and how it has been influenced by the growth of the Communist movement in South Vietnam. The other is the use by the Viet Cong of Cambodian territory as a source of supply, sanctuary, and political comfort.

A thorough review of intelligence from all sources confirms that the Viet Cong have procured supplies in and through Cambodia but shows that the volume of such supplies has been small in comparison with Viet Cong requirements and in comparison with what they have received through Laos, by direct sea infiltration, and from within South Vietnam. It is clear that with the complicity of local Cambodian officials the Viet Cong have found safe haven in many areas along the Cambodian border. The Communists have also established small but useful clandestine facilities on Cambodian territory. From all indications these facilities have played only a small part in the over-all Communist effort in South Vietnam.

A substantial body of evidence indicates, however, that the Cambodian Government is not a witting or willing accomplice in Viet Cong operations in Cambodia. Intelligence reports confirm that Sihanouk is increasingly concerned over charges that Cambodia is being used by the Viet Cong. These reports reveal that although Phnom Penh has tried to take measures to curb such use, its ability to police the 600-mile border with South Vietnam is extremely limited.

[Here follows the body of the memorandum.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence.

171. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk 171. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 29, 1965.

Dear Dean:

In light of the United States Intelligence Board (USIB) findings (USIB Study, D–24.7/4 of 28 Oct 65, subject: Infiltration and Logistics—South Vietnam),2 the Joint Chiefʼs of Staff have expressed their views for future U.S. policy and actions to cope with support being given the Viet Cong through Cambodia. Their report to me, JCSM 812–65 of 12 Nov 65,3 was made available to Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy on 16 November 1965 to enable prompt consideration by State and Defense staffs of the proposed courses of action which are briefly stated as follows:

Course of Action A. Expand and intensify the overall intelligence collection program for Cambodia.

Course of Action B. Conduct a political/psychological campaign to persuade the Government of Cambodia to take actions to stop support of the VC.

Course of Action C. Encourage third-county participation in actions designed to bring pressure against Cambodia to stop support of the VC.

Course of Action D. Increase surveillance of the sea lines of communications (LOCs) between the RVN and Cambodia and increase controls on the Mekong and Bassac waterways.

Course of Action E. Conduct covert paramilitary operations into Cambodia to reduce the infiltration of personnel and material and to collect intelligence information.

Course of Action F. Conduct low altitude aerial reconnaissance into Cambodia.

Course of Action G. Authorize GVN/US operations into Cambodia in immediate pursuit of VC forces which are withdrawing into Cambodian territory.

Course of Action H. Conduct military operations to prevent entry of maritime shipping carrying contraband goods into Cambodian ports.

Course of Action I. Conduct overt air and/or ground cross-border operations into Cambodia against confirmed LOCs and facilities which support the VC insurgency.

I am of the opinion that unless there is a sudden, significant increase in either use of Cambodian territory by the PAVN/Viet Cong or step-up in logistical support from that country, a gradual response by the U.S. Government and certain other friendly governments is both appropriate and desirable. My thoughts on each of the proposed courses of action are as follows:

Course of Action A. Foremost in importance, I feel, is the need to expand and intensify the overall intelligence collection program for Cambodia, since decisions on other courses of action may hinge largely upon the availability of timely, reliable information concerning activities in Cambodia related to PAVN/Viet Cong operations. To this objective, I request your concurrence in the attached memorandum to Admiral Raborn proposing enhancement by the CIA of its efforts with respect to Cambodia.4 This, of course, is additional to what can be accomplished in the area by the Defense Intelligence Agency and your Bureau of Intelligence and Research by way of intensifying their programs.

Courses of Action B and C. These seem to fall entirely within your purview and I recognize the far-ranging implications in the international arena. I fully share the concern of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and urge that the Government of Cambodia be made acutely aware of all hard evidence now existing or which may be developed in the future that the Viet Cong are being supported from Cambodian territory, or using this territory as a sanctuary, together with appropriate reactions of the U.S. Government to such illegal activities. I would appreciate your views as to what may be possible of accomplishment in the political sphere.

Course of Action D. I have directed the Joint Chefs of Staff to intensify Market Time5 operational surveillance of the sea lines of communications (LOCs) between RVN and Cambodia and to make more effective the controls on the Mekong and Bassac waterways, without violating the Cambodian border, territorial waters, or legitimate rights of navigation.6 Implementation of this course of action will, of course, demand concurrent enlargement of efforts by the Government of South Vietnam. You will be consulted on all aspects of these plans.

Courses of Action E and F. I do not propose a policy decision at this time for conducting paramilitary operations and low level aerial reconnaissance into Cambodia, but believe we should plan to be ready for such operations. As indicated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, these are effective methods of supplementing other intelligence means. For example, the initial experience with Shining Brass7 reconnaissance/intelligence teams suggests that the selective introduction of highly trained military personnel in cross-border operations could be effective in obtaining reliable information on infiltration activity leading to more effective harassment and interdiction of supply routes.

Since it is only prudent to be prepared for launching cross-border and/or low level aerial reconnaissance, I have informed the Joint Chiefs of Staff that, if the problem with Cambodia grows, consideration will be given on a case-by-case basis to undertaking such actions.

Course of Action G. As you know, the question of immediate pursuit of PAVN/Viet Cong into Cambodia has been separately coordinated with the Department of State as matter of special urgency, and agreed policy is contained in Joint State/Defense message 1634 (DTG 112319Z Dec 65), to the American Embassy, Saigon, and to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, subject: “Authorization for Operations Involving Cambodia”.8 At this time, I have no additional proposals related to this course of action.

Courses of Action H and I. I am of the opinion that it is premature to seek decision with respect to overt actions against Cambodian sea and land LOCs, but planning will proceed so that we may be prepared to consider such operations if developments should warrant.

Sincerely,

Bob

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Top Secret.

2 Not found.

3  Document 159.

4 In a separate letter to Director of Central Intelligence Raborn, also December 29, McNamara elaborated further on JCS recommendations to expand and intensify intelligence on PAVN/VC activities in Cambodia. McNamara reiterated JCS recommendations for intelligence agent collection nets in Cambodian cities, ports, and areas adjacent to the South Vietnamese border; high altitude reconnaissance; and covert cross-border intelligence-gathering teams. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 ASIA SE)

5 Market Time was the code name of a U.S.-GVN coastal patrol operation to prevent seaborne infiltration. It was begun on March 11, 1965.

6 In a December 29 memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs. (Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155.1 (14 Oct 65))

7 Shining Brass was the code name for U.S.-led South Vietnamese intelligence probes of the Ho Chi Minh Trail in the Laos panhandle. See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXVIII, for extensive documentation on it and its successor operations.

8 See Document 166.

172. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 172. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, December 29, 1965, 9:36 p.m.

1085. For Ambassador Lodge and Ambassador Martin from the Secretary. Ref: A. Deptel 1026 to Bangkok; 1708 to Saigon.2 B. FTB 9478.3

1. I am most concerned that, notwithstanding approaches which have been made to GVN and RTG, Vietnamese and Thai authorities continue to provide active support to Khmer Serei action against Cambodia and that a major acceleration of this activity is now imminent.

2. Ambassador Martin should see Prime Minister soonest (and General Praphat as well, if he considers this desirable)4 to inform him that we have incontrovertible evidence of activity of Thai officials described above and to request that he take immediate action to terminate any form of RTG support for Khmer Serei. He should use such arguments as he believes best designed to bring about this result but Thanom should be left in no doubt that it is the firm view of the United States Government that Khmer Serei operation will in no way contribute to our broad objectives in Southeast Asia and can only bring discredit on the United States as well as Thailand and South Viet Nam.5

3. Ambassador Lodge should follow up earlier approach and take similar line with Ky, but in view Saigonʼs 21666 this may be deferred until approach to Thanom has been confirmed.

4. Following these approaches, I would appreciate your views as to what further action, if any, is required to bring a stop to this affair.7

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 THAI. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Also sent to Saigon as telegram 1831.

2 In telegram 1026 to Bangkok, also sent to Saigon as 1708, December 27, the Department expressed concern about Thai and South Vietnamese support for the Khmer Serei. (Ibid., POL 23–8 CAMB)

3 Not further identified.

4 According to telegram 1275 from Bangkok, December 30, on the basis of Department telegram 1026 and prior to receipt of telegram 1085, Martin saw Praphat and expressed concern over Thai support of the Khmer Serei. Praphat downplayed Thailandʼs role and claimed it was mostly “passive supporting South Vietnamese initiated and financed operations.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 THAI)

5 In telegram 1088 to Bangkok, December 30, Rusk asked Martin also to see Thanom so as to leave no possibility of doubt in Thai minds about the seriousness of U.S. concern in the matter and to make the record completely clear. Rusk stated that he realized “that the Vietnamese are at least equally to blame in this affair and no effort should be spared to bring them to terminate support for the Khmer Serei.” (Ibid.)

6 In telegram 2166 from Saigon, December 28, Lodge reported on representations he made with Ky about South Vietnamese support for the Khmer Serei. (Ibid.)

7 Lodge reported in telegram 2338 from Saigon, December 31, that should he raise the issue again with Ky, the Vietnamese Prime Minister would ask for a clear view of the U.S. position in Viet Cong use of Cambodia as a sanctuary. Lodge stated that he had “gone as far as I can go on the basis of treating the Khmer Serei as a totally isolated and separate event.” (Ibid.)

173. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Under Secretary of State Ball 173. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and Under Secretary of State Ball 1

Washington, December 30, 1965, 11:30 a.m.

Pres said he had been worried about the Cambodian situation for some time—our harassing their border. Pres said Ball in talking to Mansfield should ask him to tell Sihanouk that he had reported to the President and the President reciprocated Sihanoukʼs good wishes.2 He is to tell Sihanouk that we are very anxious to have no border disturbances and we wish he would make a study of these raids that are being initiated within his borders so that our people would not pursue them.

Ball said he would see what we could get back to Sihanouk. Pres said we should put it on Sihanouk that he should stop these raids from being initiated and that we donʼt want to go across his borders. Pres said Mansfield is Sihanoukʼs biggest sponsor and he is a hero to Mansfield. Pres [said] Mansfield should tell Sihanouk that he gave a full three hour report to the President and told him how great Sihanouk is. We should try in this way to get a little closer to Sihanouk.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Ball Papers, Cambodia [12/9/63–6/26/68]. No classification marking.

2 See Document 168.

174. Memorandum of Conversation 174. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 4, 1966.

SUBJECT

Situation in Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Leonard Unger, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

The Honorable J. Keith Waller, Australian Ambassador

Mr. Robert W. Furlonger, Counselor, Australian Embassy

Mr. Thomas F. Conlon, FE/SPA

1. Ambassador Waller called at his request to deliver orally a message from Australian Minister for External Affairs Hasluck, in reply to a suggestion made to Ambassador Waller by the Secretary December 23, that Australia might find some way to bring Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia to adopt a more realistic position.2

2. Ambassador Waller summarized Mr. Hasluckʼs views as follows: a) Cambodia is not lost; b) Before anything drastic is done involving Cambodia, we should carefully weigh the consequences of the action; c) It is doubtful that the VC are currently using Cambodian territory controlled by the RKG, as distinct from Cambodian territory not under effective RKG control.

3. Ambassador Waller said that Mr. Hasluck wonders whether we are making as much of an effort as is necessary to carry the Cambodians along with us. He noted in particular that the announcement on December 21 by the Department, that U.S. forces in Viet-Nam had authority to fire back across the border at VC forces which had taken refuge in Cambodia and were firing at U.S. forces, left Australia, the power protecting U.S. interests in Cambodia, no time to present the matter to Prince Sihanouk before he read about it in the newspapers. The Secretary acknowledged that there was substance in Mr. Hasluckʼs point. He remarked that the problem was that distorted versions of the authorization to U.S. forces to fire across the Cambodian border had leaked out in Saigon, and it was necessary to make the statement to clarify the situation.

4. Ambassador Waller continued that Mr. Hasluck believes the Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh could engage in active discussions with the RKG, but Hasluck wanted to be convinced first that the VC are, in fact, using Cambodian territory. Some of the military reports of such use have been proved to be untrue, and many of the Thai allegations regarding Cambodia have also been untrue. Hasluck feels that it would be better to try to carry the RKG with us than to have them read allegations against them in the press.

5. The Secretary asked whether there was any possibility of making a virtue of the situation. The Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh, for example, might go in to talk to Prince Sihanouk, making it clear that it was speaking on behalf of Australia, not the U.S. The Embassy might say that it was concerned at recent developments involving Cambodia and the U.S., that the Australian Government has discussed the situation with the U.S. and was glad to learn the following: a. The U.S. wants to avoid any armed involvement with the RKG. The U.S. has ample commitments in Viet-Nam.

b. The Americans do not believe that the RKG actively supports or collaborates with the VC. The Americans know that the RKG has limited capabilities of ensuring the security of its own territory.

c. The Americans would be receptive to any steps to be taken to assure Cambodiaʼs borders. Where border problems exist, the Americans would welcome any effort to resolve them.

d. The Americans would welcome moves to regularize relations between the RKG and the GVN.

e. The Americans are aware that exaggerated claims have been made regarding VC use of Cambodia, but the Americans are convinced that the VC have abused Cambodian territory.

6. The Secretary suggested that Ambassador Waller or his staff might want to review the above list with Mr. Bundy or Mr. Unger to develop or expand it. He noted that what remains true of allegations of VC activity in Cambodia is that there are operations on the border during which the VC enter Cambodia and shoot across the frontier, which is undemarcated.

7. The Secretary read from a press report3 that the RKG has appealed to the Co-Chairmen and the ICC regarding alleged threats to its borders. He said that the U.S. would be glad to see the Co-Chairmen and the ICC involved in securing Cambodiaʼs borders. Ambassador Waller asked whether there were any real prospects of doing something useful regarding the Cambodian-Vietnamese border. The Secretary replied that this was uncertain. However, the Australian Ambassador in Phnom Penh might ask Sihanouk what practical steps could be taken. He speculated that demarcation of the border might cause trouble, as Sihanouk might object to the word “demarcation.”

8. Ambassador Waller said that the risk of an Australian approach of this kind to Sihanouk was that it might raise all presently dormant issues between Cambodia and its neighbors (“might throw everything into the melting pot”). Mr. Unger, who had been asked by the Secretary to join the meeting after it was under way, said that a result of the discussion between the Australians and Sihanouk might be a proposal to expand the powers of the ICC in Cambodia. He thought an Australian approach to the RKG was worthwhile. Prince Sihanouk knows the facts and is aware that there is VC activity on Cambodian territory.

9. In reply to a question by the Secretary, Ambassador Waller said that Australian relations with Cambodia are currently good. The Secretary suggested that an Australian approach to Sihanouk might do some good.4 The important thing is for Sihanouk to know that the U.S. is not looking for a chance to hit him. Mr. Unger speculated that a major element in the problem may be Prince Sihanoukʼs pathological fear of his two neighbors, Viet-Nam and Thailand.

10. The Secretary emphasized his view that if there are problems involving the Cambodian-Vietnamese border, these could be solved. If Sihanouk would talk sense, the GVN would meet him half way. Prince Sihanouk is being worked on by the Chinese Communists. If Australia could find a way to engage in relaxed and extensive discussions with the RKG, it would be helpful. Ambassador Waller said that he would look into the entire question.5 (Mr. Furlonger later told the drafting officer that the Embassy would probably discuss with Mr. Bundy or Mr. Unger the five points mentioned by the Secretary.)

11. The Secretary asked if Ambassador Waller had been filled in on the details of Senator Mansfieldʼs recent meeting with Prince Sihanouk. When Ambassador Waller indicated he had not, the Secretary asked Mr. Unger to brief the Ambassador on the matter. The Secretary noted that Sihanouk almost entirely monopolized the conversation. Senator Mansfield got in only about 10 minutes worth of talking in a conversation lasting one and one-half hours.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Conlon and approved in S on January 5.

2 An account of the meeting of December 23 is in a memorandum of conversation, December 23, 1964, attached to a memorandum from Bundy to Rusk, January 1. (Ibid., POL 17 AUSTL–US)

3 Apparent reference to an article in The New York Times, January 4, 1966.

4 The following phrase was eliminated from the memorandum at this point: “and he thought that a bedside manner might be most effective at this point.”

5 On January 14, in telegram 559 to Canberra, the Department of State reported that Australian Ambassador to Cambodia Noel St. Charles Deschamps raised the question of better U.S.-Cambodian relations with Prime Minister Kantol who promised to pass the information on to Sihanouk. The Department found Kantolʼs reaction “encouraging,” but realized that he was not necessarily mirroring Sihanoukʼs current feelings. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S)

175. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 175. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, January 5, 1966.

SUBJECT

Cambodia Conference

Although I understand that State as a whole remains very leery of resurrecting any Cambodia conference proposal, Allen Whiting2 suggests that we over here might want to consider such a move.

The circumstances have altered considerably since Sihanoukʼs turn-down of the previous conference proposal. Cambodia is more gravely threatened than ever before—by a pincer movement with MACV on Cambodiaʼs eastern frontier and the Thai/GVN-supported Khmer Serei on the western frontier. Sihanouk is properly scared. It would be far less likely for him to shoot down the proposal under the present circumstances.

Our interests here are two-fold and clear: first and more narrowly, to get the Thai and GVN to call off their dogs—an effort in which we have been so far markedly unsuccessful; but second and more important, to get the right people to a conference where the long-sought corridor conversations can finally take place.

In short, there is more reason than ever for a Cambodia conference, both in terms of the heightened threat to Cambodiaʼs security and in terms of our intensified quest for negotiations.

So why not add this item to our current push? (Get the British and Soviets to take the initiative summoning such a conference.)

Jim

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. V, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret.

2 The Director of the Office on Research and Analysis for the Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State.

176. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Ball to Secretary of Defense McNamara 176. Letter From Acting Secretary of State Ball to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 17, 1966.

Dear Bob:

I have given careful consideration to the problem of Viet Cong use of Cambodia to support its forces in South Vietnam and, in particular, the Joint Chiefs of Staff views on future U.S. actions regarding Cambodia outlined in your letter of December 29.2 I agree with your conclusion that, unless there is a sudden and significant increase in the use of Cambodian territory by the PAVN/Viet Cong or in logistical support obtained in Cambodia, a gradual and cautious response by the U.S. Government and by certain other friendly governments is appropriate and desirable.

The following are my thoughts on the Courses of Action proposed by the Joint Chiefs and commented upon in your letter:

Course of Action A—The need to expand and intensify the overall intelligence collection program for Cambodia is amply demonstrated by the paucity of hard evidence on the extent and significance of PAVN/Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory and by the differences in interpretation of available information within the intelligence community which have arisen in the course of interagency discussions of the Joint Chiefsʼ proposals. I concur in and am forwarding your letter of December 29 to Admiral Raborn,3 requesting that he ask USIB to re-examine all possible assets to determine additional programs which might be developed to enhance our intelligence capability. I note, however, that among the activities which the Joint Chiefs envisage as being included in a stepped-up intelligence collection program are covert ground cross border intelligence incursions by small teams into Cambodian territory. In any proposal for this type of activity, I would wish to make certain that full consideration is given to the political problems it may raise, particularly should there be any question of the use of Vietnamese or “Khmer Serei” Cambodians.

Courses of Action B and C—I recognize the importance of political and psychological pressure on the Cambodian Government to inhibit Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory, including enlisting support in this effort by other friendly governments. We have already undertaken various actions to this effect, most recently in our December 21 press statement,4 and have had recent consultations with Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, India and France. We will continue to explore ways which can be effective in persuading Sihanouk that Cambodiaʼs best interests lie in preventing, to the best of his ability, Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory. However, as you are no doubt aware, a principal drawback to our efforts in this respect has been the lack of convincing evidence that use of Cambodian territory, in fact, constitutes a really significant factor for PAVN/Viet Cong operations in South Vietnam or that there has been collusion by the Cambodian Government in such use as has taken place. An aspect of this problem is that the Cambodian Government does not have the capability to control its borders with South Vietnam to the extent of preventing any use at all of its territory by the Viet Cong.

Course D through Course I—I agree fully with your views on these proposed courses of action and have no further comment on them at this time.

In conclusion I should like to point out that unsatisfactory as the present situation in Cambodia is from the U.S. point of view, it would be far worse, it seems to me, if Cambodia were pushed into active belligerency against South Vietnam and against U.S. armed forces or if control authority there were to collapse into civil strife and virtual anarchy as a consequence of border incidents and pressures from such elements as the Khmer Serei movement. Should either of these conditions occur, the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces would have a far greater opportunity than they now enjoy to use Cambodian territory for base areas, for refuge, for training, for supply and for infiltration of men and supplies into South Vietnam. In our various calculations as to how to deal with our existing difficulties in Cambodia, I believe that these are dangers which we must always keep in mind.

Sincerely yours,

George W. Ball 5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Ewing and John M. Kane of SEA on January 12.

2  Document 171.

3 See footnote 4, Document 171.

4 See footnote 2, Document 169.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Ball signed the original.

177. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of State McNamara 177. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of State McNamara 1

Washington, March 3, 1966.

JCSM–141–66

SUBJECT

Measures to Decrease Infiltration into South Vietnam from Cambodia via Sea LOCs and Mekong and Bassac Waterways (C)

1. (TS) Reference is made to your memorandum, dated 29 December 1965, subject: “U.S. Policy and Actions to Deal with Cambodian Support of the Viet Cong (S),”2 in which you expressed the desire that the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in coordination with the Department of State, take the necessary action to improve surveillance of sea lines of communication (LOCs) between the RVN and Cambodia and to intensify and make more effective controls on the Mekong and Bassac waterways without violating the Cambodian border, territorial waters, or legitimate rights to navigation.

2. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the problem of water-borne infiltration from Cambodia into South Vietnam and recognize that the development of feasible courses of action to deny the use of Cambodia for infiltration by the Viet Cong is limited by lack of adequate intelligence. However, pending the results of current efforts to expand and improve our intelligence on this problem being undertaken at your request by the US Intelligence Board, certain measures, as discussed below, are warranted.

3. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that: a. The planned increase in shallow-draft vessels for Market Time operations will increase capabilities to interdict infiltration along the coastal areas. CINCPAC is also studying the feasibility of extending GVN control over localities such as Phu Quoc. Upon arrival of the additional US personnel (approximately 560) required, forces will be adequate to initiate the US Navy portion of major river patrols by Operation Game Warden.

b. Legal authority exists for the GVN to impose more stringent measures to increase control over the Mekong and Bassac international waterways.

c. Select Vietnamese military personnel should be put aboard international shipping on the Mekong and Bassac Rivers while in SVN to assist customs officials, who have been generally ineffective, inspect cargoes en route, guard against unauthorized offloading, function as a cross-check on the performance of other GVN representatives, and obtain intelligence.

d. The GVN should be urged to announce intent to search ships during transit of the Mekong and Bassac Rivers.

e. To be properly integrated, plans for tightening controls on international shipping on the Mekong and Bassac waterways should be made in Saigon.

f. If future intelligence verifies Cambodian support to the Viet Cong, the US Government should announce that US Government-financed cargoes shall not be shipped on foreign flag vessels that have called at a Cambodian port subsequent to a specific date. This measure would be similar to the provisions of National Security Action Memorandum 340 dealing with NVN commerce.

4. (TS) In conclusion, the measures outlined in paragraph 3, above, will, under current political restrictions imposed, increase somewhat the effectiveness of countermeasures applied against Cambodian support of the Viet Cong via sea LOCs and the Mekong and Bassac Rivers. As additional intelligence develops, other recommendations which address the total infiltration problem will be forwarded. Immediate action is required to insure that the enforcement of current waterway controls is improved.

5. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the joint State/ Defense message in Appendix A hereto be dispatched.3 Upon dispatch of the message in Appendix A, the Joint Chiefs of Staff will provide appropriate direction to CINCPAC (Appendix B hereto).

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
John C. Meyer 4
Major General, USAF
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

1 Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155.1 (14 Oct 65). Top Secret.

2 See footnote 6, Document 171.

3 The appendices are attached, but not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Meyer signed the original.

178. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson 178. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 11, 1966.

The Cambodian caper.2 On delving further into this, I have discovered a royal snafu.

First, Hayden, Fulbright and Aiken3 all referred this matter to the Vice President, as the titular presiding officer of the Senate. The Vice President was about to sign letters to Fulbright, Aiken and Mansfield pointing out that the Cambodians had withdrawn the invite. We have held this up.

Second, while Washington, Bangkok, Saigon, and even Peiping all interpreted the Cambodian radio broadcast of 24 February (an attack on Symingtonʼs criticism of VC use of Cambodia) as stating that the Cambodian government withdrew the invitation addressed by its Parliament to three U.S. Senators, a red-faced State Department, checking the French text yesterday, found out that the French word used also means “reminds.” They then went back this morning to the Cambodian original and found that the verb is in fact “reminds.” Thus the invite still stands.

Third, FE in State still feels strongly that we should not pick up the invitation because (a) the Thais and GVN would be sore as hops; (b) it would give Sihanouk another propaganda victory; (c) Fulbright says his committee is too busy to travel; and (d) the Mansfield expedition to Cambodia demonstrates how little can be accomplished through such contacts. Others, including Harriman (I am told), believe that it might be better simply to defer this matter and play for time, perhaps returning an interim answer that the Congress is too busy at this moment. They see merit in keeping open at least a tenuous channel to the Prince.

Queries:

Should we leave this to the Vice President, or do a letter on your behalf?

On the merits, would you prefer a soft deferral or a polite turndown?4

R.W. Komer

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Robert Komer, Vol. XXI, 3/2–30/66. Confidential.

2 In a speech on January 30, Sihanouk took exception to Thai statements of widespread Khmer Serei popularity in Cambodia. Sihanouk charged that this was a view held by the United States and asked the U.S. Congress to send some of its members to conduct an on-the-spot investigation. On the same day, Senator Hayden received an invitation from the Cambodian National Assembly to send a delegation to investigate Khmer Serei versus Sihanouk popularity and charges of Cambodian santuary for the Viet Cong. (Memorandum from Thompson to Komer, March 11; ibid., Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67)

3 Senators George D. Aiken (R) from Vermont and Carl Hayden (D) from Arizona.

4 Johnson wrote the following note on source text: “Lets talk about this. Come in to see me. L.” Komer wrote the following note: “this superseded the later memo which the President approved. RWK.” Apparent reference to Document 179.

179. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson 179. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Komer) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 12, 1966, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Congressmen to Cambodia

I wonʼt bother you any further on this; it can be easily handled in the following way if you approve.

1. Iʼve called Senator Aiken. He was most understanding when I explained how State and I had misinformed you. In fact, he was so pleasant that I told him how I was recommending we handle the matter. He completely agreed, and feels it makes great good sense not to slam the door on Sihanouk.

2. Iʼve cleared with State a soft reply (Tab A)2 which neither rejects the Cambodian invite of three Congressmen nor accepts it—but simply pleads the press of Hill business at this time. This leaves us maximum flexibility and offends nobody.

3. It seems to me better if the Vice President formally answers the Hill inquiries and, as President of the Senate, signs the letter to his Cambodian counterpart. This leaves you above the play. If you agree, I will so recommend to the Vice President.3

R.W. Komer

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Robert Komer, Vol. XXI, 3/2–30/66. No classification marking.

2 Attached, but not printed.

3 Johnson checked his approval and wrote the following note “Bob, Be sure to have H.H[umphrey] check out with all Senators who might be interested—Mansfield, Fulbright, Hickenlooper, Dirksen et al. L”. According to a memorandum to Humphrey from Komer, March 14, attached but not printed, Komer recommended to the Vice President the “soft” reply and informed him of the Presidentʼs desire that he check with key Senators who might be interested.

180. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 180. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, April 2, 1966.

SUBJECT

Presidential Inquiry Regarding Emissary to Cambodia

1. We have examined the possibility of sending a Presidential emissary to reason with Sihanouk regarding Viet Cong/North Vietnamese use of Cambodian territory. We can see no hope of a successful mission, and a number of pitfalls.

2. Assuming the purpose is to persuade Sihanouk not to permit the VC/NVN to use his territory and to intern those who do cross the frontier in accordance with international law, the difficulties are these: a. Cambodian forces are, in fact, incapable of patrolling, let alone controlling, the 600-mile Cambodian border. (In this respect they are far weaker than the ARVN whose inability to control the border from their side has been clearly demonstrated.)

b. We know that the Cambodian Army has secret orders to prevent VC/NVN incursions. We know of no case where the Cambodian Army has resisted a large intrusion, but they do occasionally drive back small numbers.

c. Any open action by Cambodia in support of the GVN, which this would be, is out of the question, if for no other reason than because it would alienate Peking, which Sihanouk regards as his last friend, save De Gaulle, in a hostile world. He remains confident of a Communist triumph in Southeast Asia, and sees China as his only hope of salvation against his ancient enemies, Vietnam and Thailand.

3. An approach to Sihanouk would most likely elicit the response, which he has made repeatedly, that the VC/NVN do not use his territory for any purpose. He would cite the visits by US newspapermen Topping and Karnow, who failed to turn up any evidence, his request for a visit by US congressmen to certify his neutrality, and, most importantly, his repeated requests for action by the ICC to control his frontiers. In the latter connection he can point to still outstanding requests to the ICC and to the Geneva Co-Chairmen beginning last December and repeated most recently in mid-March. Although the British and Canadians, with our encouragement, have reacted favorably to these requests, nothing has come of them because of the flat opposition of the Russians and Poles (and, in the background, the Chinese), and the inaction of the Indians. A genuinely effective control operation, it has been estimated by our military, would require some thousands of men with helicopters, bases and good communications, and a willingness to engage the VC/NVN. Apart from the problem of where these forces would come from, we see no prospect of the Russians and Poles agreeing, and the Indians have never been willing to press this issue. A somewhat enlarged ICC operation with a few more teams might conceivably be mounted, but would at most serve as a deterrent and inconvenience to the VC/NVN. Moreover, the procedures would have to be carefully designed to prevent a whitewash.

4. Finally, it must be expected that any discussion with Sihanouk would promptly be made public. This would be particularly important to bear in mind if the approach involved any express or implied change in our rules of engagement. It is our estimate that Sihanoukʼs only response to such an approach would be to publicize it, to appeal for Chinese assistance, and to invite international condemnation of the US for violating his borders.

5. At this stage the problem is not so much to get Sihanouk to act, but one of supporting his request to the ICC for more adequate patrolling and control of his frontier. The British have been urging this on the Russians with no success, and the Canadians and we have been trying to get the Indians to react favorably to Sihanoukʼs request.

6. Even if we could get the Indians to support and contribute more teams, the Russians or Poles would not contribute money or men, and would do everything they could to block any effective operations. The Indians have never shown any willingness to push positions in the Cambodian ICC in opposition to the Russians. (Attached is a memo on our efforts to reactivate the ICC.)2

7. Conceivably an emissary could be sent to Sihanouk to impress on him the seriousness with which we regard the crossing of his border and use of his territory, but he might well refuse to receive an emissary for such a mission. If he did he might well ask the emissary to inspect the borders himself or send others. Such inspections have so far produced scant evidence of incursion or use—the VC/NVN all vanish—and invariably produce a whitewash of the charges. (For an analysis of the extent of VC/NVN use of Cambodian territory, see Intelligence Memo No. 3183/65.)3

8. Conceivably we could send an emissary to indicate our support of Sihanoukʼs request for an enlargement of the ICC and make this a joint effort. The questions then arise: a. Are we prepared to pay for it?

b. How do we overcome Polish sabotage of ICC operations and Indian reluctance to make them effective?

c. We would have to insist that the ICC could act by majority rule, in order to overcome the Polish veto.

d. We would have to insist that the ICC act on requests from the GVN and the US as well as Cambodia.

e. We would run the danger that an expanded ICC would not seriously inhibit the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese but would tie our hands.

9. The foregoing suggests that there is no prospect that a mission to Sihanouk would produce any useful result, and that our main effort has to be directed at the Indians.

10. If an emissary is sent, the names which come to mind are: Senator Mansfield

Governor Harriman

Ambassador Bonsal

WPB/SDB 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret. Rostow sent this memorandum to Johnson on April 11 recommending that “we get Ruskʼs personal judgment on the matter” and noting that if the United States had to engage in cross-border operations into Cambodia, “our record would be better.” Johnson wrote the following note on Rostowʼs memorandum: “see me about this.”

2 Not attached, but a copy can be found ibid., Memos to the President, W.W. Rostow, Vol. I, 4/1–30/66.

3 For the summary, see Document 170.

4  Berger signed for Bundy.

181. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) 181. Information Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 18, 1966.

SUBJECT

Some Possible Effects of Cambodian Recognition of DRV Political Representation

1. The April 11 decision of the Cambodian and North Vietnamese governments to elevate the level of DRV mission in Phnom Penh from a commercial representation to “the rank of Representation of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam” presumably places the latter on the same footing as the GVN “Representation” before the rupture of political relations in 1963. The West German “Representation” in Phnom Penh is the only mission with similar status there today. In Cambodian precedence lists, a “Representation” follows diplomatic missions but precedes the ICC and UN representations and the consulates general.

Sihanoukʼs Attitude Unchanged

2. The RKG decision clearly shows that Sihanouk has not changed his assessment of the final outcome of the struggle in South Vietnam. Apparently the increased U.S. commitment there and the consequent reports of belief among many Cambodian leaders that it may mean that the Viet Cong will not win in South Vietnam have not affected Sihanoukʼs attitude significantly. The DRV may have been able to capitalize on the current political turmoil there to pressure him into this latest concession.

Exact Status of “Representation” Unclear

3. The legal consequences of the Cambodian action depend upon the interpretation placed on it by the RKG. Theoretically, Sihanouk could be (1) establishing only de facto relations with the government administering the Northern Zone of Vietnam; (2) recognizing the existence of two separate Vietnamese states, while maintaining political relations with only one; or (3) recognizing the DRV as the sole government of the state of Vietnam. The language of the RKG announcement suggests that Sihanouk is moving beyond de facto relations with the government of a Zone in Vietnam but the fact that the “Representation” formula has been used in lieu of diplomatic relations leaves this possibility open. Sihanouk is likely to preserve the ambiguity in order to retain maximum flexibility. However, attributes of diplomatic status may be accorded the DRV representatives in the future, if the GVNʼs position deteriorates further. GVN/USG interpretation of the current Cambodian action as diplomatic recognition might clarify the situation to our overall disadvantage by pushing Sihanouk closer to the DRV than he wants to go at this time.

Effect on the 1954 Geneva Agreements

4. Signatories to the 1954 Geneva Agreements recognized that there was a single nation of Vietnam temporarily divided into two regrouping Zones subject to separate administration pending reunification. The Final Declaration of the 1954 Geneva Conference states: “The military demarcation line is provisional and should not in any way be interpreted as constituting a political or territorial boundary.” Thus, the Cambodian action would be inconsistent with the 1954 Geneva Agreements if it means Cambodia recognizes the existence of two states on the territory of the former single state of Vietnam. In this connection, however, it should be noted that the RLG maintains full diplomatic relations with both North and South Vietnam.

Mekong River Convention

5. The 1955 Mekong River Convention guarantees freedom of navigation on the river to the three contracting parties—Laos, Cambodia, and the Republic of Vietnam. It also extends this right to states which recognize the contracting states and which adhere to the terms of the Protocol. Other states may also adhere to the Protocol with the approval of the contracting parties. General principles of international law hold that treaties are made between states not governments. Thus the rights and obligations of states are not affected by non-recognition of governments except insofar as the absence of diplomatic relations prevents the operation of treaty machinery or the vindication of treaty rights. If Cambodia does not recognize the authority of the Government of the Republic of Vietnam, it could not call upon those authorities to implement its rights. Nevertheless, the GVN could not lawfully close the river to Cambodian shipping.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–VIET N. Confidential. Drafted by John M. Kane of FE/SEA and Meyer Feldman of L/FE. A note on the source text indicates that Bundy saw it.

182. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Komer) to President Johnson 182. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Komer) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 28, 1966.

Handling Cambodia. Your comment to the NSC staff that you were not entirely satisfied with our current “hard line” toward Cambodia crystallized some of my thinking too. Requests from our embattled field commanders that we bomb Cambodia or at least drop leaflets leave me cold—they would have far too little effect to outweigh the political uproar they would cause. Hence State is quite right in turning off these “gung ho” suggestions.

On the other hand, there ought to be imaginative ways of putting a quiet squeeze on Sihanouk via economic means and psywar. Intelligence reports suggest economic distress in Cambodia, growing disaffection with Sihanoukʼs policies—including his diversion of rice from Cambodian mouths to those of the VC and Hanoi. Meanwhile much Delta rice from the supposedly best-pacified area of Vietnam is rumored to be flowing to Cambodia.2

I am working on a rice strategy to cut back this flow, as well as eventually reduce the amount of rice we have to ship in. We are also taking a look at preclusive buying of Cambodian rice through third parties, so as to reduce the flow to our enemies. Surely we can outbuy Hanoi and Peking. Iʼm also pressing for quick study of other means of quiet economic warfare against Cambodia, as probably more effective and less politically risky than the warlike gestures proposed from Saigon.

The above will take time but weʼll keep the needle in.3

R.W. Komer

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Robert Komer, Memos to the President, March–June 66. Secret.

2  Komer wrote the following note next to this paragraph: “oil—WPB[undy] says something might be done.”

3 Johnson wrote the following note at the end of the memorandum: “Good—get back to me on this. L.”

183. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 183. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, June 21, 1966.

SUBJECT

Possible Approaches to the Cambodia Problem

This file is more or less self-explanatory.

In meeting with the NSC staff—urging us all to be imaginative—the President asked for proposals to get closer to Sihanouk.

Jim Thomson did the attached paper. I sent it forward with the recommendation that I be instructed to request you to examine the proposals and make your recommendations.

The Presidentʼs enthusiasm is self-evident, including his reaction to pages 5–6.

Walt

Attachment

Washington, June 20, 1966, 10:30 a.m.

Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Mr. President:

At your suggestion Jim Thomson has prepared the attached collection of imaginative initiatives with respect to Cambodia.

My recommendation is that you instruct me to request Secretary Rusk to examine them and make his recommendations to you—understanding, however, that you wish movement on this problem.

Walt

Approved2

Disapproved

See me

Attachment

Washington, June 14, 1966, 6:30 p.m.

Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

SUBJECT

Possible Approaches to the Cambodia Problem

In response to your request at our Cabinet Room meeting, I have been probing this town intensively for fresh ideas as to how we might improve our relations with Cambodia over the months ahead.

A. The Problem

As you know, the widely held view within the bureaucracy is that very little can be accomplished until we have achieved success in Vietnam—or at least until Sihanouk is convinced that we will succeed. This view is based on some convincing facts of life: 1. The United States is closely associated with Cambodiaʼs two historic enemies, Thailand and Vietnam. Both nations have encroached on Cambodia throughout the past (making it, in miniature, the Poland of Southeast Asia); and as recently as 1941–1945, Thailand seized and occupied all of northwest Cambodia. As long as we are so deeply committed to the Thai and Vietnamese, Sihanouk doubts that we will protect Cambodiaʼs independence.

2. In seeking protection from his immediate neighbors, the Prince thus looks to Communist China. He does this despite his opposition to Communism and his awareness of a long-term threat from China itself. Only the emergence of an alternative protector power will pull him away from alignment with Peking.

3. The Vietnam war exposes Cambodiaʼs eastern frontier areas to periodic incursions by Viet Cong, North Vietnamese, GVN, and U.S. forces. Since Cambodia completely lacks the capability to keep Communist units out of the sparsely populated northeast, it closes its eyes to Viet Cong incursions—and holds the U.S. and GVN responsible for the destruction of Cambodian lives and property that results from our own border operations.

B. Possible Lines of Action

Despite these facts of life, however, there are steps we could take that might ease the Princeʼs sense of insecurity and gradually improve our relations with Cambodia. None of them guarantees success; all involve at least the minimal risk of rebuff. But they seem to me worth trying nonetheless.

In the proposals that follow, I have suggested actions we might take to reassure Sihanouk of our support for Cambodiaʼs independence, territorial integrity, and neutrality; to maintain channels of friendly unofficial and perhaps official communication; to increase the effectiveness of international supervision of Cambodiaʼs frontiers; to end needless and profitless provocations; and, hopefully, to lay the groundwork for reestablished diplomatic relations. Some involve mere style and atmospherics—but such factors should not be discounted in our relations with a proud and sensitive ruler.

1. Expansion of the ICC

Sihanouk has asked that the ICC be expanded in order to police more effectively Cambodiaʼs Vietnam frontier; he also asks that we foot the bill. Rusk has informed the Cambodian Foreign Minister of our willingness to push this project. The problem seems to be that the Russians (and their agents, the Poles) are dragging their feet. It is possible that 30 to 40 ICC personnel, with helicopters and terms of reference that permit mobility, could keep close tabs on this border region, detect Viet Cong violations, and deter increased Communist use of Cambodia as a sanctuary or infiltration corridor. We should be entirely willing to pay the cost for such an obvious assist to our side; we should put the heat on the Russians (and the Indians) to get this expansion moving; but we canʼt do it without the Princeʼs strong support, and at the moment he seems to fear the heat from the other side.

2. Avoidance of Provocations from Vietnam

We should issue firm instructions to keep MACV (and the Pentagon) from further public accusations of unproven Cambodian collusion with the Communists. There is an understandable MACV tendency—with hearty Vietnamese support—to distort and magnify Communist use of Cambodia. We should accept the fact that some border violations will be inevitable in such a war; that although some Cambodian border officials do encourage such violations, the Cambodian Government so far does not; and that there is a clear net value to us in preventing the expansion of the Vietnam Warʼs battleground to include 66,000 sq. mi. of Cambodia.

3. Avoidance of Provocations from Thailand

Despite periodic efforts in Washington and the field, there is still clear evidence of Thai (and Vietnamese) support for the anti-Sihanouk Khmer Serei forces (no more than 1000) on Cambodiaʼs northwest frontier. The GVN trains Cambodians and ships them to Thailand where they are then put into action on the Cambodia border in order to broadcast anti-Sihanouk appeals and to foment frontier incidents. Sihanouk is still convinced of U.S. collusion with the dissidents. These activities, which stand no chance of success and run counter to our national interests, can only be turned off by a Presidential directive [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] repeated lower level protests have simply not been taken seriously by the GVN or the RTG.

4. Quiet Bilateral Contacts

Of the various posts where U.S. and Cambodian diplomats function in the same community, perhaps New Delhi and New York are the best suited to periodic quiet conversations between our lower level officials and those of the Cambodian Government. The Cambodian Ambassador to India, formerly Ambassador to the U.S., is a trusted Sihanouk man who participated in the prematurely terminated discussions which we conducted with the Cambodians in New Delhi in December 1964. Our Cambodian expert in Embassy New Delhi has maintained contact with this man. This channel should now be used to communicate substantive messages and to raise useful questions from time to time; an alternative channel should also be developed in New York between our mission and Cambodiaʼs able new Number-Two representative there.

5. U.S. Congressional Visit

As you know, the Vice President has accepted, on behalf of the Congress, a Cambodian suggestion that three members of Congress visit Cambodia sometime in the months ahead; this visit is now tentatively set for the autumn, with Senators Aiken, Inouye, and Pell hoping to travel to Phnom Penh. We should use the occasion of this visit to convey the good will of the U.S. Government to Sihanouk and his colleagues; we should attach to this mission some able Cambodia specialists from the Department; and we should consider using this occasion for the presentation of a letter from you to Sihanouk (see below).

6. Eugene Black Visit

We should explore the possibility of including Cambodia on the itinerary of Eugene Black when he takes his postponed trip to the Far East in October. Cambodia is highly pertinent to Blackʼs trip since the Mekong Development Program is currently hung up on the problem of funds for the next priority project, the Prek Thant Dam complex in Cambodia. Here again, Black might be the bearer of a Presidential letter (see below).

7. Presidential Letter

Although one must assume that Sihanouk will probably publish any correspondence he receives, however private, consideration should be given to a letter from you to the Prince, perhaps to be carried by the Senators or Black. The purposes of such a letter would be reassurance, flattery, and the establishment of a personal channel of communication with a man who places high value on personal relations. Such a letter would involve obvious risks, but I have attempted an illustrative draft (see attachment).3

8. Other Visitors

We should keep in mind the several human assets we hold in Americans for whom the Prince has special friendship or respect. Among them are Dean Acheson, who won Cambodiaʼs World Court case against Thailand; also Senator Mansfield, Governor Harriman, and Chester Bowles; of lower visibility but great skill is Major General Edward C.D. Sherrer, one of our most successful MAAG Chiefs (in Cambodia, 1961–63), who is now serving on the Joint Staff of the Pentagon. In the absence of diplomatic relations, we should try to keep up a program of unofficial visitors to Phnom Penh.

9. Third Country Mediation

Our diplomatic interests in Cambodia are currently well served by the Australians, whose able Ambassador is close to the Prince. As an antidote to over-reliance on Saigon and Bangkok for information on Cambodia, we should frankly ask the Australians, as well as other potential intermediaries—notably the Japanese, British, Filipinos, and Indonesians—to be alert to times and ways in which our relations with Cambodia might be improved.

10. Diplomatic Relations

Since 1965, Sihanouk has set three general conditions for resumption of diplomatic relations with the U.S.: a halt to border incidents; compensation—through bulldozers or tractors—for past Cambodian casualties; and formal U.S. recognition of Cambodiaʼs neutrality, territorial integrity and present borders. Although these conditions may be negotiable, we should probably not push too hard for resumed relations until we have tested the ICC track and unofficial contacts. Through the latter contacts, however—and through New York and New Delhi—we should seek to refine Sihanoukʼs conditions to a more acceptable formulation (i.e., a pledge of respect for Cambodiaʼs frontiers and neutrality, and perhaps some symbolic compensation for Cambodian casualties.)

Note: I do not believe that any of these moves will easily or quickly resolve our problems with Cambodia but they are all worth considering, and—with a close eye to timing—they may be worth trying in the months ahead. Some of them, of course, will irritate the GVN and, especially, Thailand; but this is not a high price, and it is well worth paying. Improved relations with Cambodia would clearly serve our national interest not only by limiting the Indo-China battlefield but by proving our willingness and ability to pursue a live-and-let-live relationship with a neutral and unaligned Southeast Asian state.

C. Recommendations

1. That you indicate to the Department of State the high priority which you attach to an expansion of the ICC in Cambodia.4

2. That you direct the Department and CIA to press the Thai and Vietnam Governments to cease all support for the Khmer Serei rebels.5

3. That you ask State to consider and prepare a Presidential message to Sihanouk, to be carried either by the Senate mission or by Eugene Black.6

4. That you ask State to prepare a continuing program of unofficial visits by Americans to Phnom Penh and private contacts between U.S. and Cambodian diplomats.7

JC Thomson Jr.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Read sent a memorandum to Rusk, Ball, and U. Alexis Johnson, June 22, informing them that he had asked the Policy Planning Staff to coordinate a response to Thompsonʼs memorandum by June 28. Readʼs memorandum is attached, but not printed.

2 Johnson approved and wrote the following note: “This is excellent. Iʼm proud—L.”

3 Attached, but not printed.

4 Johnson approved and wrote: “Good & Strong!”

5 Johnson approved and wrote: “Same.” and drew an arrow to the phrase “Good & Strong!”

6 Johnson approved and wrote: “by both.”

7 Johnson approved and wrote: “I heartily agree—Letʼs also include other countries where we need contacts (Latin America, Africa, Eastern Europe.)”7

184. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 184. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 25, 1966, 4:15 p.m.

Mr. President:

This lively account confirms your instinct about Sihanouk.

I checked with George Ball to make sure they staff out and act on some of the Cambodia recommendations we sent over.

Mr. President, you can smell it all over: Hanoiʼs operation, backed by the Chicoms, is no longer being regarded as the wave of the future out there. U.S. power is beginning to be felt.

Weʼre not in; but weʼre moving.2

Walt

Attachment

Saigon, June 25, 1966.

Telegram 5762 From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State3

1. DʼOrlandi, Italian Ambassador, called to tell me of his trip to Cambodia, to which he is accredited, and where he went to make his official farewell call.

2. Evidently DʼOrlandi carried out my request that he not give Sihanouk an impression that everything was falling apart in Viet-Nam. When he told Sihanouk that Ky was in a solid position here, Sihanouk said that Ky was the only Vietnamese who “has not smeared me in his speeches.” He evidently felt less antagonistic to Ky than he has to any other Vietnamese.

3. He said he wanted to resume normal diplomatic intercourse with Viet-Nam and DʼOrlandi felt there was a better atmosphere on this subject than he, DʼOrlandi, had ever noticed.

4. Apparently, when Lord Walston was in Cambodia recently, he revived the idea of Cambodian-Vietnamese teams to inspect the border. This had been a Diem proposal, which Sihanouk had turned down in 1962. Sihanouk said he was still against it because he did not want to get entangled in internal affairs with Viet-Nam. According to Sihanouk, “All Vietnamese are ʼB—S.ʼ” Sihanouk wants to stay neutral. He is happy to have a powerful, and much larger International Control Commission in Cambodia, provided he does not have to pay anything, since “I havenʼt a penny.” Instead of charging him with helping the Viet Cong, there should be a larger International Control Commission, which, Sihanouk said, would be specifically authorized by him to establish fixed posts in cities, harbors, and along the frontier and take their jeeps wherever they wanted. He said they could go wherever they wanted to and in any number, and there would be no limit on the extent which they would be allowed to inspect.

5. When DʼOrlandi asked whether the Italian Military Attache would go, Sihanouk said he would be delighted and would instruct his Chief of Staff accordingly, adding that the Military Attaches have all visited the so-called Sihanouk trail and have found nothing.

6. What, he asked, can he do with 30,000 men when 900,000 Americans and Vietnamese are unable to cope with the situation?

7. DʼOrlandi said that he was sure that Sihanouk means what he says and that he detected absolutely “no nonsense” about being tied up with the Chinese Communists.

8. Turning to Thailand, Sihanouk said that he realized that the Thais might not accept, but he wanted to ask the Thais to join him so that “both of us” would sign a communique stating that both would respect the present border. Sihanouk said he didnʼt care about the Khmer Serei. All he wanted was to ask the Thais to sign the statement with him and both sides to respect the borderline. DʼOrlandi commented that quite a lot could be achieved under this.

9. Sihanouk admitted that this was no time for negotiations with North Viet-Nam. DʼOrlandi, reflecting our conversation before he left, asked Sihanouk whether he had told Peking and Hanoi that if they had accepted President Johnsonʼs offer of April 7, 1965, negotiations would have started with only 30,000 American advisers in Viet-Nam? Now there were 265,000 fighting men, and if you wait eight or nine months more there will be almost a half-million fighting men. “Do your friends,” DʼOrlandi asked, “realize the implications of this?”

10. Sihanouk said this was a good point, but he didnʼt know what could be done about it. What could Italy do?

11. DʼOrlandi said Italy was aware of its limitations, and Sihanouk told him not to be so modest.

12. DʼOrlandi then said that “Our great ally is in favor of negotiations, and yours isnʼt. It is up to you to do something.”

13. DʼOrlandi then said it was his impression that Sihanouk does not rely on China to save him if he is attacked. In fact, he relies on no one. He is very bitter and pessimistic about his own prospects and that of his country, saying, “They can murder us anytime. The United States is the biggest logistic and military power in the world. I just have a few old jeeps, and no gasoline to put into them.” DʼOrlandi then described his conversation with the Australian Embassy in Cambodia. They were absolutely flat in their assertions that there had never been a trace of Viet Cong in Cambodia. They believe Sihanouk is acting in good faith and really neutral. The Australians said that the Chinese Communist Ambassador was really embarrassed Saturday morning when Sihanouk made his offer to the Thais.

14. Sihanouk says that “In the whole of Southeast Asia, there are no more anti-Communist measures than I have taken in Cambodia.” DʼOrlandi backed this up, and said the police measures regarding the Communists are very strict.

15. DʼOrlandi called on the Secretary-General of the Foreign Office, who is “terrified” of the U.S. might in Viet-Nam, and said “It will be worse for Hanoi next year, and yet they wonʼt discuss.” The Secretary-General of the Foreign Office expects to meet Sainteny on the 27th.

16. Sihanouk stressed the need for understanding with the West; he is proud of being on good terms with Australia and Japan; he has invited three U.S. Senators to come to Cambodia (he did not give DʼOrlandi their names).

17. DʼOrlandi theory is that the Viet Cong order rice through Chinese traders in Phnom Penh, then it is transported by truck close to the border where there is no one. Then the Viet Cong cross the border and fetch it. There is no direct contact. The Chinese donʼt deliver. They just leave it. If the ICC were in Cambodia, with fixed posts, they would know. DʼOrlandi believes there are no men coming through Cambodia, but supplies—“Truck loads of eatables.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. LV, Memos A, 6/66. Secret.

2 Johnson wrote the following note on the source text: “Good—see me. L.” Another note in an unidentified hand reads: “Mr. Rostow saw Pres. 6/27/67.”

3 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt. W. Rostow, Vol. VII. Secret. The telegram was retyped in the White House and there was no time of dispatch on the source text.

185. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 185. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 29, 1966.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

1. I refer to the recommendations on Cambodia which you have approved2 and indicate below the action that has been and is being taken with respect to each of them.

2. I know that you appreciate that, in dealing with Sihanouk, who is Cambodia, we are dealing with someone who is not only proud and sensitive but also highly mercurial and temperamental. I feel that our policy of gracefully withdrawing aid and subsequently terminating diplomatic relations without any recriminations on our part has had a favorable influence on Sihanoukʼs attitude. A major additional factor, which is also beginning to influence his attitude, is the demonstration in Vietnam that we do not intend to abandon Southeast Asia to the Communists.

3. While resumption of diplomatic relations with Cambodia would of course be desirable, I agree that to seek to force the pace might well produce the opposite effect upon the Prince. However, we should continue a forthcoming and dignified stance toward him, keeping alert to any overtures he may make on resumption of relations.

4. At the present time from the standpoint of our interests the most important aspect with regard to Cambodia is the use of its territory by the Viet Cong. After, over the years, rejecting many bilateral and multilateral proposals for reducing incidents along the border, including those by the subcommittee of the UN Security Council in 1964, Sihanoukʼs increasingly urgent appeals over the last six months for the ICC to supervise his border seem to indicate that he now has real concern over the consequences of Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory. We have therefore regarded the expansion of the ICC, despite its limitations, as the most promising line of action open to us. With support from the British and Canadians, we have accordingly pressed the Soviets, Poles and Indians to respond positively to the Cambodian proposals. We have also made clear that we are prepared to foot the bill. Regrettably, after six months of silence, the Soviets have now rejected the proposals, apparently definitively.

5. While the Soviet action now seems to have closed the ICC track for the time being, we can take some satisfaction from the fact that our support for the proposal has improved our own relations with Cambodia. It has also again shown our willingness—and Communist refusal—to support any peaceful approach to the problem of Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory. However, Secretary Rusk is now discussing with UK Foreign Minister Stewart in Canberra what our next steps might be. One of the difficulties is, of course, that the Poles as well as the Indians will not move in the face of Soviet opposition. The Soviets are probably motivated by more concern for their relations with Hanoi than with Cambodia. This will certainly be apparent to Sihanouk.

6. Our views on the remaining recommendations are as follows: A. The Khmer Serei Problem (1) Our efforts with the Thai and the Vietnamese on this have a long history. However, more recently, when we received intelligence last winter indicative of plans for a build-up of Khmer Serei forces and for large-scale attacks against Northwest Cambodia, Ambassador Lodge in Saigon and Ambassador Martin in Bangkok, acting on Secretary Ruskʼs personal instructions, made strong representations at the highest level to the governments of South Vietnam and of Thailand to urge an end to support of Khmer Serei activities. Both Prime Minister Ky and Prime Minister Thanom indicated a willingness to comply with our strongly-expressed wishes in this matter. Although we cannot be certain that support has ceased entirely, there have been almost no reports of Khmer Serei activity in recent months, except for a small clash in April.

(2) Perhaps more important, we have solid evidence that the Thai, at least, are disillusioned by the demonstrated ineffectiveness of the Khmer Serei and are anxious to damp down tensions in the border area. With this in mind they have asked the UN Secretary General to send UN observers to the border area, at Thai expense. The Secretary General has discussed the Thai proposal with the Cambodians and has expressed to them and to the Thai willingness to send a high-level representative to explore the possibilities of mediation and possibly of later sending teams of observers to both sides of the border. Sihanouk is apparently agreeable to this approach and has even talked of finding some means of re-establishing diplomatic relations with Thailand.

(3) We believe that for the present we should concentrate our efforts on encouraging the Thai initiative with the Secretary General. Should there be any indication of a resurgence of Khmer Serei activity or support by the Thais or South Vietnamese, we would then favor again making the strongest possible representations.

B. Presidential Letter to Sihanouk

We agree that it may be desirable for you to send a letter to Prince Sihanouk by the three Senators (in August or September) or by Mr. Eugene Black (October or November). The draft prepared by your staff3 is a good one and we would at this time have only relatively minor changes to suggest in it. However, we should like the opportunity to review the draft and the desirability of sending the letter in the light of the exact situation at the time of the visits.

C. Unofficial Visits by Americans to Cambodia and Private Contacts Between U.S. and Cambodian Diplomats (1) Since the severance of diplomatic relations in May 1965, the only important American visit to Cambodia was that by Senator Mansfieldʼs party last November. We sought to have Cambodia included in Mr. Blackʼs itinerary this spring, but the Cambodian Government indicated that it would not be convenient for him to come. We have sought also to maintain contact with the Cambodian Ambassador in New Delhi, who was Ambassador in Washington for many years and who is close to Sihanouk. For example, earlier this month Ambassador Bowles made a special point of explaining to him that the U.S. fully supported the ICC expansion proposal. Still another move of this sort is a recent friendly letter from Governor Harriman to the Prince, sent via the correspondent Robert Shaplen, who is visiting Cambodia next month.

(2) In addition to the possible visits by the Senators and Mr. Black, we will be looking for other possibilities, or alternatives, if these do not materialize. We will also continue to seek additional diplomatic and unofficial contacts, for example, through private Americans on good terms with Sihanouk. In doing so, we must of course accept the possibility of rebuffs. For example, when we sought some months ago to contact Son Sann, a senior Cambodian minister then traveling abroad, in order to pass a reassuring message to Sihanouk, he refused to see our representative (an acquaintance of long standing). Similarly, the Cambodian UN Delegate declined the recent White House invitation.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared by U. Alexis Johnson and Berger.

2 See Document 183 and its attachments.

3 See footnotes 3 and 6, Document 183.

July 1966–December 1968: Reconciliation Attempts; Assessing Cambodiaʼs Support of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese; Attempts to Encourage Cambodia To Confront the Problem; Cambodian Detention and Release of the U.S. Crew of LCU 1577July 1966–December 1968: Reconciliation Attempts; Assessing Cambodiaʼs Support of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese; Attempts to Encourage Cambodia To Confront the Problem; Cambodian Detention and Release of the U.S. Crew of LCU 1577

186. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson

Washington, July 1, 1966.

Source: Johnsonn Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt W. Rostow, Vol. VIII. Secret. Rostow transmitted this memorandum to the President under cover of a note of July 5, noting that “State argues that we should not push the Black visit to Cambodia now, but leave it for his planned trip in the fall.” Rostow also noted that the Department would “prefer to let the Congressional delegation carry the mail on this round.” Rostow suggested that after seeing what kind of response Bowles had with the Cambodian Ambassador in New Delhi and how the British fared with the Soviets on a wider role for the ICC in Cambodia, then the decision on the Black visit could be made. The President approved the recommendation that Rostow “Report what Bowles gets and seek later instruction.”

187. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, July 8, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret.

188. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, July 8, 1966, 8 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos 10/65–9/67. Secret.

189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, August 4, 1966, 1231Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret.

190. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 12, 1966, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Barbour. The memorandum is part I of II. The meeting took place in Harrimanʼs office.

191. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, September 20, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Confidential.

192. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 24, 1966.

Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155 (1 Feb 1966) Sec. 1, IR 101. Top Secret; Sensitive.

193. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Roche) to President Johnson

Washington, September 30, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Seven Nations Conference, POTUS Trip I. No classification marking.

194. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Saigon, October 2, 1966, 1305Z.

Source: Johnson Library National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. LX, Cables, 10/66. Top Secret. Exclusive for Sharp. Repeated to JCS for Wheeler.

195. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, October 6, 1966.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 57–66. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction. In a briefing memorandum to George F. Denney, October 5, Fred Green of INR/RFE noted that the White House asked for this estimate early in the summer of 1966 when it appeared likely that Harriman would go to Cambodia. According to Green, its terms of reference were broad because no NIE had been written on Cambodia since 1959. (Ibid.)

196. Memorandum of Conversation

Manila, October 22, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Blair and approved by S on November 21. The meeting took place at the Department of Foreign Affairs while Rusk was in Manila for the Summit Conference on Vietnam.

197. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State

Manila, October 31, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Seoul eyes only for Secretary from Ambassador Blair. There was no time of dispatch on the source text, which was received at the Department of State at 2:07 a.m., October 31.

198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 19, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Cambodia, 1966. Top Secret.

199. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, January 26, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 57–67. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a covering note, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, the AEC, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with its submission except the representative of the FBI who abstained on the grounds it was outside his jurisdiction.

200. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 57–67. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Limited Distribution.

201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, March 24, 1967, 10:27 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Ewing, cleared by Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

202. Memorandum From the Chief, Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 13, 1967.

203. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by Douglas R. Perry and Ewing of EA/BUC.

204. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, S/S-International Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 169. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy and approved in S on May 1. Holyoake, Hasluck, and Rusk were attending the 16th meeting of the ANZUS Council, held in Washington, April 21–22.

205. Action Memorandum From the Chairman of the Cambodian Study Group (Unger) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, May 1, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Unger and initialed by Kohler.

206. Memorandum From the Country Director for Burma and Cambodia (Ewing) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 15, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Secret. Initialed by Habib.

207. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read)

Washington, June 19, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Confidential. Initialed by Bromley Smith. A note on the source text indicates that William Bundy saw it.

208. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser (Aldrich) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 11, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Mark B. Feldman and Aldrich of L/EA on September 9. A note on the source text indicates that it was seen by Bundy. Copies went to Harriman, Habib, and Lacey.

209. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, September 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Lacey and Perry on September 13.

210. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, September 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Perry on September 13.

211. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 5, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 71 A 4919, Cambodia 000.1—1967 (381 Cambodia). Top Secret.

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, November 29, 1967, 0225Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared in substance with Rostow at the White House, and approved by Rusk.

213. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Saigon, December 5, 1967, 0815Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Top Secret; Limdis; Exclusive for Wheeler. Repeated to Rusk, McNamara, and Sharp. This telegram was retyped in the White House and used at a lunch-eon meeting on December 5; for a record of the meeting, see Document 214; and apparently referred to at the meeting of 6:02 p.m. of December 5, see Document 216.

214. Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 5, 1967, 1:18–2:37 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnsonʼs Notes of Meetings. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the living quarters of the White House. Attending were President Johnson, Vice President Humphrey, McNamara, Rusk, Vance, Helms, Rostow, George Christian, and Tom Johnson.

215. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 5, 1967, 4:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Cambodia. Top Secret; Extremely Sensitive.

216. Notes of Meeting

Washington, December 5, 1967, 6:02, 7:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnsonʼs Meeting Notes. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. There is also a “Summary of the Meeting on Cambodia on December 5, 1967 in the Cabinet Room 6:02 p.m.–7:15 p.m.,” which has no drafting information. (Ibid., Transcripts of Meetings in the Cabinet Room, 12/5/67) Tom Johnsonʼs record is more extensive, but the few minor differences are noted in footnotes below.

217. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Washington, December 6, 1967, 0154Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia, 5 E(1)a, 5/66–1/68. Top Secret; Immediate; Specat; Exclusive. No drafting officer appears on the source text; Wheeler approved the transmission. Repeated to Sharp.

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, December 8, 1967, 0027Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Bundy, cleared with Lacey, Steadman of DOD/ISA, Rostow, and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to Saigon and Ottawa.

219. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, December 12, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E(1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Top Secret; Nodis.

220. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, December 14, 1967.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79–R 01012A, ODDI Registry. Secret/[classification indicator not declassified]; Controlled Dissem. A note on the covering sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of Defense and State, and the NSA prepared this estimate. It was concurred in by all members of the USIB except representatives for the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

221. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson

Washington, December 15, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Memos and Cables, 1/67–12/68. Top Secret; Nodis. Also sent to Acting Secretary Katzenbach. Rostow sent this memorandum to the President on December 16, noting Harrimanʼs “deep opposition to military action” and his urging of diplomatic action via the ICC. Rostow stated that if renewed ICC action failed, a campaign to educate the public should be undertaken. Only after these steps were taken, should American military power be taken in violation of Cambodiaʼs borders. Rostow observed that, “at the moment he [Harriman] is supporting the track we are on.”

222. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Saigon, December 26, 1967, 1009Z.

Source: Center for Military History, Westmoreland Papers, Message Files, COMUSMACV, 1 Dec-31 Dec 1967. Top Secret; Limit Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

223. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, December 27, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 8:55 p.m. This was originally a Department of State situation report on Cambodia, drafted by Lacey and Perry and cleared by Habib. Read sent it to Rostow on December 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB)

224. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, December 29, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Confidential. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 10:20 a.m. Central Standard Time.1

225. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, December 29, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Secret. Repeated to George Christian. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 12:50 p.m. Central Standard Time and relayed to San Antonio Communication Center at 1:10 p.m. These recommendations were drafted by William Bundy. (Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron, Nov-Dec 1967)

226. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, January 3, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. Secret; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, January 7, 1968, 1649Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB. Secret; Nodis. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the Johnson Ranch in Texas for the President as CAP 80186, January 8. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia)1

228. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 10, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Meeker, Salans, and Aldrich. Copies sent to Harriman and Bundy.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, January 12, 1968, 1523Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Bowles. Secret.1

230. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State

New Delhi, January 12, 1968, 1653Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Eyes Only; handled as Exdis. A copy of this telegram was sent to the Johnson Ranch as CAP 80311, January 12. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68)

231. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, February 27, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Herz and Perry on February 23 and cleared by Bundy.

232. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, March 19, 1968, 12:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. Top Secret.

233. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, April 22, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. No classification marking.

234. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 27, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Cowherd and Leonhart.

235. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 28, 1968, 10:40 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables & Memos, 1/67–12/58. Top Secret.

236. Telegram From the White House to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) in Texas

Washington, May 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 8:25 p.m. CST.

237. Telegram From the White House to President Johnson in Texas

Washington, May 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 9 p.m. CST.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 8, 1968, 2342Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret;Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Herz and Bundy, cleared by J.R. Burke of EA/VN, and approved by Bundy.

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, July 26, 1968, 0005Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret; Priority; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Bennett, cleared by Leonhart, Corcoran, Richard H. Moorsteen of U, and Murray J. Bellman, the Deputy Legal Adviser, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Canberra and Saigon.

240. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 29, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Trent, Corcoran, and Charles A. Schmitz of L/EA.

241. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 29, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Trent and approved by Corcoran.

242. Memorandum of Meeting With President Johnson

Washington, July 30, 1968, 1 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, [Luncheon with the President, 7/30/68]. Secret. This was a regular weekly Tuesday lunch meeting with Rusk, Clifford, Wheeler, Taylor, Helms, George Christian, Bromley Smith (acting for Rostow), and Tom Johnson. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted until 2:05 p.m. (Ibid.) Tom Johnson also prepared a memorandum of this meeting. (Ibid., Tom Johnsonʼs Notes of Meetings, July 30, 1968) Additional information from Tom Johnsonʼs account is noted in footnotes below.

243. Letter From Senator Mike Mansfield to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 1, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. No classification marking.

244. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, September 4, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking. Drafted by Wright.

245. Editorial Note

246. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, September 5, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Black. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy.

247. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, September 5, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development Program (Black Committee) (ADB), Vol. III. Secret.

248. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, September 16, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. No classification marking.

249. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, September 24, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret.

250. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, October 1, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1499, Cambodia 000.1, 1968 (092 Cambodia). Top Secret. Drafted by J.H. Mobley of ISA on September 26.

251. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense Clifford

Washington, October 10, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Top Secret. Drafted by Bennett and cleared by Corcoran and Porter.

252. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, October 15, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Top Secret.

253. Information Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, October 28, 1968, 5:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum.

254. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain)

Washington, November 7, 1968, 2223Z.

Source: Center for Military History, Abrams Papers, Messages, 1754. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Abrams.

255. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, November 26, 1968, 1908Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, but not passed to Bangkok, Vientiane, and Canberra by the Department as requested by the Embassy.

256. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Nitze)

Washington, December 3, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (3), 11/68–1/69, Cambodia. Top Secret; Sensitive.

257. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, December 5, 1968, 1325Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok.

258. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, December 12, 1968.

Source: Department of State, EA/VN Files: Lot 74 D 51, Cross Border. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Bennett and cleared by Godley and Corcoran.

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, December 17, 1968, 1818Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–7 CAMB. Secret; Immediate, Nodis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared with Godley and Corcoran, and approved by Rusk.

260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, December 17, 1968, 2206Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bennett and Corcoran, cleared with Bromley Smith and Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

261. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, December 18, 1968, 0415Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 (D) 1, Allies Troop Commitments, 3/67–1/69. Top Secret; Eyes Only. On December 19, Wheeler repeated this telegram to Rostow, Rusk, and Helms.

262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 21, 1968, 0135Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Bennett; cleared by Corcoran, Flowerree, Rear Admiral Shepard of OASD/ISA, and B.G. Glick of the Joint Staff/J–3; and approved by Godley. Also sent to JCS and repeated to Bangkok, CINCPAC, and COMUSMACV.

263. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, December 29, 1968, 0649Z.

Source: Center for Military History, Abrams Papers, Messages, 2104. Top Secret. Repeated to Abrams, CINCPACFLT Admiral Hyland, CINCPACAF General Nazzaro, and Lieutenant General Hutchin of CINCPAC Admin.

186. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 186. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 1, 1966.

SUBJECT

Possible Visit by Mr. Eugene Black to Cambodia

How It Might be Arranged

1. The proposed visit might be arranged directly or indirectly. The direct approach would be to inquire, either through the Australian Ambassador in Phnom Penh or through the Cambodian Ambassador in New Delhi, whether Prince Sihanouk would receive Mr. Black as your emissary. An indirect approach might be to have Mr. Black visit Cambodia for discussion of the Prek Thnot Dam Project. He could at the same time go to Saigon for discussion of the My Tuan Bridge Project. Both of these are Mekong Committee schemes recently endorsed by ECAFE for solicitation of funds. It would probably be best to sound out Sihanouk through ECAFE channels (Mr. Narasimhan) if the latter approach is adopted. (A prior decision in principle for U.S. participation in the funding of these projects would be required.)

Concurrent Action Now Under Way

2. In addition to the matters mentioned in my memorandum of June 29, we have since taken two new steps designed to encourage the apparently favorably-developing Cambodian attitude. First we have instructed Ambassador Bowles to make direct contact with Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny in New Delhi. Nong Kimny was a long-time Cambodian Ambassador in Washington and is close to Sihanouk. Bowles is to explain to Nong Kimny all that we have done to support the Cambodian proposal for expansion of the ICC and to solicit his views as to what further we can do to support them on this.

3. Secondly, the British Foreign Secretary Michael Stewart, at Secretary Ruskʼs urging, is communicating anew with the Soviet Geneva Co-Chairman, in effect seeking to get Soviet reconsideration of its rejection of the ICC expansion proposal and inviting the Soviet Co-Chairman to meet with him in Geneva (or another place) to consider this matter as well as the more general question of an international conference on Cambodia, which Sihanouk has long desired.

4. Thirdly, Ambassador Thompson is following up on the ICC matter with Dobrynin tomorrow.

Consideration Affecting a Possible Visit by Mr. Black

5. The evidence of a developing shift to Sihanoukʼs position to a more neutral stance is now unmistakeable. This is evident from his speech of June 18, with which I believe you are familiar. It is also borne out by a readiness to push for expansion of the ICC not only with us and the British but also with the Communist side, including the Chinese. Another indicator is the positive reaction he has given to Thai proposals for the sending of a UN Secretary General representative to the area. Finally, there is sensitive evidence that Sihanouk is making direct moves to restore diplomatic relations with Thailand. We think these moves reflect Sihanoukʼs fear that the war might spill over into Cambodia, and very likely that he is beginning to doubt his earlier judgment that the Viet Cong were certain to succeed.

6. We very much feel that, as in the case of Indonesia, we should act with great caution with regard to this evolving situation, being especially careful to avoid actions or statements which Sihanouk might consider as pushing him too far or too fast. We do not judge that he is at the point, or anywhere near it, where he is prepared to take important risks with regard to his relations with the Chinese, in particular, and Hanoi. This is borne out by the anti-American tirade which he delivered on June 20, apparently to balance his statement of the 18th. Sample excerpt: “The acts of the Johnson/McNamara group, if compared with those of the bellicose German warmongers during World War II, are more savage and inhuman. Actually these acts are unique and are the most cruel and savage acts that one has ever witnessed in world history.”

7. I know you attach considerable importance to Mr. Blackʼs trip to the area this fall, in connection with your program for Southeast Asia. We hope at that time that he might be able to visit Cambodia. If Sihanouk should refuse to agree to a visit by Mr. Black now, and make a public issue of it, on top of his last turn down of a Black visit in April, it would probably rule out a possible Black visit in the fall.

8. If the visit involves a move to restore diplomatic relations, it is virtually certain that we shall be confronted with an immediate demand that we accept Sihanoukʼs prior conditions which include an acceptance of his present frontiers with Vietnam and Thailand, as he defines them; a “guarantee” against future violations of his border; and the payment of indemnities for past violations. There is no reason to believe on past performance that these demands are negotiable, and a failure to meet them could well leave our relations with Cambodia in a worse state than they were before the visit. Acceptance of them, on the other hand, would gravely damage our relations with the Thai and Vietnamese who have, after all, supported us down the line over the years.

9. It seems to me that we now have a situation in which Sihanouk seems to be trying to extricate himself from a predicament which is in part of his own making. We should make sure that all the doors are kept open so that he can get out, but avoid any overt action which might cause him to pull back or even slam the door in our face.

10. A ready opening, through which you can send a message to Sihanouk, should soon be available. The Cambodians have now replied to the latest message of the Vice President indicating readiness to receive a Congressional delegation as soon as they can free themselves, presumably after Congress adjourns. Barring some new development, I believe that this would be better timing for a special communication from you to the Prince. It would also, in our view, be a better vehicle because we would avoid the inevitable suggestion of aid involved in a Black visit—which Sihanouk could all too easily play publicly as an effort to buy him off.

George W. Ball 2

1 Source: Johnsonn Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt W. Rostow, Vol. VIII. Secret. Rostow transmitted this memorandum to the President under cover of a note of July 5, noting that “State argues that we should not push the Black visit to Cambodia now, but leave it for his planned trip in the fall.” Rostow also noted that the Department would “prefer to let the Congressional delegation carry the mail on this round.” Rostow suggested that after seeing what kind of response Bowles had with the Cambodian Ambassador in New Delhi and how the British fared with the Soviets on a wider role for the ICC in Cambodia, then the decision on the Black visit could be made. The President approved the recommendation that Rostow “Report what Bowles gets and seek later instruction.”

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Ball signed the original. The original signed copy is filed (mistakenly) ibid., Country File, China, Vol. VI.

187. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 187. Memorandum From James C. Thomson, Jr., of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, July 8, 1966.

SUBJECT

Next Moves on Cambodia

Chet Bowles has now talked to Cambodiaʼs Ambassador to India (New Delhiʼs 336 attached).2 The conversation contained no surprises, but the key will be Sihanoukʼs reaction. Despite Chetʼs doubts, Stateʼs analysts believe that Nong Kimny will view the Bowles approach as a deliberate, non-casual démarche and will report it in full to the Prince. So we should be prepared for some repercussions—favorable or otherwise—through FBIS, a return visit by Nong Kimny, or some other channel.

Meanwhile, as you know, the British have delivered a note from Stewart to Gromyko requesting reconsideration of the Soviet refusal to support the expansion of the ICC in Cambodia and proposing talks on the Cambodia problem in Geneva, Moscow, or elsewhere. Wilsonʼs visit may reveal the Soviet response.

These two developments seem to argue for a further postponement of decision on an early visit by Eugene Black to Cambodia. It would certainly be a mistake to risk a Cambodian turn-down until we learn of Sihanoukʼs reaction to the New Delhi conversation.

A third aspect of the Cambodian scenario is the proposed senatorial mission. The Vice President has received a very responsible letter from the President of the Cambodian National Assembly indicating willingness to receive three senators once Congress is out of session. Some of the Committee members, however, are apparently willing to consider a trip before the adjournment of Congress if the Executive Branch urges such a move (an urging that could not easily be kept quiet). State and Carl Marcy would like some guidance from us on this matter.

My own view is that the ideal arrangement would be for an earlier senatorial visit (perhaps late August or the Labor Day period) to be followed by a Eugene Black visit in October. The senators could carry a letter from the President and create a friendly atmosphere without going into substance. Black, however, carries with him the flavor of American money; he is therefore more potentially embarrassing to the Prince (who is currently far out on a limb in rejecting American funds) unless the way has been carefully cleared by preliminary visitors.

I donʼt know whether we can sell such a timetable either to the Congress or to the President, much less Cambodia. But I think it is worth a try—and I sympathize to some extent with Stateʼs desire not to press the Prince too hard at a time when he is gradually shifting his position of his own accord.

I attach some draft language which you might want to use in presenting this problem to the President.3

I also attach a memo from State in response to my Cambodia paper4 which I have held here for two reasons—first, because it was already out of date on arrival as a result of further developments on the ICC, and second because it was overtaken by the Eugene Black project and the instructions to New Delhi.

A final word on Bowlesʼ comments regarding the resumption of diplomatic relations: they make a good deal of sense (and are obviously influenced by Herb Spivack, who knows Cambodia well); they could serve as good basis for substantive discussions if the Prince is responsive.

Jim

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Secret.

2 Dated July 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB)

3 Not found.

4  Document 185.

188. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 188. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 8, 1966, 8 p.m.

SUBJECT

Eugene Black Mission to Cambodia

We now have Chet Bowlesʼ report of his meeting with the Cambodian Ambassador in New Delhi.2

Bowles was frank and conciliatory, but the Cambodian was obviously not free to be responsive until he had checked back with Sihanouk. The next few days should reveal the Princeʼs reaction to Bowlesʼ proposals for an expanded ICC, resumed diplomatic relations without preconditions, and a possible visit by some U.S. official to Phnom Penh.

Meanwhile, Michael Stewart is pushing Gromyko for reconsideration of the negative Soviet position on expansion of the ICC. We should have some further word in the week ahead.

In view of these two developments, State suggests—and I concur—that we hold off on any approach to the Cambodians about an early Eugene Black visit pending Sihanoukʼs response to our New Delhi initiative.3

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos 10/65–9/67. Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 187.

3 The approved line is checked indicating Johnsonʼs approval.

189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 189. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 1

New Delhi, August 4, 1966, 1231Z.

1931. Subject: US-Cambodian Relations. Ref: New Delhi 336.2

1. Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny asked to see me this morning in order, as it turned out, to continue the discussion of US-Cambodian relations described in reftel.

2. Kimny opened the conversation by commenting he was glad to learn that Ambassador Harriman would be going to Cambodia to visit Prince Sihanouk.3 He volunteered information that Robert Shaplen, New Yorker correspondent, had brought Sihanouk a letter from Harriman when Shaplen was recently in Cambodia, and Sihanouk had replied, warmly welcoming Harriman, not only as a state guest but a personal guest of the Prince himself.4

3. Kimny then referred to his statement in our previous conversation of three conditions for renewal of US-Cambodian diplomatic relations. He repeated these as: A. Recognition by US of Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity and independence;

B. Cessation of attacks by US-Vietnamese armed forces on Cambodian territory; and

C. Compensation for victims of past attacks.

4. Kimny said that Prince Sihanouk was apparently now prepared defer last of these conditions for discussion after relations had been established. (Kimny had gained this impression of Sihanoukʼs new attitude from news reports of the Princeʼs statements to a group of visiting Americans; he had queried Phnom Penh for confirmation, which he hoped to have in the next two or three days and would immediately pass on to Spivack in my absence.)

5. Questioned as to Cambodiaʼs understanding of what would constitute US recognition of Cambodian territorial integrity, Kimny replied that, in case of Vietnam, this involved recognition by US of land border as it exists de facto at present, and is accepted by people living in border areas. In addition US should recognize as rightfully belonging to Cambodia islands in Gulf of Siam off Kep and Ream.

6. On Thai side, US should recognize Cambodiaʼs borders as defined in various treaties between Siam and French which were basis of World Court decision in Preah Vihear temple case. Kimny emphasized that Cambodia did not require that US should persuade Thai or Vietnamese Governments recognize these borders, but only that US should do so.

7. In matter of military incursions into Cambodian territory, Kimny said that, as far as he knew, USSR had not replied to Cambodian request of June 25 for increase in size and scope of Cambodian ICC. Although Cambodia would continue to press for larger and more effective ICC, recent visits by Americans (group of seven observers led by Russell Johnson, forthcoming visits of Harriman and of three senators) would in all probability reduce need for increased ICC as witness to non-use Cambodian territory by Viet Cong; in other words fact of non-use would become clear to world without enlarged ICC.

8. Kimny said he had wanted to have this talk with me prior to my forthcoming visit to SE Asia so that I could, while I was in Thailand and in Vietnam, judge for myself comparative degree of sincerity between Cambodians on the one hand and Thais and Vietnamese on the other in seeking better relations with each other. He also said that he hoped that Harriman would have benefit of my observations when he came to Cambodia.

9. I told Kimny I appreciated his calling on me and that I would immediately pass on substance his comments to Washington for Governor Harrimanʼs attention. I added that I looked forward to seeing him after I returned from SE Asia to discuss my impressions.

10. Comment: While Kimny at no point stated he was calling on me under instructions and, in fact, attributed to press reports his understanding of Sihanoukʼs views as to elimination of the requirement for compensation for past victims as a condition for renewal of relations, I do not believe he would have taken initiative to say what he did without permission from Phnom Penh. I have distinct impression Sihanouk is increasingly disposed seek to rebuild his bridges with US. If Kimnyʼs statement that relaxation of compensation condition is confirmed, I urge we seek some formula to meet Sihanoukʼs desire for recognition by US of his frontiers which will satisfy him and still be acceptable Thais and Vietnamese, even if we have to use a little friendly pressure with latter two.

11. Having been rebuffed by Soviets in matter of expansion of ICC, Sihanouk seems to be trying to move off that limb and may now be calculating that presence of US Mission in Phnom Penh may provide most effective group of observers he is likely to get to bolster his assertions that no Viet Cong using his territory.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 CAMB–US. Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 187.

3 In a memorandum to Rostow, July 18, Harriman reported that according to reports from the Australian Embassy, Sihanouk had reacted well to the letter from Harriman and suggested that he come to Cambodia in September. Harriman thought that the President would be interested since “he asked that we undertake to get in touch with Sihanouk.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Walt W. Rostow, Vol. IX) Harrimanʼs letter has not been found.

4 Shaplenʼs report of his trip, which Rostow sent to the President on July 22, was transmitted in telegram 1633 from Saigon, July 22. (Ibid.)

190. Memorandum of Conversation 190. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 12, 1966, noon.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

Charles Lucet, French Ambassador

Governor Harriman

Robert E. Barbour, EUR/FBX

Following his September 8 meeting with the Acting Secretary, Ambassador Lucet called on Governor Harriman at the request of the French Foreign Minister. He assumed Governor Harriman was fully aware of the French attitude toward Cambodia and of the feeling that the government should be supported. In the French view, it could serve as an example for all the Indochinese countries. Governor Harriman interjected that there was no doubt that Sihanouk had the support of his people. Ambassador Lucet said that Couve de Murville was not too pessimistic about long-term prospects for Cambodian-US relations. However, a factor always to be considered was the personality of Prince Sihanouk. He was extremely temperamental and had been infuriated by the statement we issued after the Thlok Trach incident, because this statement had indicated that the two Cambodian villages were on Vietnamese territory.2 Sihanouk had now produced some new maps. These dated from the period of Governor Brevie and showed the villages to be on territory that was unmistakably Cambodian. Prince Sihanouk felt that to deny the Cambodian status of the villages in question was to deny Cambodian sovereignty. Couve de Murville felt that prospects for Governor Harrimanʼs projected trip to Phnom Penh would be better when Sihanouk returned to Cambodia from vacation in France. Couve hoped, of course, that there would, in the interim, be no untoward developments like a new bombing of Cambodian territory.

Governor Harriman commented that Sihanoukʼs attitude in the incident had been rather unreasonable. The only maps we had were some he gave us, in March 1964. The two villages were clearly shown on these maps in South Viet Nam, whereas they were in fact under Cambodian administration and control. The Thlok Trach incident was unfortunate. It has been handled badly by us, and distorted by the press. He asked whether there were any French advice as to how to proceed in the months ahead. Should he endeavor to get in touch with Sihanouk while the Prince was in France? Ambassador Lucet thought not.

Ambassador Lucet said that the French position on the Cambodian frontier problem was one of a willingness to recognize Cambodian territorial integrity within the limits of the present borders. In considering the Indochinese problem, General De Gaulle was thinking of a return to the 1954 Geneva Agreements and of a new agreement which would confirm the pertinent frontiers under a guarantee by the five major powers. Ambassador Lucet read from the September 2 French-Cambodian declaration3 the following passage: “France, for her part, reaffirms her respect for the territorial integrity of Cambodia within the limits of its present borders.” He described this as a cautious position devoid of any formal French undertaking, and he asked whether it might not be possible for the United States to agree to similar language.

Governor Harriman reviewed the history of past efforts to solve the Vietnamese-Cambodian border problem and said Sihanouk had been very unreasonable. Obviously, one cannot guarantee borders which are not known. We were ready to recognize the borders as they were internationally understood, but we could not automatically take the Cambodiansʼ side in their disputes with the Thai or Vietnamese. Ambassador Lucet again asked whether the language of the French-Cambodian communiqué might not be acceptable to us. Governor Harriman said we had been prepared to go farther than that at one time. We had talked with the Cambodians for days in New Delhi about the problem, but they had always been unrealistic when it came to the question of a territorial guarantee. If everybody else were willing to guarantee the borders, we would, too. The Vietnamese had proposed various meetings to demarcate the frontier, but the Cambodians had always found an excuse to avoid such meetings. Ambassador Lucet again referred to the French-Cambodian communiqué. Governor Harriman said he thought it would be possible to find acceptable and reasonable language if Sihanouk really wanted to do so. He said we would look into the language used in the Cambodian-French declaration to see if we had any problems with it.

Ambassador Lucet said Couve de Murville regretted the difficulties which had arisen over Governor Harrimanʼs trip to Phnom Penh. Governor Harriman explained how the project for his trip had developed and how it was that Prince Sihanouk was completely wrong when he said Governor Harriman had invited himself. However, he had not replied to this distortion. Nor would he do so.

He asked Ambassador Lucet whether the ICC question had arisen during the French visit to Phnom Penh. Ambassador Lucet said there had been no discussion of this question, and there was nothing new on the situation. Governor Harriman remarked that he assumed the Soviets would continue to refuse to strengthen the ICC, because Hanoi would not like it. He noted a September 12 AFP ticker reporting that Prince Sihanouk had invited a Soviet delegation to Phnom Penh and that the latter had accepted. This was an interesting development. He remarked that it was also interesting that Sihanouk admitted the presence of individual Viet Cong on his territory. We do not believe all the reports of NVN divisions in Cambodia, but we do believe there are local arrangements which permit supplies and armed Viet Cong to flow back and forth across the frontier. Ambassador Lucet said that Prince Sihanoukʼs attitude had not been helped by references to a Sihanouk Trail as a major infiltration route. Governor Harriman agreed this was unfortunate nomenclature. He did not know its origin even though a road did exist.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Barbour. The memorandum is part I of II. The meeting took place in Harrimanʼs office.

2 On August 16 the Department of State released a statement expressing regret for U.S. air attacks of July 31 and August 2 on the villages of Thlok Trach along the South Vietnamese-Cambodian border. The statement noted that although the villages were under Cambodian administration, maps provided to the United States by Cambodia clearly showed them to be on the Vietnamese side of the border. Text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, p. 645.

3 The text is ibid., pp. 648–650.

191. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 191. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, September 20, 1966.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

I had an interesting talk yesterday with Ambassador Noel Deschamps, the Australian envoy in Cambodia. He is on two months leave.

The more interesting points were: 1. The most significant development in Cambodia in recent months has been the drift away from Red China. It is the product of several things: Pekingʼs taking Sihanouk for granted; its rejection of his plan to beef up the ICC to oversee his borders; its repudiation of the Geneva Agreements, which Sihanouk sees as a bulwark to his countryʼs position.

2. The DeGaulle visit was a plus in one important respect: France has replaced Communist China as Cambodiaʼs “best friend.” This relates to (1) above.

3. Sihanoukʼs principal interest in life is getting the broadest possible international recognition of and support for his borders. (We ought to keep this in mind when and if Harriman ever gets to Phnom Penh.)

4. It was the handling of the recent border incident—rather than the incident itself—that pushed Sihanouk into cancelling the Harriman trip. On a more recent incident—which occurred just before Deschampsʼ departure—Sihanouk was asked about it; he replied: “That kind of thing happens in war.” (I would suggest that Sihanoukʼs volatility gives no assurance he might not go through the roof on the next one!)

5. Deschamps thinks chances are good that we can send an official visitor to Cambodia in the next few months. Sihanouk is in a mood to welcome such a visit. He wants us to recognize his borders and intercede with the Thai and Vietnamese to do likewise.

6. Sihanoukʼs main enemies are the Vietnamese and the Thai. He dislikes and distrusts both, the Thai more than the Vietnamese. He is probably less concerned with the latter—for the moment—because they are involved in trouble at home, and Viet-Nam is not unified.

7. Sihanouk would look on Vietnamese unification as a disaster for him. He therefore tends to favor a victory for the South that would leave the country divided, rather than victory for Ho Chi Minh.

8. Internally, Cambodia is doing fairly well in terms of political stability. No major discontent. Sihanouk works hard and constantly at keeping his people happy. The economy is poor—but discontent is low because the people generally donʼt know how bad off they are. No serious problem of communist subversion.

9. Australia enjoys probably the best relations of any nearby power, despite its involvement with us in Viet-Nam. Sihanouk says he judges Australia—and others—by the way they treat him and his country, and not by what they do elsewhere.

10. Sihanouk has said a number of complimentary things about General Ky, and Deschamps thinks it not impossible that Sihanouk would welcome a friendly gesture from the Saigon Government, especially some kind of agreement on the borders. He is ready to abandon Cambodian claims to disputed islands in return. (The islands in question are really meaningless for both countries.)

Summary: Sihanouk is a diplomatic challenge of the first order. The Presidentʼs instinct in trying to get something moving with Cambodia is absolutely correct.

Bill

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Vol. IV, Memos, 10/65–9/67. Confidential.

192. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 192. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, September 24, 1966.

JCSM–612–66

SUBJECT

Cross-Border Operations (U)

1. (S) Reference is made to: a. Your memorandum, dated 13 June 1966, subject as above.2

b. A message from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to CINCPAC, 5374/271912Z June 1966, subject as above.3

c. A message from CINCPAC to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 130401Z August 1966, subject as above.

d. A message from COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, 031206Z August 1966, subject as above.

e. A message from the Defense Intelligence Agency to CINCPAC, DIAAQ 4054/152257Z February 1966, subject: “Clandestine Collection Operations Against Cambodia (S).”4

f. A message from COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, 010340Z February 1966, subject: “Preparation for Cross-Border Operations in Cambodia.”

2. (TS) On 13 June 1966, you approved (reference 1a) the recommendation to organize, train, and equip an indigenous force of intelligence agents, reconnaissance teams, and reaction teams for possible future employment in cross-border operations into Cambodia. Authority was not granted to commit these forces into Cambodia.

3. (TS) The State Department view (reference 1a)5 that the recruitment of ethnic Cambodians (Khmer) should not be permitted was reflected in the guidance provided to CINCPAC by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in reference 1b. However, prior to receipt of this restriction, based on his interpretation of the guidance contained in reference 1e and on his visualized employment of the force (reference 1f) until such time as cross-border operations were authorized, COMUSMACV had already recruited and partially trained 40 ethnic Cambodians. These personnel were carefully screened to ensure that they were not Khmer Serei.

4. (TS) In reference 1c, CINCPAC requested reconsideration of the restriction prohibiting the recruitment of Cambodians and requested the authority to retain and utilize those already in training.

5. (TS) The State Departmentʼs rationale in recommending against the use of Cambodian personnel is as follows: first, the Cambodian minority in Vietnam is strongly influenced by the Khmer Serei (Free Cambodia) movement and second, should Prince Sihanouk learn that a force of Khmers was being formed for cross-border operations into Cambodia, he would interpret this as a serious threat to his regime and be more likely than ever to cast his lot with the Chinese communists.

6. (TS) COMUSMACVʼs position (reference 1d), supported by CINCPAC (reference 1c), is that Cambodians who have lived in border regions are ideal for use in this type operation due to their familiarity with the area, language, and customs of the people. Furthermore, thorough screening, checking and investigation of all Cambodians recruited can minimize penetration of the operation by the Khmer Serei.

7. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered these factors and are of the view that COMUSMACVʼs requirements can be met and the potential problems associated with the use of ethnic Cambodians minimized by adhering to the following guidelines: a. Ethnic Cambodians will be used primarily as agents and in the intelligence and reconnaissance teams.

b. Ethnic Cambodians will be recruited in such numbers as not to become the dominant element in the reaction force as a whole or in any one reaction company.

c. All ethnic Cambodians recruited will be carefully screened to reduce the possibility of penetration of the program by Khmer Serei or Cambodian intelligence agents.

d. The program will not be identified as a potential cross-border operation into Cambodia, and use of the assets for in-country operations will support this contention.

8. (TS) Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend: a. Approval for the retention of the Cambodians now in the program.

b. Approval for recruitment of additional Cambodians in accord-ance with the above guidelines.

c. Forwarding a memorandum to the Secretary of State substantially as proposed in the Appendix hereto.6

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
David L. McDonald 7
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155 (1 Feb 1966) Sec. 1, IR 101. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 References, a, c, and d are attached, but not printed.

3 Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155.1 (14 Oct 65), Sec. 2, IR 6231.

4 References e and f were not found.

5 The Department of State view is in a memorandum from Unger to Blouin, June 7, attached to reference 1a, which is attached to this memorandum.

6 The memorandum to the Department of State was not found attached, but in telegram 120 to CINCPAC, December 10, the JCS granted authority to retain the 40 Cambodians already recruited and trained so long as all necessary precautions were taken to minimize the risk of disclosing their association with cross-border operations. Authority was not granted for recruitment of additional ethnic Cambodians for cross-border operations. (Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9155 (1 Feb 1966), Sec. 1, IR 101)

7 Printed from a copy that indicates McDonald signed the original.

193. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Roche) to President Johnson 193. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Roche) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 30, 1966.

The Baguio Conference might offer a fresh opportunity for reconciliation with Prince Sihanouk.

—Sihanouk, caught between Thai and Vietnamese ambitions, thought that he could get guarantees from the Chicoms.

—It now appears that he feels he took out insurance with a bankrupt firm, and might be willing to shift his account.

—Sihanouk is more reliable than a canary in a coal mine when it comes to indicating changes in the power atmosphere in Southeast Asia. He is in motion away from the Chicoms.

But, he has to have guarantees. And the State Department does not want to create ripples in Bangkok by raising the question.

Might it not be possible at Baguio to formulate a multilateral statement that the powers there convened will respect the sovereignty of their neighbors, whether present or not, whether Communist, neutralist, or free world in alignment?

This would do much to establish the broad, principled goals of the “pacific powers.”

—It would provide a formula fully in accord with your Vietnamese policy, namely, a stabilization of frontiers in Asia with no “wars of liberation” launched from either side.

—It would undermine the inevitable attack on the Baguio Conference as a “council of war.”

—It would supply a basis for reopening our direct contacts with Sihanouk from which might come a strengthening of the I.C.C. and a Cambodia neutral against the VC and PAVN.2

John P. Roche

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Seven Nations Conference, POTUS Trip I. No classification marking.

2 Johnson wrote the following note on the source text: “Walt—I like what he says & the way he says it. Give me your comments. L.” Rostow sent Jorden a copy of this memorandum with the note: “WJ—What do you think? Take up quietly with State—donʼt take an easy no. Walt.”

194. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 194. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Saigon, October 2, 1966, 1305Z.

44351. Subj: Cambodia (U).

1. (TS) MACV has been concerned for some time with increasing North Vietnam Army (NVA) and Viet Cong (VC) use of Cambodia and the support provided NVA–VC forces by the Royal Khmer Government with or without official RKG sanction. The effect of this situation on our current military operations is threefold. It results in a considerable number of casualties, it diverts forces from other tasks, and it contributes to prolongation of the war. In the southern provinces, NVA–VC forces using Cambodia sanctuary constitute a major hindrance, while in the areas adjacent to Pleiku and Kontum provinces, such forces constitute a significant threat. An indication of the overall effect of the existence of the Cambodia sanctuary on our operations can be seen in the number of casualties (7, 317 US and ARVN) in the provinces bordering Cambodia during the period January through August 1966. While not all such casualties may be attributed to the sanctuary, the figure is of significance.

2. (TS) Analysis of numerous reports of varying reliability dealing with RKG support of the NVA–VC indicates: A. Cambodia has contracted to sell and deliver to Communist forces in South Vietnam, and possibly southern Laos, 55,000 tons of rice for the year 1966.

B. The number of trucks and boats, times the tons reported on each, times the number of trips indicates that 140 tons of rice per day, or 51,000 tons annually, are being delivered to the NVA–VC forces in southern Laos and South Vietnam. Additional evidence indicates that unofficial sales could raise this total to over 100,000 tons annually.

C. On 12 June 1966, Viet Cong representatives in Phnom Penh reportedly told the Cambodian Government that its support was required to fight and win decisively the war in 1966. Sihanouk agreed to sell needed rice to the VC.

D. Arms, ammunition, explosives, medical supplies, equipment, and material also are being delivered to the Viet Cong by Cambodians from Cambodia.

E. At least six NVA regiments, four battalions, and eight infiltration groups are known to have entered South Vietnam from Cambodia. The 630th NVA Div uses Cambodia as a base area and sanctuary.

F. The north-south infiltration complex is being shifted from within SVN further to the west into Cambodia. Enemy base areas reportedly have been established in Cambodia at approximately 100 kilometer intervals along the border from Laos to the Mekong River. The four major base areas in Cambodia are: (1) Chu Pong, (2) Nam Lyr mountain, (3) Lo Go to 20 km south, and (4) the banks of the Bassac-Mekong Rivers near the border. In addition, three other probable base areas have been identified: (1) Tassing, at the northern boundary of Cambodia in the tri-border area, (2) Snoul and the areas to the south and east, and (3) the “Parrotʼs Beak” of Svay Rieng Province.

3. (TS) In addition to the foregoing, it now appears possible that the Cambodia sanctuary problem may be exacerbated by an NVN-VC decision to convert Cambodia into the major logistical base for all supplies—including arms and ammunition—for the NVA–VC forces in the II and III Corps tactical zones and for the VC in the IV Corps tactical zone. This hypothesis is based on the following factors: the high cost to the enemy of opening up motorable routes in the southern portion of the Laos panhandle last year, the success of market time operations in cutting off sea routes of communications into South Vietnam, the uncovering of substantial NVA–VC caches of munitions and other supplies in South Vietnam, the success the NVA–VC have had in obtaining food and medical supplies through Cambodia, the ability to move supplies through Cambodia overtly and into areas immediately adjacent to the border of South Vietnam because the Royal Khmer Army is equipped with ChiCom materiel identical with NVA–VC, and, finally, the lack of any activity thus far indicating an intent to reopen lines of communications in the southern panhandle of Laos this year. All these factors suggest that the NVA–VC intend to rely in the main on the Cambodia sanctuary for total logistic support. This matter must be watched closely.

4. (TS) As you are aware, MACV established a study group to conduct a searching inquiry into all ramifications of the Cambodia matter in an effort to develop greater local understanding of major problems involved and to determine what might be done to solve them. This group has just completed its study and an initial presentation has been made within MACV. The study analyzed the following courses of action: A. Green: A continuation of current US policy of accommodation with respect to Cambodia in the hope that, [garble] the sanctuary will disappear as a function of evolution.

B. Yellow: A simultaneous expansion of current US policy towards (1) amity and the restoration of diplomatic relations and (2) conflict within current parameters to establish the base for more militant actions to eliminate the sanctuary.

C. Blue: A course of action evolving from the amity portion of Yellow designed to reach a rapprochement and eventually to create an atmosphere in which the Royal Khmer Government accepts or invites US assistance in eliminating the sanctuary problem.

D. Orange: An aggressive course of action, falling short of extreme military actions, evolving from the conflict portion of Yellow and designed to build a base of support in the US and abroad among allies for more vigorous US activities.

E. Red: The execution of limited trans-border raids on targets of opportunity in response to an actual or fabricated provocation.

F. Black: The seizure and occupation of selected NVA–VC base areas in northeast Cambodia.

5. (TS) The study concluded that: A. A limited ground raid as an ad hoc response to a specific situation would be appropriate as a basis for contingency planning and could be pursued seriatim without prejudice to other options.

B. The most appropriate course of action from among the remaining would be Yellow.

C. The study could be of value to other agencies considering the Cambodian problem.

6. (TS) As the proposals developed by the study include ways in which political, psychological, economic and military capabilities might be employed to lead to a solution of both the immediate military problem and to lay the groundwork for a long term US program to deal with Cambodia, I am inclined to believe that this is a matter which should be considered by SEACOORD. It is my intention to so recommend to Ambassador Lodge following presentation of the study of him. I will keep you advised.

1 Source: Johnson Library National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Vol. LX, Cables, 10/66. Top Secret. Exclusive for Sharp. Repeated to JCS for Wheeler.

195. National Intelligence Estimate 195. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, October 6, 1966.

NIE 57–66

SIHANOUKʼS CAMBODIA

The Problem

To estimate the internal political prospects and the international orientation of Cambodia over the next year or so.

Conclusion

A. Prince Norodom Sihanouk is still the dominant political force in Cambodia and his views are decisive in determining both domestic and foreign policy. His regime is strong, and rests on his own personal prestige and popularity with the masses, particularly the peasantry. There is some discontent in the army and among the Phnom Penh elite. This will probably continue to increase, but is not expected to reach serious proportions in the next year or so. (Paras. 1, 4–9, 14)

B. Cambodia has some growing economic problems. Unemployment, inflation, and business failures are increasing, and private foreign and domestic investments have dwindled. The bad rice crop over the past year, resulting in reduced exports, will bring about an imbalance of payments and further aggravate budgetary deficits. These trends will probably continue, but economic problems are not likely to threaten the stability of the regime during the period of this estimate. (Paras. 11–12)

C. Sihanoukʼs foreign policies reflect his basic concern over Cambodiaʼs ability to survive. He has a deep distrust, rooted in centuries of conflict, of the intentions of the Thai and the Vietnamese. As the US became more committed in Thailand and Vietnam, he became more distrustful of US intentions. At the same time, his conviction grew that Communist China would become the dominant power in Asia and that Hanoi was going to win in Vietnam. In these circumstances, his appraisal of Cambodiaʼs self-interest led him to a policy of increased accommodation with the Communists, without abandoning his basic policy of neutralism. (Paras. 17–19, 21, 23)

D. Sihanoukʼs belief that the Vietnamese and Thai threaten Cambodiaʼs independence will continue to be the main determinant of his foreign policy. Sihanouk will almost certainly continue to seek guarantees for Cambodiaʼs independence and borders, through both bilateral agreements and international accords. He is likely to make tactical adjustments depending on his judgments with respect to the course of the war in Vietnam and the future prospects for Chinese influence in Southeast Asia. He appears to be reviewing these judgments and may be coming to conclusions that will bring him to adopt a less antagonistic attitude toward the US. Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that Sihanouk would tie himself closely to the US even if he should become convinced that the Communists were going to lose in Vietnam. (Paras. 22, 27, 31–32)

[Here follow a 8-page Discussion section and a map of Cambodia.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 57–66. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction. In a briefing memorandum to George F. Denney, October 5, Fred Green of INR/RFE noted that the White House asked for this estimate early in the summer of 1966 when it appeared likely that Harriman would go to Cambodia. According to Green, its terms of reference were broad because no NIE had been written on Cambodia since 1959. (Ibid.)

196. Memorandum of Conversation 196. Memorandum of Conversation1

Manila, October 22, 1966.

SUBJECT

U.S. Relations with Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Secretary Narciso Ramos

Secretary of State Dean Rusk

Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, William P. Bundy

Ambassador William McC. Blair, Jr.

Secretary Ramos started off the meeting by saying that he had had a message from the Philippine Ambassador in Phnom Penh who is close to Sihanouk, stating that he, the Ambassador, had been asked to convey to President Marcos a request that Marcos take up with President Johnson (this to be a Marcos initiative) Prince Sihanoukʼs desire to normalize relations with the United States. If Marcos was willing to do this, Sihanouk would inform the Philippine Ambassador of his terms. Ramos said that President Marcos has agreed to discuss this matter with President Johnson.

Secretary Rusk replied that it would be useful for President Marcos to ascertain what is in Sihanoukʼs mind, stating that of course the United States is interested in Cambodiaʼs independence and in the maintenance of its territorial integrity. The Secretary said that we would like to see Cambodia nonaligned but that we have the feeling that that isnʼt their position at the present time. Secretary Rusk said further that the United States did not wish to have diplomatic relations with Cambodia which were subject to the personal whims of Sihanouk. If Sihanouk wants to use the American Ambassador as a punching bag, we are not interested. The Secretary stated that the purpose of relations is to talk about relations and continued by saying that, of course, the United States would be glad to study anything Sihanouk suggested. The Secretary recalled that when Sihanouk had broken relations sometime ago he had suggested maintaining consular relations but that we were not interested in this. Secretary Rusk repeated that, if Sihanouk came up with anything worthwhile, we would be interested. The Secretary said that he realized that Sihanouk does not have the strength in his own country to prevent the Viet Cong from abusing Cambodiaʼs territory and that we donʼt blame him too much. The Secretary said, however, when incidents do occur he should protest to both sides and not just one.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Blair and approved by S on November 21. The meeting took place at the Department of Foreign Affairs while Rusk was in Manila for the Summit Conference on Vietnam.

197. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 197. Telegram From the Embassy in the Philippines to the Department of State 1

Manila, October 31, 1966.

4791. Ref Bangkok 5507.2

1. I spoke to President Marcos today about his aide-memoire on Cambodia addressed to President Johnson and he confirmed (Manilaʼs 4431)3 that he had received a verbal message from Prince Sihanouk through Phil Ambassador in Phnom Penh stating Sihanoukʼs desire to normalize relations with U.S. message asked Marcos to discuss matter with President Johnson but said that if anything leaked out he, Sihanouk, would deny making any overtures.

2. Marcos says he believes that U.S. should convey to Sihanouk through Marcos its regret over alleged mistake bombings and offer to send them team to investigate. Repeat this is Marcosʼs idea and not Sihanoukʼs. Marcos further suggested that investigating team once in Cambodia would be able to check on North Vietnamese and Viet Cong hostile establishments for actions inside Cambodian territory.

3. All this seems rather far fetched to us and I conveyed to Marcos Secretaryʼs comments on Sihanouk (Manilaʼs 4431). However, Marcos told me he hopes to serve as intermediary between U.S. and Cambodia just as he claims he did between Malaysia and Indonesia. Once Marcos receives message from us to Sihanouk that we regret the bombings he will transmit it through his Ambassador in Phnom Penh and will then await Sihanoukʼs reaction to our further expression of willingness to send investigating team. If Sihanouk agrees, Marcos would then announce here our regrets and Sihanoukʼs willingness to accept investigating team.

4. I understand Cambodian Charge to Manila was called back suddenly to Phnom Penh on October 27th, the day of President Johnsonʼs departure.

5. Will respond to your query on Johnson-Marcos communiqué U.S. state visit in septel.4

Blair

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to Seoul eyes only for Secretary from Ambassador Blair. There was no time of dispatch on the source text, which was received at the Department of State at 2:07 a.m., October 31.

2 In telegram 5507, October 28, the Embassy reported that it had received a “cryptic ʼaide-memoireʼ” from President Marcos to President Johnson, October 27, which is described in paragraph 1 below. (Ibid.)

3 Dated October 22. (Ibid., POL CAMB–US)

4 Not further identified.

198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 198. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, December 19, 1966.

JCSM–779–66

SUBJECT

Actions to Deal with VC/NVA Use of Cambodian Territory (S)

1. (TS) Reference is made to JCSM–812–65, dated 12 November 1965,2 in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff informed you of their views and recommendations concerning Cambodian support of the Viet Cong (VC). The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that forceful action be taken to stop the use of Cambodian territory by enemy forces as a logistics base and sanctuary.

2. (TS) You concurred in actions to expand and intensify the over-all intelligence collection program in Cambodia, increased surveillance of the sea lines of communication (LOCs) between the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) and Cambodia, increased controls on the Mekong and Bassac waterways, and planning for the conduct of covert paramilitary operations and low-altitude aerial reconnaissance. You further stated that should these measures prove ineffective other recommendations would be considered on a case-by-case basis. The immediate pursuit of VC/North Vietnamese Army (NVA) forces withdrawing into Cambodian territory was authorized only in emergency self defense/preservation situations.

3. (TS) Measures recommended for the conduct of an aggressive political/psychological campaign to persuade the Cambodian Government to stop support of the VC/NVA were referred to the Secretary of State. The Secretary of State advised a gradual and cautious approach and, with respect to covert cross-border operations, full consideration of the political problems involved. He further stated that there was a lack of convincing evidence of the significant use of Cambodian territory by the VC/NVA.

4. (TS) The VC/NVA exploitation of the pseudo-neutrality of Cambodia has increased to serious proportions. This is amply substantiated by a recent DIA assessment (Appendix A)3 and attested to by the conclusions reached at a Southeast Asia Coordination (SEACOORD) meeting of 10 November 1966. VC/NVA use of the Cambodian sanctuary constitutes a clear and present danger and thereby requires a continuous commitment of sizable friendly forces to the border area, impedes progress of the land campaign, and results in unnecessary US and friendly casualties. Major US operations conducted adjacent to the Cambodian border during 1966, including the largest ground operation to date, Attelboro, have provided continuing indications that the VC/NVA are using Cambodia as a base of operations, a safe haven, and a source of logistical support.

5. (TS) Actions authorized under current policy have proven inadequate to counter the growing threat imposed by VC/NVA use of Cambodia. An impasse exists wherein the collection of convincing intelligence is prerequisite to changes in policy, while adequate intelligence cannot be obtained until this policy is changed.COMUSMACV, CINCPAC, and Embassy Saigon recommend and the Joint Chiefs of Staff concur that additional measures must be taken to obtain adequate and convincing intelligence suitable for use in diplomatic efforts aimed at reversing Cambodiaʼs countenance of the present situation.

6. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that current national policy with respect to Cambodia must again by reviewed in light of over-all US objectives in Southeast Asia and the continued use of the Cambodian sanctuary by the VC/NVA. It is noted that Secretary Vance has requested the Under Secretary of State to establish a joint State-Defense-CIA study group to explore problems associated with Cambodia. This will take time. In the meantime, certain minimum actions should be taken now. Therefore, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The over-all intelligence collection program against Cambodia be expanded and intensified immediately to include: (1) Authorization for ground reconnaissance operations such as Daniel Boone into Cambodia.

(2) Authorization to conduct high altitude U–2 photography over Cambodia on a continuing basis.

(3) Authorization to conduct medium and low altitude day/night photography, ARDF, IR, and SLAR on a continuing basis into Cambodia to a depth of 75 nautical miles from the border with Laos and South Vietnam (SVN). Excluded from reconnaissance coverage is an area 25 nautical miles around Phnom Penh.

b. Immediate pursuit of actively engaged VC/NVA forces which are withdrawing into Cambodian territory be authorized, thereby enhancing our capability to destroy the enemy, gaining hard intelligence, and increasing the security of the border area.

c. A more extensive coordinated public affairs and information program and supporting psychological operations be instituted to illuminate Cambodian support to the VC/NVA, to dissuade Cambodia from continuing such support, and to lay the foundation for possible future courses of action.

d. A memorandum, substantially as contained in Appendix B, together with a copy of Appendix A, be forwarded to the Secretary of State.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler 4
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Cambodia, 1966. Top Secret.

2  Document 159.

3 Appendices A and B are attached, but not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Wheeler signed the original.

199. Special National Intelligence Estimate 199. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, January 26, 1967.

SNIE 57–67

SIGNIFICANCE OF CAMBODIA TO THE VIETNAMESE COMMUNIST WAR EFFORT

Conclusions

A. Denying the Communists the use of Cambodian territory and supplies would make life more difficult for them; it would not constitute a decisive element in their ability to conduct military operations in South Vietnam.

B. The availability of Cambodian territory is of considerable psychological and military advantage to the Communists. They use it as sanctuary to evade allied forces and more permanently as a refuge for rest, training, medical care, storage of supplies, and as a convenient and secure route for the infiltration of personnel from North Vietnam.

C. Access to the Cambodian rice surplus has alleviated one of the Communistsʼ most serious logistics problems. Movements of Cambodian rice to the Communists in the South Vietnamese highlands and Laotian Panhandle during 1966, as a result of an official Cambodian sale and some smuggling, could have reached 20,000 tons and possibly more. This quantity more than met the annual consumption requirements of Communist forces in the rice-deficit Vietnamese highlands and the Laotian Panhandle, and obviated any need to move substantial quantities of food down the Laotian route system from North Vietnam.

D. The Communists continue to smuggle small quantities of arms and other military equipment from Cambodia; some of this probably represents unauthorized diversions from the Communist arms now being imported by the Cambodian Government for its own forces. But we have no evidence of large-scale diversions of these arms or of any substantial clandestine movement of arms into Cambodia and thence forward to the Communists in Vietnam. Moreover, its seems unlikely that the Communist command would choose to rely in any major way on such an uncertain and indirect source of arms for its main force units, so long as the overland routes from North Vietnam are available. Some other supplies such as drugs, communications equipment, and chemicals useful in the manufacture of explosives are obtained from Cambodia, but the quantities involved are not critical to the overall Communist effort.

E. During 1967, Communist use of Cambodia will probably continue to increase, as it has over the past 18 months. The principal causes are the logistic burdens imposed on the Communists by their own military buildup and the increasing military pressures imposed by allied forces.

F. Sihanouk is probably aware of the general nature of Communist activities in Cambodia. He has shown some concern that he has leaned too far to the Communist side, and over possible US–GVN counteractions. But Cambodia lacks the military capability to close its 700-mile border with South Vietnam, and any determined effort to do so would run counter to Sihanoukʼs basic aims of avoiding direct involvement in the war, of avoiding too close alignment with the US, and of maintaining cordial relations with the Communists. Thus, we do not foresee any substantial change in Cambodiaʼs posture over the next year toward the war in Vietnam.

[Here follows the Discussion section of the paper.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 57–67. Secret; Controlled Dissem. According to a covering note, the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, the AEC, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with its submission except the representative of the FBI who abstained on the grounds it was outside his jurisdiction.

200. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk 200. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

SNIE 57–67: Significance of Cambodia to the Vietnamese Communist War Effort2

The attached Special National Intelligence Estimate assesses the nature and the extent of Viet Cong use of Cambodian territory in support of Communist military operations in South Vietnam. The estimate was requested by the SEACOORD ambassadors, following their meeting in Saigon last November. Drawing on a MACV intelligence study, “The Role of Cambodia in the NVN/VC War Effort,”3 which was prepared a month previously and served as the basis of their briefing by General Westmorelandʼs intelligence officers, the SEACOORD ambassadors concluded that Communist use of Cambodia “is growing in magnitude” and cited MACVʼs view that our “tolerance level” of refusing to expand the fighting into Cambodia “is being reached.” Finally, SEACOORD proposed, pending “confirmation of the magnitude and seriousness of the problem” by the intelligence community estimate, a number of specific actions to discourage Communist use of Cambodia and to expand our intelligence assets on the problem.

Utilizing intelligence from all sources, as well as the MACV study of last year, the estimate deals with Communist use of Cambodia for sanctuary, infiltration, and logistical support, the extent of official Cambodian involvement, as well as the RKGʼs ability to counter Communist efforts through Cambodia. It also attempts to assess Communist alternatives to the use of Cambodian territory in the event that Cambodian rice were denied the insurgents.

The estimate concludes that, while Communist use of Cambodian territory has increased substantially during the past 18 months and will probably continue to do so as a result of increased requirements created both by their own military build-up and intensified military operations by allied forces, denial of Cambodian territory to the Viet Cong “would not constitute a decisive element in their ability to conduct military operations,” even though it would make life more difficult for them. Regarding the RKGʼs ability to restrict Viet Cong use of Cambodia, the estimate concludes that “Cambodiaʼs capability to detect and resist sizable Communist forces or inhibit Communist activities, particularly in the northeast, is extremely limited.” However, it notes that Sihanouk is probably aware of the general nature but not the full extent of Communist activities in Cambodia and that his own attitude has fostered a permissive atmosphere for collusion by officials and private commercial interests. The estimate also makes the judgment that Sihanouk could do more than he is now doing to discourage the Viet Cong, but because of Cambodian military limitations, fear of involvement in the war, and Sihanoukʼs belief that in the long run he will have to deal with the Communists, Sihanoukʼs efforts during 1967 to control Communist use of Cambodia “will be minor and ineffectual.”

In sum, the principal judgments in this estimate are (1) that Communist use of Cambodian territory is not decisive to the Communist military effort in South Vietnam and (2) that the RKG is neither willing nor able to restrict substantially the use of its territory. On the basis of these judgments, therefore, the estimate does not appear to support the tone and implications of the MACV study. Indeed, in its own thorough review and evaluation of the MACV study, CIA has concluded that the MACV study (1) failed to discriminate sufficiently in the use of raw intelligence reports and (2) overstated the significance of Cambodia to Communist military operations in South Vietnam. We agree with CIA on these points.

Despite the estimateʼs divergence with MACV, it is worth noting that the DOD representatives had no major difficulties with it. Indeed, there was considerable consensus among all representatives on the high-lights of the estimate. At one point, DIA threatened to reserve its position over the amount of rice estimated to have been delivered from Cambodia to Communist forces in the central Vietnamese highlands and in the southern Laos panhandle, but later accepted compromise wording on this portion of the estimate.

Finally, the conclusion that the Viet Cong in certain areas would probably have to rely on major shipments of rice from North Vietnam if Cambodia were no longer a source is, in our judgment, somewhat overdrawn since we are not at all confident that sources within South Vietnam could not make up the gap or that rice from these sources could be effectively denied the insurgents.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, SNIE 57–67. Secret; No Foreign Dissem; Limited Distribution.

2  Document 199.

3 See Document 194.

201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 201. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, March 24, 1967, 10:27 a.m.

161744. 1. Please deliver following personal message from the Secretary to Foreign Minister Hasluck at earliest possible opportunity:

“Dear Paul: I very much hope that Prime Minister Holt, during his forthcoming visit to Phnom Penh, will have the opportunity to discuss with Cambodian leaders including Prince Sihanouk the possibilities for an improvement in U.S.-Cambodian relations. We are concerned, as I am sure you are too, at the increasing seriousness of military problems resulting from Viet Cong and North Vietnamese use of Cambodian territory and support received from Cambodia. The number of recent incidents that have arisen as a result of Operation Junction City2 testify to the seriousness of this situation, which we fear will only lead to a further deterioration in relations with Cambodia unless some way is found to reduce the problem and deal with it more effectively than at the present time.

Communist Vietnamese forces have been using Cambodia as an infiltration route, sanctuary and source of supplies since the early 1960s. With the escalation of hostilities in the past few years, Communist utilization of Cambodia has steadily increased. There is every reason to believe, moreover, that during the coming year, as allied forces successfully clear enemy base areas in South Vietnam, pressure upon North Vietnam and the Viet Cong to expand their use of the sanctuary existing in Cambodia will further increase.

The psychological and military advantages of a privileged sanctuary have hindered the effective conduct of military operations against the enemy throughout Vietnam because of the necessity to divert troops to areas near the Cambodian border. Furthermore, in the immediate border area allied forces have sustained casualties from Vietnamese Communist forces which have taken sanctuary on Cambodian soil and under conditions in which they were permitted only limited countermeasures in self-defense. Under such circumstances, border incidents that involve Cambodian lives and property, unfortunately, are almost inevitable despite the care and restraint exercised by allied forces to avoid them.

The United States has on many occasions expressed to the Cambodian Government its concern over the problems arising from Vietnamese Communist activity in the border areas and its readiness to support any proposal which offers a reasonable prospect of assuring that Cambodiaʼs neutrality is respected by all concerned. It supported the Cambodian proposal to make the International Control Commission in Phnom Penh more effective and it has declared its willingness to discuss with the Cambodian Government directly any other ways of dealing with this problem. Evidence of enemy use of Cambodian territory has been offered to the Cambodian Government in an attempt to inform it of the extent of the enemy presence. The most recent approach to the Cambodian Government, which covered the aforementioned points, was made through Australian Ambassador Deschamps in Phnom Penh on January 20 of this year. To date the Cambodian Government has neither accepted the offer of evidence, nor the suggestion of discussions to resolve the problem.

The United States has been and still is willing to accept as sincere Cambodiaʼs declared desire to maintain a neutral status, despite the fact that over the past two years Cambodia has regularly protested alleged violations of its territory by U.S. and allied forces but has not, to our knowledge, protested or made any official acknowledgment of violations of its territory by Viet Cong or North Vietnamese forces. Enemy use of Cambodia has increased during that period, and the problem has grown progressively more serious. The United States has not charged the Cambodian Government with supporting or assisting the Viet Cong or North Vietnamese forces but, on the contrary, has repeatedly taken pains to describe enemy use of Cambodia as a problem for Cambodia as much as for U.S. and allied forces in South Vietnam.

There have been recent signs that Cambodia is attempting to control its frontiers more effectively. Even given Cambodiaʼs physical inability to control by itself its long frontier with South Vietnam, however, it has not been clear that these Cambodian efforts are being applied uniformly or with particular energy against Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces entering Cambodia. There is as yet no evidence, for example, of such forces being interned or of systematic efforts being taken forcibly to prevent them from entering Cambodia. Continued failure by Cambodian authorities to deal with this problem effectively or even to acknowledge its existence can only bring into question the genuineness of Cambodiaʼs claim to neutral status.

In discussing with Cambodian officials the seriousness with which the United States Government views the present situation and our desire to find a way to bring about an improvement in it, I would appreciate if Prime Minister Holt would again reassure them that the United States has no hostile intent or design toward Cambodia. We recognize and respect Cambodiaʼs independence and territorial integrity and its desire to remain neutral. It remains our wish that Cambodia should have the opportunity to develop in peace and security and that our differences may be resolved peacefully and on a basis mutually beneficial to both countries. (For the Prime Ministerʼs background information, the United States prior to the time relations with Cambodia were broken had given evidence of support for Cambodia through economic and military assist-ance totaling $342.5 million.)

The United States accepted, regretfully, the Cambodian Governmentʼs decision to break relations in May, 1965. Since that time, we have on a number of occasions stated our readiness to consider a restoration of relations on a mutually acceptable basis and without any preconditions. We continue to be prepared at any time to enter into discussions with the Cambodians of our mutual problems, in particular to consider ways in which to reduce the dangerous situation now existing in the border areas and provide a sound basis for the improvement of U.S.-Cambodian relations. It is a development which we would very much like to see take place. In this respect, we were disappointed last fall at the postponement of the proposed visit by Governor Harriman and would be happy to see the prospect revived for a visit of a similar nature, which could provide the opportunity for frank discussions of the full range of problems and difficulties existing between us. In the meantime, we would hope that follow-up discussions could be carried on by Ambassador Deschamps, or through direct channels where they may be available, in a mutual effort to devise ways in which to bring about an improvement in the existing situation.3

With warm personal regards,

Dean”

2. Australian Embassy here being informed of contents of message.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Ewing, cleared by Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Saigon, Bangkok, and CINCPAC.

2 In late February 1967, MACV launched Operation Junction City against Communist strongholds in an area northwest of Saigon to the Cambodian border. The operation was a major part of MACVʼs search and destroy strategy in Vietnam.

3 In telegram 6071 from Vientiane, April 3, Sullivan reported a conversation with Holt who had just left Cambodia and was visiting Laos. Holt and Sihanouk, according to Sullivan, “hit it off well.” Sihanouk frankly admitted that “the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong were trespassing on some of his territory” and wanted to oust them. Sihanouk also realized that there would be occasional U.S. infringements and bombings in the heat of battle, which he would protest vigorously, but the United States should understand his protestations were pro forma. Sihanouk would not accept “permanent” U.S. occupation of Cambodian territory. Holtʼs advice to the United States, according to Sullivan, was “to let its relations with Cambodia just simmer along as they are” without reestablishing relations or sending missions to Phnom Penh. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Laos, Vol. XVIII, Cables, 2/67–12/67)

202. Memorandum From the Chief, Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) 202. Memorandum From the Chief, Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 13, 1967.

[Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDO/EA Files: Job 78–000032R, Chipwood Memos, Vol. II. Secret. 2–1/2 pages of source text not declassified.]

203. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 203. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, April 14, 1967.

SUBJECT

Discussion of Cambodia with Australian Foreign Minister Hasluck

1. Mr. Hasluck has deferred replying to your message to him about Cambodia in order to discuss it with you personally while he is here for the SEATO meeting (Tab A).2 You have a meeting with him scheduled for April 17 at 7:00 p.m., and I believe this offers a good opportunity to stress our deep concern over Viet Cong and North Vietnamese use of Cambodia which is becoming an increasingly serious military problem for us.

2. My impression is that the Australians, in particular Ambassador Deschamps in Phnom Penh, do not fully share the seriousness with which we view this situation. You will recall that in your letter to Hasluck prior to Prime Minister Holtʼs recent visit to Cambodia (March 29–31), you emphasized our concern over the problem, which you requested that Prime Minister Holt convey to Sihanouk along with our desire to discuss ways to improve the present situation (Tab B).3 While the VC question and border incidents were discussed by Holt with Sihanouk, Ambassador Deschampsʼ account of the conversation (Tab C)4 does not indicate that Holt undertook to convey the full flavor of your message.

3. Hasluck is likely to reflect the impressions which Prime Minister Holt received as the result of his visit to Phnom Penh. These, as reported by a member of Holtʼs party, are: (a) We should not at this time try to force matters with Cambodia in any direction, whether towards a restoration of relations or towards more determined action against VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory.

(b) In Sihanoukʼs present “anti-American” frame of mind, a visit by Governor Harriman would not be likely to be productive and we should for the time being continue to rely on Ambassador Deschamps.

(c) Sihanouk realistically accepted the inevitability of border incidents, although he intended to continue protesting them for the record and would strongly resist anything that looked like a permanent lodgment of American or South Vietnamese forces on Cambodian territory. (Tab D)5

4. I recommend that you stress to Hasluck our strong feeling of the need to find a way to reduce the advantage which Viet Cong and North Vietnamese are now able to derive from use of Cambodian territory. Our intelligence people consider that the ability to use Cambodia offers a psychological and military advantage of considerable value to the enemy and that the use is likely to increase further during the coming year. While we are aware of the limitations of what the Cambodians are able or could be expected to do, we do believe that direct discussions with them at some level could help to relieve some of their apprehensions and establish the base for some form of cooperative action to deal with the problem, at least in some fields. Initially this might possibly take the form of an exchange of intelligence information on VC/NVA activities on either side of the border as well as discussion of ways to improve border controls and reduce the danger of border incidents through further efforts to get an expansion of the Cambodian ICC, use of some other international group or neutral third country, or improvement of Cambodian patrolling capabilities. At a later stage, if a good working relationship were established, we might be able to probe ways in which the Cambodians could be assisted to do more or to countenance certain actions by others which they are themselves unable to perform.

5. In view of Holtʼs feeling that the timing may not be propitious for a visit by Governor Harriman, you may wish to get Hasluckʼs reaction to the possibility of establishing direct contact through a visit by an experienced but lower ranking and less visible official. An alternate possibility would be contact in a third country such as Japan, where the Cambodian Ambassador, Prince Sirik Matak, appears to be intelligent and well disposed as well as to have good contacts with the Lon Nol Government. Depending on Hasluckʼs reaction, you may wish to suggest that Ambassador Deschamps be asked to take some discreet soundings in Phnom Penh regarding the establishment of contact in one fashion or another.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL AUSTL–US. Secret;Exdis. Drafted by Douglas R. Perry and Ewing of EA/BUC.

2 The tabs were not attached. Presumably Tab A is telegram 6071 from Vientiane, April 3, see footnote 3, Document 201.

3 See Document 201.

4 Tab C is a copy of an Australian telegram reporting on the Sihanouk-Holt conversation of March 30. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 17 AUSTL–US)

5 Apparent reference to a copy of paragraph 5 (a) of Tab C.

204. Memorandum of Conversation 204. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 21, 1967.

SUBJECT

ANZUS Council Meeting—Part Two—Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Prime Minister Keith Holyoake of New Zealand

Minister for External Affairs Paul Hasluck of Australia

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary, EA

Mr. Ian Stewart, Head, Defense Division, Department of External Affairs of New Zealand

Sir James Plimsoll, Secretary of the Department of External Affairs of Australia

Hasluck began by reporting on Prime Minister Holtʼs trip to Phnom Penh. He said that Holt had wished to help, but it was hard on a first visit to get into argument on the difficult questions related to the VC. Holt had engaged in some discussion with Sihanouk, in which without being argumentative he had at least got across to Sihanouk that the US believed it had a real case.

Hasluck then adverted to the question of what Deschamps might usefully do. He thought he could readily and perhaps usefully make soundings seeking to have a direct US-Cambodian channel of some sort. However, he was dubious that Deschamps could effectively raise the question of providing or exchanging information on VC/NVA activities. Deschamps could only talk to Sihanouk as a practical matter, since talking to any other Cambodian would arouse resistance from Sihanouk when he heard about it. Sihanouk would fear the Chinese reaction if he appeared to be getting into such an information exchange with us. Therefore, even if the exchange were proposed, Sihanouk would probably turn it down. If he did accept, he would at once wish to know where it led, and this would be most difficult.

Hasluck concluded that it was the general Australian view that the US should not rush. Let Deschamps talk about direct contacts, but donʼt ask him to discuss exchange of information.

The Secretary responded that he was agreeable to this proposal. As to the locale of direct contacts, he suggested that they could be in Tokyo, or New Delhi, or at the UN, or indeed wherever the Cambodians wished. The Secretary noted that Senator Brooke felt he had received some encouragement in this direction, though not from Sihanouk himself.

Hasluck then went on to say that he himself had made the deliberated decision to leave Deschamps in Phnom Penh, having learned when he took over (in April 1964) that Deschamps was up for transfer. He considered Deschamps ideally equipped to conduct a policy of keeping relations smooth with the Cambodians and particularly never getting into argument. This was in fact Deschampsʼ own personal inclination, and this he had done. Hasluck considered the results of this policy to have been of value, as the Australians clearly had good standing in Phnom Penh now and even their role in Viet-Nam was not condemned by the Cambodians.

The matter was left at that, and Bundy remarked that we would draw up a possible message for Deschamps to use suggesting direct contacts.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-International Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 169. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy and approved in S on May 1. Holyoake, Hasluck, and Rusk were attending the 16th meeting of the ANZUS Council, held in Washington, April 21–22.

205. Action Memorandum From the Chairman of the Cambodian Study Group (Unger) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 205. Action Memorandum From the Chairman of the Cambodian Study Group (Unger) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, May 1, 1967.

SUBJECT

Initial Report by the Joint State-Defense-CIA Study Group for Cambodia

1. Pursuant to a suggestion to you from Deputy Secretary Vance, agreement was reached last December on the establishment of Joint Study Group under Department of State Chairmanship to discuss means of dealing with the problem of Viet Cong-North Vietnamese use of Cambodia. In addition to State, representatives of the Department of Defense and CIA participated in the study and USIA was included in the discussions of psychological operations.

2. The Study Group has now completed its initial report which I am submitting to you at Tab A. In this report (pages 1–4) you will find a summary and a series of recommendations which provide the essence of our findings. It is our hope that the report will serve as a policy and operating guide for the Cambodian question as it relates to the war in Viet-Nam. The report is labeled “initial” in recognition of the need to reassess its findings regularly.

3. If you approve the report I recommend that you forward it to Messrs. Vance and Helms (see draft letter at Tab B)2 and invite their approval as well. Once the report is approved I would recommend also providing an information copy to Mr. Marks, USIA.

4. As the work of the Study Group proceeded we were able to reach immediate agreement on certain recommended actions and authorization was given to proceed with these forthwith as noted in the report, beginning on page 26. In addition to those actions, primarily in the military field, we have also been proceeding with diplomatic and informational activities.

5. With respect to certain other recommended actions, the Study Group deferred decision in one instance and in the remaining cases decided it was inadvisable to approve the actions under present circumstances. These deferred and disapproved proposals are discussed in the report starting on page 30. The deferred decision concerns certain limited ground reconnaissance operations, including the participation of US personnel, in a limited area of Northeast Cambodia adjacent to South Viet-Nam and Laos (code name: Daniel Boone). Because of the sensitivity of these operations I wished them to be considered at a high level in the Department but I recommend that they be approved since I consider the military utility high and the risk of exposure low.

Recommendations3

6. It is recommended that you: a) Approve the Initial Report (Tab A) of the Study Group and sign the letters transmitting it to Defense and CIA (see Tab B).

b) Approve the Daniel Boone operation recommended by the Study Group and concur in the transmittal of the messages contained in Tab K of the Initial Report.

[Here follows a table of contents.]

Attachment4

Initial Report of the Joint Department of State-Department of Defense-Central Intelligence Agency Study Group on Cambodia

I. Summary and Recommendations

Following a SEACOORD meeting in November 1966, which focussed attention on the increasing seriousness of the problems of Viet Cong and North Vietnamese use of Cambodia, USIB undertook a restudy of the problem in an effort to evaluate its relative significance to our military effort in Vietnam. That study, completed on January 26, 1967, concludes inter alia that VC/NVA use of Cambodia: (1) does not constitute a decisive element in the enemy capability for conducting military operations in Vietnam; (2) is of considerable psychological and military advantage to them; and (3) is likely to increase further during the coming year.5

Based on the USIB study, an interdepartmental Study Group, representing State, OASD/ISA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and CIA (with USIA participation on psychological operations) has been meeting since early February under Ambassador Ungerʼs chairmanship to consider what additional actions might be taken to deal with this problem. In particular, the Study Group has examined in detail proposals submitted by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for an expansion of existing ground and aerial intelligence collection activities, psychological operations, and immediate pursuit of VC/NVA forces on Cambodian soil.

In considering the JCS proposals, the Study Group has worked from the premises that, for the present, our efforts to deal with this problem should continue to be primarily in the political sphere and should be on a priority basis. Provocative actions which would seriously prejudice the success of such efforts and threaten to expand the combat into Cambodia should be avoided. However, those actions which are clearly required in terms of self-defense of our forces in South Vietnam should continue to be authorized as necessary.

Although recognizing the limited capability of the Cambodians to control their frontiers, the Study Group noted recent developments in Cambodia which seem to offer an improved prospect for getting the Cambodian Government to take more effective action to reduce the advantage VC/NVA forces derive from use of Cambodian territory. The Study Group supported a stepped up plan of political/diplomatic action aimed at getting Cambodian cooperation or acquiescence in dealing with this problem and bringing about an improvement in US-Cambodian relations.

In view of the increased concern over VC/NVA activity in Cambodia and in order to obtain a clearer picture of the extent of such activity and its effect upon military operations in South Vietnam, measures designed to expand air intelligence collection programs and which carry tolerable political risks have been approved. An expanded leaflet operation to reach VC/NVA forces in relatively sparsely populated border areas of Cambodia has also been approved and a psychological operations plan prepared for use as authorized (Tab H). Other proposals involving actions by US forces on Cambodian territory, which would have been difficult to conceal and involved high risk of further worsening our relations with Cambodia, have been deferred pending further diplomatic efforts to reach some understanding with Cambodians which could lead to an improvement in the existing situation. These proposals are covered in detail in Section V of the report.

The recommendations of the Study Group are as follows: (1) that the Study Groupʼs initial report be adopted as the basis for actions concerning Cambodia taken by the respective agencies involved, in particular Section IV (Political/Diplomatic Plan of Action) and Section V A. (Approved Actions.)

(2) that Daniel Boone-type operations in the border zone of Northeastern Cambodia be authorized on a case-by-case basis as described in Tabs K and L.6

(3) that those proposals in Section V A. that were partially implemented and those proposals in Section V B. that were deferred in their entirety, at appropriate intervals be reviewed and considered for expansion or implementation.

(4) that the Study Group meet as necessary on an ad hoc basis where new developments call for consideration of recommendations for specific actions going beyond the guidelines laid down in this report.

(5) that in any case the Study Group reconvene for a comprehensive review of the situation after a three month period.

[Here follow section II, “The Nature of the Problem,” section III, “U.S. Policy, section IV, “Political/Diplomatic Plan of Action,” section V, “Proposals Considered by the Study Group and Action Taken,” and Tabs A–M, and Annexes I and II.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Unger and initialed by Kohler.

2 Attached but not printed.

3  Katzenbach approved both recommendations on May 9.

4 Top Secret; Limdis.

5 Special National Intelligence Estimate 57–67: Significance of Cambodia to the Vietnamese Communist War Effort. [Footnote in the source text; see Document 199.]

6 In JCS telegram 5937 to CINCPAC, May 22, the Joint Chiefs informed CINCPAC that Daniel Boone cross-border operations for northeastern Cambodia were approved subject to certain restrictions: The area was limited; reconnaissance teams were to total not more than 12 men (with no more than 3 U.S. advisers); tactical airstrikes and/or the commitment of exploitation forces into Cambodia was not approved; infiltration and exfiltration would be by foot; mission time would be kept to the minimum; all precautions should be taken to avoid contact with Cambodians; purpose of the operation was intelligence and verification; no more than three missions could be undertaken at one time; missions required prior JCS approval with notification of the Department of State; and the operations would not be acknowledged. (Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 880/211 (22 May 67) IR 2278)6

206. Memorandum From the Country Director for Burma and Cambodia (Ewing) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy) 206. Memorandum From the Country Director for Burma and Cambodia (Ewing) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Statement of Respect for Cambodiaʼs Present Frontiers

1. Adherence within the past week by the Soviet Union, Communist China, North Korea, North Vietnam, and the Liberation Front to the French-type declaration of respect for Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity “within its present borders” is being used by Sihanouk to put pressure on western countries to follow suit. Sihanouk has said, in effect, that he will look upon adherence to such a declaration as a measure to judge friendship for Cambodia.

2. Both the Australians and the British have informed us that they have been asked officially by the Cambodians to take this action, and the Ambassadors of both countries in Phnom Penh have recommended so doing. In this connection, we have received telegrams from Bangkok strongly opposing any such action and from Vientiane stating Souvanna Phoumaʼs opposition to Laos doing so. Copies of both telegrams are attached.2

3. In my discussions with both Robertson of the Australian Embassy and Gilmore of the British Embassy, I have pointed out that the previous difficulty we had with this statement, without any accompanying qualification that would protect the Vietnamese, Thai and Lao positions in their border differences with Cambodia, still continues to exist. (We discussed this problem at some length previously with the British last October in connection with the appointment of a new British Ambassador to Phnom Penh and with the Australians this March in connection with Prime Minister Holtʼs visit to Cambodia.) I have indicated that I did not see anything at the present time that changed this, other than the added disadvantage now of clearly following in the Communist wake. Emphasizing that my reaction was a preliminary one, I have pointed out that obviously their adherence to the declaration would make our position more difficult in not doing so, but have not otherwise tried to put pressure upon them not to take such action. I have, however, urged that both consult with both the Thai and the South Vietnamese regarding their intentions.

4. There is a slight possibility that the Cambodian Government might be prepared to make an official statement to the Australian and/or the British Ambassador to the effect that adherence to the declaration did not prejudice their positions with respect to border differences existing with neighboring countries. Deschamps has reported that Son Sann made such a statement to the Lao Charge and British Ambassador Brown has indicated that the Secretary General of the Cambodian Foreign Office made a similar statement to him. I have suggested to both Robertson and Gilmore that an effort be made to determine whether it might be possible to obtain an official Cambodian statement to this effect, which would make the declaration much more acceptable. Although Deschamps has expressed doubt the Cambodians would agree to give a written statement, I think the possibility of obtaining an oral statement may still be worth pursuing.

5. At the present time, the matter stands that I have asked both Robertson and Gilmore for the opportunity to consult again if it appears that the decision is likely to be in favor of making a declaration. Robertson is now uncertain what Canberra will do and appears to feel that adverse reactions from Saigon and Bangkok will carry some weight. Gilmore, on the other hand, has asked for our reaction on the assumption that the decision in London will be favorable, which he seems to feel may be the case.

6. I feel that it would be preferable for us at this point not to go beyond the restatement of our problems with the declaration or try to put further pressure upon either Canberra or London. Hopefully, they will both decide against doing so because of the problems associated with it, without feeling they have done so under our pressure. Should, as may be the case, London decide in favor of a declaration and Canberra against, we would together with the Australians be in a position to make a much stronger case as to the difficulties such a divergence would present for us all.

Recommendation 3

1. That I be authorized to continue my discussions with the British and Australians along the present lines, indicating to the British that it represents the present thinking at the EA level;

2. That, regardless of the British and Australian decision, we do not at this time ourselves consider adhering to the “present borders” declaration in its present form;

3. That we continue to pursue the possibility of an official Cambodian statement along the lines reportedly made to the Lao Charge and British Ambassador Brown, which might provide a basis for us to reconsider our position on the “present borders” declaration, in consultation with the Thais and South Vietnamese.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Secret. Initialed by Habib.

2 Not attached to the source text and not further identified.

3 Bundy approved, but with the statement that he wanted “a bigger paper on all implications.”

207. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) 207. Memorandum From William J. Jorden of the National Security Council Staff to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read)1

Washington, June 19, 1967.

SUBJECT

Cambodiaʼs Territorial Integrity

North Viet-Nam and the Liberation Front have declared their respect for Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity within its present borders. This has been welcomed warmly by Prince Sihanouk. He has declared his intention to raise the level of representation with NVN and permit establishment of a Front mission in Phnom Penh as a result.

Several Governments have raised the question whether a similar declaration should not be made by non-Communist Governments, especially the U.K., Australia and the U.S.

I recognize all the problems and pitfalls in this matter—especially South Vietnamese, Thai and Laotian sensitivity.

But in this connection, I call your attention to Section IV of the Declaration of Manila2 which said, in part: “We do not threaten the sovereignty or territorial integrity of our neighbors, whatever their ideological alignment … “

This Declaration was subscribed to by the U.S., Australia, South Viet-Nam and Thailand, among others.

In dealing with the Cambodian matter, would it not be useful to call wide attention to this statement, to get all subscribers to use it when the Cambodian question is raised, and perhaps to call Sihanoukʼs attention to it through third parties?

Please call this to the attention of the bureau (EA). The President would like a prompt report on what can be done, or is being done, and any arguments that would suggest that Section IV language not be used for this purpose.

Bill Jorden

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Confidential. Initialed by Bromley Smith. A note on the source text indicates that William Bundy saw it.

2 The Joint communiqué with statement and Declaration issued following the Seven-Nation Conference at Manila, October 24–25, 1966. For the text of the Declaration, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, p. 871.

208. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser (Aldrich) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 208. Memorandum From the Assistant Legal Adviser (Aldrich) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 11, 1967.

SUBJECT

Proposals to Inhibit NVA/VC Exploitation of Cambodian Territory

The Joint State/DOD/CIA Study Group on Cambodia is presently considering proposals for certain diplomatic and/or military actions to inhibit or guard against enemy exploitation of Cambodian territory. L/EA has been asked a number of pertinent questions concerning the legal rights and obligations of so-called neutrals and belligerents under contemporary international law. These questions are answered in the memorandum attached at Tab A.2 The basic conclusions are (1) a neutral is obligated to take measures within its power to prevent the movement of forces or the establishment of bases on its territory by the parties to the conflict; (2) violations of a stateʼs neutrality and territorial integrity by one party to an international conflict do not justify violations by opposing parties; (3) participants in international conflict, including those who are engaged in collective defense against armed attack, may not take military actions on the territory of a neutral third country except in self-defense against armed attack; and (4) pacific means of settlement must be exhausted before the conflict is extended to a “neutral” state.

Cambodia may not have taken all the measures which reasonably can be expected of it to enforce its neutrality, but the remedy for such shortcomings is diplomatic, or legal, not military. Armed reconnaissance patrols on Cambodian territory can be defended only to the extent that they are necessary means of defending U.S. and friendly forces against enemy forces operating in Cambodia and posing a threat so serious that it must be countered. In this memorandum, L/EA analyzes the Cambodian problem in light of the applicable rules of law and U.S. policy objectives and recommends a course of action consistent with our international obligations.

Recommendations:

1. No decision should be taken to expand Daniel Boone operations in Cambodia until the offices concerned have had the opportunity to review (a) a detailed analysis of suspected enemy troop dispositions in Cambodia and the threat they pose to friendly forces in border areas of South Viet Nam, and (b) a full statement of the public justification we would be able to make for our action in the very likely event of disclosure.

2. Before deciding to expand Daniel Boone operations, we should undertake a major diplomatic effort to (a) inform Sihanouk of the extent of NVA/VC use of Cambodia territory; (b) persuade him that failure to prevent such abuse, or to limit its growth, will create a greater risk for Cambodia than would remedial action; and (c) create sufficient international interest and concern to give Sihanouk a justification for acting, i.e., for putting pressure on the NVA/VC to restrain their activity in Cambodia, and/or for seeking an international presence to protect Cambodiaʼs frontiers. The specific diplomatic measures, depending on the strength of our public case, could include bilateral approaches to the Cambodian Government, approaches to Sihanouk by influential leaders of third countries, a new high level approach to the Indian Government to attempt to activate the ICC, and initiatives in the United Nations.

3. In the interim, aerial reconnaissance of Cambodia and other intelligence measures should be continued at present levels to guard against a major build-up of enemy forces in Cambodia. Daniel Boone missions in areas other than the present operating area could be authorized on a case-by-case basis in those situations where, because of the specific disposition of friendly forces, reports of hostile activity in Cambodia, and other factors, it is believed that there may be an immediate serious threat to friendly forces from enemy forces on the Cambodian side of the border.

A. The Problem: NVA/VC Exploitation of Cambodian Territory

There is no doubt that North Viet Nam and Viet Cong forces consist-ently violate Cambodian neutrality. There are, however, no confirmed reports of major NVA/VC troop dispositions on Cambodian territory. The Vietnamese Communists have used Cambodian territory in a variety of ways to support their insurgency in South Viet Nam, but the extent and significance of their use is uncertain. The most important use of Cambodian territory probably has been as temporary sanctuary from US/ARVN operations. Cambodia is also used for infiltration of personnel from North Viet Nam, and bases have been established to provide rest areas, medical care, and possibly training for enemy forces. On occasion U.S. and friendly forces are fired upon from Cambodian territory, and there are reports that certain enemy headquarters operate in Cambodia. The most extensive base areas are located in northeast Cambodia, in Ratanakiri province, and in southeast Mondulkiri province. There is also considerable enemy activity adjacent to South Viet Namʼs Tay Ninh province. These activities violated Cambodiaʼs rights as a neutral and infringe upon the territorial integrity of the state.

The Viet Cong have also procured considerable rice, some medicines, and other supplies in Cambodia. Although this traffic may violate Cambodian and/or South Vietnamese laws, it is not inconsistent with Cambodiaʼs status as a neutral.

SNIE 57–67, January 26, 1967,3 concludes that the availability of Cambodian territory is of considerable psychological and military advantage to the Communists. Denying that territory to the enemy would make life more difficult for the Communists. However, “it would not constitute a decisive element in their ability to conduct military operations in South Viet Nam.”

U.S. commanders believe that Communist use of Cambodia as a sanctuary and source of supply continues to increase as U.S. military superiority makes it more difficult for Communist units to operate in South Viet Nam. A number of enemy units are located in areas of South Viet Nam close to the Cambodian border and there is concern that these forces might be utilizing Cambodian territory to avoid contact with U.S. forces or to prepare for operations against US/ARVN positions. However, as far as we are aware, the conclusions of SNIE 57–67 are still considered valid. The extent of enemy exploitation of Cambodian territory is not certain, but that activity is not believed to be a “decisive element” in the enemy effort.

B. Cambodiaʼs Policy of Neutrality

The Cambodian government has assumed an official posture as a “neutral” in the conflict in Viet Nam, and its actions generally conform with a policy of non-participation in the war. Cambodian forces have not joined in the fighting in South Viet Nam, and so far as we can determine, the Cambodian government has not authorized use of its territory by the Communist forces or supplied arms to them. Prince Sihanouk reportedly has given instructions that no Vietnamese forces be permitted sanctuary or bases in Cambodian territory, and in recent weeks he has made increased efforts to curtail the illicit rice trade with the Viet Cong. Cambodiaʼs official position is strengthened by the Princeʼs request to the International Control Commission to expand its activities to investigate alleged border incursions.

Sihanouk continues to deny the presence of NVA/VC forces on Cambodian territory, but we presume that he is generally aware of VC activity in Cambodia, although perhaps not of the full extent of that activity, particularly in the northeast. Recent reports suggest that some information is withheld from the Prince by subordinates. There are numerous reports that Cambodian military personnel in the border areas have, in some instances, cooperated with NVA/VC forces transiting Cambodia.

The RKG could do more than it has to prevent abuse of Cambodian neutrality, but there are definite limitations on Cambodiaʼs ability to deny its territory to the enemy. Cambodiaʼs military forces are small and many are devoted to the sensitive border with Thailand. Further, Sihanouk must contend with serious pressures from Communist China and from strong left wing elements in Cambodia. In these circumstances, the RKG may have decided to tolerate a limited use of its territory, e.g., for infiltration, temporary sanctuary and convalescence, which in any event it could not effectively prevent, in hopes that the substances of its neutrality would be respected. There are no confirmed reports of major NVA/VC troop dispositions on Cambodian territory or of complicity of the RKG in the enemy war effort.

In view of the enemyʼs limited use of Cambodian territory to date, and the limited capacity of the Cambodian government to protect its territory from all abuse, Cambodia cannot be said to have abandoned or substantially compromised its policy of non-involvement in the conflict. We would like to see Cambodia take official notice of and protest NVA/VC abuse of its territory; to appeal to the United Nations or to third countries to intervene to protect its neutrality; or quietly to seek the support of the Soviets to restrain North Vietnamese activity in Cambodia. However, in view of the problems confronting Prince Sihanouk and the strongly anti-American public position he has taken, it is no more realistic to expect him to confront the Vietnamese Communists publicly than it is to expect him to take strong military action against them. It is not, however, unrealistic for us to endeavor to prevent Sihanouk from burning his bridges to the west and to convince him to press the Communists privately to reduce their use of Cambodian territory. In fact, the only method that offers any reasonable prospect of reducing enemy use of Cambodia is pressure by Sihanouk or action by him to obtain a substantial international presence. Military action by the United States in Cambodia runs a serious risk of driving Cambodia openly into collaboration with the Communists, thereby greatly expanding VC–NVN use of Cambodian territory, establishing a whole new front in the war, and increasing international condemnation of the United States as an aggressor. Diplomatic action is more likely to promote our interests than military action, and it involves much smaller risks, both military and political, to the United States.

C. U.S. Policy Towards Cambodia

There have been a few serious violations of Cambodian territory by U.S. forces, but it has been and remains agreed U.S. policy to avoid extending the Viet Nam war to Cambodia. Combat operations are not authorized in Cambodia except as necessary to suppress hostile fire from Cambodian territory and to preserve U.S. forces engaged on the South Vietnamese side of the border. Immediate pursuit of enemy ground forces into Cambodia is not otherwise permitted.

Despite these precautions there have been a number of incidents along the Cambodian frontier and NVA/VC use of Cambodian territory has been an increasing source of concern. The U.S. has protested the abuse of Cambodian neutrality through the Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh, and has attempted to persuade Sihanouk to discuss the problem directly. Sihanouk publicly rejected the U.S. initiative. The U.S. has also supported Canadian efforts to activate the ICC, but the Poles and Indians have blocked these initiatives. Aerial reconnaissance of Cambodian territory has been authorized to guard against a sudden enemy buildup in Cambodia and a limited number (5 per month) of Daniel Boone ground reconnaissance teams have been permitted to enter the remote northeast corner of the country where the Cambodian government has virtually no presence. Penetration to 20 kilometers has been author-ized, but the teams have not proceeded to that depth. The patrols are instructed to avoid contact with the civilian population and to avoid engagement with Cambodian forces except in self-defense. U.S. commanders in Viet Nam believe that these measures are insufficient and that new measures are required to inhibit NVA/VC exploitation of Cambodia.

D. Proposals for Military Actions in Cambodia

The Department of Defense has proposed an expansion of Daniel Boone operations in Cambodia that would (1) extend the operating area along the entire frontier from Laos to the Gulf of Siam; (2) authorize the infiltration and exfiltration of personnel by helicopter; and (3) increase the number of authorized missions from five to thirty each month. The twenty kilometer limitation on maximum penetration and other operating limitations now in effect would be retained.

This proposed revision of the Daniel Boone program would be fundamentally different from the small, covert operations now authorized in a remote corner of Cambodia. Increased frequency, operation in more populous areas, and the use of helicopters would greatly increase the risks of disclosure and of direct confrontation with Cambodian forces.

Moreover, expanded Daniel Boone operations in Cambodia cannot be viewed as an isolated step. Once authorization is granted for expanded military activities in Cambodia, the pressure for taking the next step—use of force against VC–NVN positions in Cambodia—would be very difficult to resist. We should be fully aware now of where the end of this road is likely to lead and not begin to go down it unless we are prepared to travel to the end.

From the legal point of view, Cambodia is not a party to the conflict in Viet Nam. It has not intervened in South Viet Nam and has not become a co-belligerent with North Viet Nam. It retains its status as a neutral. Abuse of Cambodian neutrality by NVA/VC forces does not automatically justify corresponding violations of Cambodian territorial integrity by U.S. or friendly forces. Such responsive violations can be justified only in cases where it may legitimately be claimed that the action is required in self-defense. Moreover, recourse must first be had to bilateral and multilateral diplomatic means of pacific settlement before reliance may be placed on the right of self-defense, except in cases where the act or threat being defended against arises suddenly and leaves no time for deliberation. When a threat develops and grows over a period of time, as in Cambodia, it is even more apparent that the threatened state is obligated to seek a pacific settlement before resorting to the use of force on the territory of a neutral and that it has had the opportunity to do so. Thus, Article 33 of the United Nations Charter obligates the “parties to any dispute, the continuation of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security” to seek “first of all” a peaceful solution to the dispute. Article 37 provides that, should they fail to obtain a peaceful settlement, they are required to refer the dispute to the Security Council.

The extent and significance of NVA/VC use of Cambodian territory is uncertain, and our public documentation of a major enemy presence in Cambodia is thin, but there can be little doubt that enemy misuse of Cambodian territory and Cambodian failure to prevent such misuse constitute a dispute, “the continuation of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security.” Under these circumstances, our obligation to attempt to settle the dispute by pacific means and, failing that, to take the dispute to the Security Council is clear.

Military force may legitimately be used by one state on the territory of another state in self-defense only when hostile actions threaten the first state in such a significant way that their suppression is not merely desirable but necessary and when such use of force is required to suppress them. In the absence of an impartial body that can effectively decide this question, it remains a matter of subjective judgment, but it is at least theoretically open to subsequent, impartial examination. With respect to Cambodia, it is far from clear that an impartial observer would decide that the demonstrable facts of its use by NVA/VC forces are sufficiently threatening to South Viet Nam and to our forces in South Viet Nam to justify direct military action based upon the right of self-defense. For the most part, Cambodia appears to be used as a source of supply, for temporary sanctuary, as a secondary infiltration route (at least in the past), and for hospital and rest areas. This uncertainty weakens the case for action in self-defense and thereby makes it even more important that all possibilities of pacific settlement be explored thoroughly before action is taken that can rest only on the basis of self-defense.

The two most extensive enemy base areas in Cambodia have been found in the northeast part of the country, but we have seen no reports of large troop concentrations in these areas. In our judgment, therefore, Daniel Boone operations should be authorized on a case-by-case basis and only in those situations where the specific dispositions of U.S. and friendly forces, reports of hostile activity in Cambodia, and other factors require cross-border ground reconnaissance to protect those forces from surprise attack by enemy forces believed to be massing in Cambodia. Great care must be taken to avoid disclosure and helicopters should not be utilized except in extraordinary circumstances.

The political cost of the disclosure of U.S. military operations in Cambodia would be enormous both in the international and the domestic context. Sympathies at home and abroad frequently would lie with Cambodia, which has managed to create an image of a small state struggling for survival amidst hostile neighbors. Public opinion would expect more convincing documentation of the necessity for self-defense in the case of a “neutral” than is normally required in respect of a belligerent. We may not have sufficient documentation of NVA/VC abuse of Cambodian territory for public use to overcome sympathies for Cambodia, and Sihanouk could make full use of the forum offered by the UN Security Council to play upon them. Further, many world leaders would regard the initiation of U.S. operations in Cambodia as a major escalation that would threaten to transform the conflict from a local war into general hostilities. Influential members of Congress would be outraged that the administration has taken steps to extend the conflict to another country without consulting the Congress. The result of such an incident could be sweeping new pressures to withdraw from Viet Nam. It is doubtful whether the possible military advantage that could be derived from the increment of information that would be obtained from expanded Daniel Boone operations justifies accepting that risk.

Costs of expanded U.S. military activity in Cambodia would also be exacted with respect to a future political settlement in Southeast Asia. Cambodia, and Prince Sihanouk, will, of necessity, play an important role in a peaceful Southeast Asia. We ought not now to take actions against Cambodia that will further alienate the Cambodians from the West and give them grounds for believing that their welfare depends on close ties to the Communist powers in Asia. We should be particularly careful not to initiate a “chain of eventsʼ which could affect political stability in Cambodia and open the way to Communist subversion. From a long-range viewpoint, the advantages of countering the threat posed by misuse of Cambodian territory must be balanced against the disadvantage of prejudicing the chances of a constructive role for Cambodia in the future political and economic development of Southeast Asia.

In view of the serious legal questions presented by these proposals and the high political costs that are anticipated, we believe that no decision should be taken to expand Daniel Boone operations in Cambodia until the offices concerned have had the opportunity to review (1) a detailed analysis of suspected enemy troop dispositions in Cambodia and the threat they pose to friendly forces in the border areas of South Viet Nam, and (2) a full statement of the public justification we would be able to make for our action in the very likely event of disclosure.

E. Alternatives

Ultimately, we cannot expect Sihanouk to take major steps to inhibit VC use of Cambodian territory unless he is persuaded that there will continue to be western influence in Southeast Asia and that this influence will not be hostile to Cambodia or to his government. The progress of the war in Viet Nam is the most important factor in this situation, but we should actively seek opportunities to demonstrate to Sihanouk our good intentions toward Cambodia, while at the same time making clear privately that large scale misuse of Cambodian territory cannot be tolerated. Obviously, that is a delicate task and one that could be rendered impossible if U.S. military action in Cambodia were revealed to the public while that effort is underway.

In the short run, the object of our diplomacy should be to (1) inform Sihanouk of the extent of NVA/VC use of Cambodian territory; (2) persuade him that failure to prevent such abuse, or to limit its growth, will create a greater risk for Cambodia than would remedial action; and (3) create sufficient international interest and concern to give Sihanouk a justification for acting, i.e., for putting pressure on the NVA/VC to restrain their activity in Cambodia, and/or for seeking an international presence to protect Cambodiaʼs frontiers.

We cannot expect Sihanouk to take such vigorous measures as would entail reprisals from the Communists, internal or external, but we can hope for a more active RKG presence in certain border areas that would tend to inhibit NVN/VC freedom of action. We can also hope for occasional sorties into border areas by the ICC, journalists and other fact-finders. These investigations could be useful to us if we can influence their location and timing. Even if little proof of VC activity is disclosed, a program of continuing investigations could inhibit enemy activity.

Accordingly, we recommend a program of continued diplomatic activity, public and private, calculated to (1) put maximum pressure on Sihanouk to take corrective action, (2) educate the public to the realities of the problem and (3) establish a better legal basis for future actions that may become necessary. In the interim, aerial reconnaissance of Cambodia and other intelligence measures (including Daniel Boone teams) should be continued at present levels to guard against a major build-up of enemy forces in Cambodia. Daniel Boone missions in areas other than the present operations area could be authorized on a case-by-case basis in those situations where, because of the specific disposition of friendly forces, reports of hostile activity in Cambodia, and other factors, it is believed that there may be an immediate serious threat to friendly forces from enemy forces on the Cambodian side of the frontier.

The diplomatic measures could include bilateral approaches to the Cambodian government, approaches to Sihanouk by influential leaders of third countries, a new high level approach to the Indian government to attempt to activate the ICC, and, depending on the strength of our public case, initiatives in the United Nations. The private approaches should include specific information on current VC/NVN misuse of Cambodian territory, a convincing statement of our good intentions toward Cambodia and the part we anticipate Cambodia will play in post-war Southeast Asia, and a gentle but firm warning that widespread and dangerous misuse of Cambodian territory cannot be tolerated.

Consideration should be given to the possibility of orchestrating pressures to compel Sihanouk to accept an outside mission with adequate freedom of movement that would include person(s) on whom we could rely. This maneuver could succeed only if Sihanouk were persuaded of the necessity to inhibit NVA/VC activity without a direct confrontation, and if he thought this device offered adequate cover. To this end the information available to the USG which can be declassified should be provided to Sihanouk. It is important that he be apprised of the seriousness with which the USG regards this situation and be given an opportunity to take some remedial action.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Mark B. Feldman and Aldrich of L/EA on September 9. A note on the source text indicates that it was seen by Bundy. Copies went to Harriman, Habib, and Lacey.

2 A “Memorandum of Law,” attached but not printed.

3  Document 199.

209. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 209. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, September 14, 1967.

SUBJECT

Cambodian Policy

Problem

Enemy use of Cambodia over the past year has continued to increase and has become a mounting source of frustration to the US commitment in Viet-Nam. Since July, the Joint State/Defense/CIA Interagency Study Group on Cambodia has considered a series of proposals aimed at alleviating the problem. The Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee (SEACOORD), meeting in Saigon in August, drafted some recommendations which encompassed a new, tougher, overall approach to the Royal Cambodian Government (RKG). CINCPAC also has offered a program which calls for a more intensive political and military offensive, as well as a number of requests for enlarged military operations inside the Cambodian border.

The proposals prescribe actions intended to impel a more forthcoming and cooperative response from Prince Sihanouk with respect to VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory. They call for greater dissemination of information on enemy use of Cambodia, the initiation of a propaganda campaign, and the expansion of reconnaissance missions across the Cambodian border. Running through these proposals is the assumption that if political measures fail to resolve the problem, then more direct action might be required.

Discussion

Cambodiaʼs relations with Communist China have cooled markedly and there are definite indications of a Cambodian crackdown on internal communist activity. Although we do not know all the whys- and-wherefores, these developments suggest that the politico-diplomatic approach to the problem is still useful. It would be unwise, however, to conclude that more political pressures upon the Prince by itself can force him to change his tune and to become more cooperative. Our leverage is still small.

And yet, the time has come when the US should pursue its political and diplomatic approaches more systematically, more actively and more extensively.

We should do what we have been doing but more aggressively. We should present by official means the evidence on which we base our deep concern—to the Cambodian Government, to the ICC, and to other selected addressees including the Geneva Co-Chairmen. For too long we have left the explanation of the border problem to the distortions of Cambodian propagandists.

Inevitably these actions will leak and will arouse some public stir, since Sihanouk can be expected to make a public rebuttal and countercharge. And the Soviets might react similarly. But if our case is presented objectively, without accusations of Cambodian complicity, Sihanouk might be persuaded to take some steps to protect his eroding claim of neutrality. He might, for example, be more helpful to the ICC investigations, or modify his catechism of complaints before the UN. In seeking to make our case, however, we should not dilute the credibility of our evidence (which is not the most convincing) by launching a propaganda campaign as suggested by SEACOORD and CINCPAC.

As for future military operations, whether reconnaissance or direct action, the pivotal consideration is the magnitude of threat to US objectives that derives from enemy use of Cambodia as sanctuary: does the problem warrant direct action that would widen the war.

After reviewing the results of intensive intelligence collection of the past six months, the sanctuary problem would not appear to have vital significance to the successful pursuit of our overall objectives. In view of our desire to avoid expanding the war, and in the light of the non-critical nature of the Cambodian sanctuary problem, no direct military action appears justifiable, either now or in the foreseeable future.

The sanctuary problem does, however, pose a threat to allied forces in the border area and we should agree to authorize the extension of cross border reconnaissance patrols. This will provide our forces with the kind of tactical intelligence needed to defend against possible attack from across the border; and it will help us to determine any significant changes in the importance of the problem. Beyond this essentially defensive step, we can live with the situation at its present level.

Recommendations 2

1. On past occasions we have informed the Cambodian Government, in notes delivered by the Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh of our concern over the violation of Cambodiaʼs neutrality by the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese armies. Also in notes to the Cambodian Government we have at various times expressed our willingness to support ICC investigations of this situation. We have also informed the Cambodian Government of our readiness to meet any place, any time to discuss this issue and to work out mutually acceptable ways of dealing with it. These official expressions of our concern should be continued.

2. The USIB has noted two papers prepared on VC/NVA use of Cambodia as a safehaven area for bases and infiltration. We should transmit the complete versions to Canada, Australia, Great Britain, and transmit a sanitized version to Japan, India and other selected countries. Our intent is to make clear to other governments the basis for our concern and hopefully to encourage their emissaries to express our concern to their diplomatic colleagues. To be effective this course of action will require persistent follow-through. To this end instructions should be sent to our posts in Saigon, Vientiane and Bangkok which place upon the SEACOORD Working Group the responsibility for prompt reporting of relevant and timely evidence of VC/NVA use of Cambodia.

3. We have tried intermittently to communicate with the Cambodian Government through third parties such as Japan and India. These efforts have not proven very fruitful and they do not look promising. Nevertheless, we should renew the efforts and instruct our ambassadors in Tokyo, New Delhi, Singapore, etc. of our wish to carry on this course of action.

4. The ICC investigations similarly have not proven useful and they will not become so unless there is a radical change in the policy of the Indian and Polish Governments. Even so it is desirable that we continue to put our version of the facts before this forum and establish that we have exhausted all possible avenues. Accordingly, this particular exercise should be continued.

5. We have not up to now, made much use of the United Nations as a forum of expressing the United Statesʼ case, believing it ill-advised to engage in a public dog-fight with Prince Sihanouk by attempting to answer his charges, before the United Nations, of US/Viet-Nam aggressions against his territory. Even so we should anticipate the day when the United States may be called upon to reply formally. Also we should anticipate the day when a White Paper might be called for. To these ends the Department of State should undertake a special effort to compile the required documentation in appropriate form.

6. Finally, I call your attention to a separate memorandum (Tab 2) regarding a proposed expansion of reconnaissance activities in Cambodia.3 In sum, it provides that military actions across the border exclude everything except essential defensive measures presently authorized and certain additional reconnaissance missions inside Cambodia.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Lacey and Perry on September 13.

2  Katzenbach approved all recommendations on September 16.

3 See Document 210.

210. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 210. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs (Habib) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, September 14, 1967.

SUBJECT

JCS Proposal to Extend Daniel Boone Operations

Attached at Tab A is the draft authorization message for expanding Daniel Boone operations inside Cambodia geographically, numerically, and mechanically.2 The presently authorized area is in the extreme Northeast (marked in red on map at Tabs B and C). The JCS recommend 1) an extension of the area in a 20 km swath along the border to the Gulf of Siam; 2) an increase from 10 to 30 operations per month from the Lao border to Lo Go (marked in green on map at Tab B); 3) additional operations on a case-by-case basis South of Lo Go (marked in black on map at Tab B); and 4) the use of helicopters for insertion and extraction of the reconnaissance teams.

While I agree in the need for increased reconnaissance along the Cambodian border, the attached proposal would, if accepted, almost certainly expose our operations inside Cambodia and might result in direct combat between Cambodian forces and the US-led Daniel Boone teams.

The use of helicopters multiplies the risk of detection several times. They are highly visible and audible and would attract the attention of defenders, whether Cambodian or Communist Vietnamese. They are also vulnerable to ground fire, and if shot down, would provide tangible proof of allied violation of Cambodian territory.

The risk of exposure and combat with Cambodian forces is also greatly increased by operations in the area south of Route 13. From that point, population density increases and the character of the population changes from predominantly nomadic Montagnard to predominantly Cambodian farmer, who has been told to defend his home against allied “aggressors”, and who in many cases has been provided with the weapons to do so. This area also contains a greater number of Cambodian military units.

Recommendations 3

I recommend for the foregoing reasons that you approve the following guidelines for Daniel Boone: A. Use of helicopters is excluded from Daniel Boone operations except in emergency extractions and in cases where it can be shown that their use is essential.

B. Daniel Boone operations up to a maximum of 30 a month are limited to a 20 km belt from Route 13 to the Lao border (marked in blue on Tab C), except in those cases where an essential need for reconnaissance can be demonstrated.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret. Drafted by Perry on September 13.

2 Tabs A–C are attached, but not printed.

3  Katzenbach approved both recommendations on September 16.

211. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 211. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, October 5, 1967.

I–35994/67

SUBJECT

Daniel Boone

As result of recommendations by the Joint State/Defense/CIA Study Group for Cambodia, CINCPAC was authorized on 22 May 1967 to conduct limited cross-border ground reconnaissance operations into the northeast corner of Cambodia, using U.S.-South Vietnamese Special Forces teams (Daniel Boone). The specified area of operations and other conditions for the initial Daniel Boone program are shown on the map at Tab A.2 The map at Tab B3 shows a sampling of Daniel Boone operations June–September 1967. It illustrates that present restrictions result in Daniel Boone operations having limited value for tactical or other intelligence purposes.

Based on COMUSMACV and CINCPAC recommendations, the Joint Staff representative on the Cambodia Study Group proposed expanding the area of operations to the full length of the SVN/Cambodian border and authorizing the use of helicopters to infiltrate and exfiltrate the teams. This proposal was discussed by the Study Group and eventually reduced to the modified program as shown at Tab C,4 which would have provided for use of helicopters for both introduction and extraction of the teams in the northern part of the area of operations. The Department of State representative non-concurred on the basis that such use would inevitably result in incidents and should be authorized by Washington on a case by case basis and only under exceptional circumstances. The length of the area was also objected to on the basis of its extending too far into areas of population density. State therefore proposed to use Route 13 as the dividing line between sub-areas. Mr. Katzenbach supported this position.

An alternative proposal developed by the Joint Staff to reduce the risk and at the same time to permit needed operational flexibility is shown at Tab D.5 It has also been rejected by the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, State. However, Mr. Katzenbach has not addressed this new proposal.

In the memorandum at Tab E,6 the Acting Chairman, JCS, requests that you take this matter up with the Secretary of State to seek his agreement on the alternative program.

I recommend that you endorse the concept of operations shown at Tab D and that you instruct me to take up this proposal with Mr. Katzenbach.7

Paul C. Warnke

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files, FRC 71 A 4919, Cambodia 000.1—1967 (381 Cambodia). Top Secret.

2 Tab A was a map that delineated a 20-kilometer deep zone of operations in a small area of the extreme northeast corner of Cambodiaʼs border with Kontum province of South Vietnam. Foot infiltration and exfiltration was allowed; helicopters could be used only for emergency exfiltration. There could only be a maximum of ten missions a month and monthly schedules had to be submitted in advance for Washington-level approval.

3 Attached, but not printed.

4 Tab C was a map that proposed that the border between Cambodia and South Vietnam be divided into 2 zones. In the northern Alpha zone from the Lao border to Route 13 there could be up to 30 incursions in a 20-kilometer deep area per month with infiltration and exfiltration by helicopters. Forty-eight-hour notice would be given to Washington. In the southern Bravo zone from Route 13 along the rest of the Cambodia border, all operations had to be referred to Washington on a case-by-case basis.

5 Tab D was the “JCS/DOD minimum proposal,” which covered the same two zones as in Tab C, but in Alpha zone only 5 of the 30 missions a month could use helicopters and they would be limited to infiltration of only 10 kilometers. Forty-eight hoursʼ notice would be required. Operations in Bravo zone would be referred to Washington for approval.

6 CM 2666–67, September 28. Attached, but not printed.

7  McNamara wrote the following note at the end of the memorandum: “10/6. Discuss with Nick [Katzenbach]—I lean to ʼmodified Cʼ if Nick disagrees with D.R. McN.”

212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 212. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, November 29, 1967, 0225Z.

76054. 1. After careful consideration here, we are today requesting GOA to transmit to Cambodian Government note and evidence set forth below concerning VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory. Transmission of note would be accompanied by oral statement, as contained para 8 below, that USG would not make public this summary.

2. Intended purpose is to convey to RKG on confidential basis clear picture of massive evidence available to us on this subject. We intend to position note and material in ICC and other capitals for possible later transmission depending on developments. Septels will cover this in light of timing of actual transmission.

3. By agreement with GOA Embassy here, we and they are suggesting that transmission be via Bangkok, to avoid excessive strain on GOA communications facilities to Phnom Penh. Bangkok should therefore transfer note and supporting evidence to appropriate stationery and get in touch with GOA Embassy there to put this in their hands. GOA Embassy Bangkok will in turn be receiving appropriate instructions from Canberra.

4. Exact timing of delivery not yet finally determined. We have today discussed factors that point in our minds to going ahead soonest and have urged GOA in this direction. However, no final Canberra decision has yet been made.

5. Saigon should hold this information to itself for time being. We anticipate instructing you to inform GVN at time of final delivery. However, consistent with intended confidential basis, we believe you should consider how this can best be done to minimize danger of GVN leak. Please give us your recommendations. We would be inclined to have you go personally to Thieu and/or Do stressing that any hope for effectiveness depends in our judgment on preserving confidential basis. (FYI: We of course recognize that Sihanouk may so act as to compel future publicity, but we will cross this bridge when we get to it. End FYI.) Needless to say, this whole action should be restricted to tightest need-to-know circle, and all who are necessarily brought in should be cautioned in strongest terms against any leak.

6. Canberra should immediately convey full contents this cable at appropriate levels. GOA Embassy already has all elements of this message.

7. Following is text of note to be delivered RKG:2

Begin text: “The United States has the honor to request the Embassy of Australia to deliver the following information to the Royal Cambodian Government.

The United States has regretted the impairment of its relations with Cambodia. Despite differences, however, the United States continues to respect the neutrality, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cambodia.

A particularly distressing problem dividing the United States and Cambodia arises out of incidents in the Cambodia-South Viet-Nam border area. The United States wishes to emphasize that American forces operating in South Viet-Nam are engaged in conflict with Viet Cong-North Vietnamese forces committing aggression against South Viet-Nam. The American forces have no hostile intentions toward Cambodia or Cambodian territory. The root cause of incidents affecting Cambodian territory is the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese presence in the frontier region, and their use of Cambodian territory in violation of the neutrality of Cambodia.

The United States has offered to cooperate in seeking a solution to this problem. Following the suggestion of His Royal Highness Prince Sihanouk for more effective action by the International Control Commission, made most notably in December of 1965, the United States has consistently supported such action and has indicated its willingness to consider sympathetically any request for specific assistance to this end.

At the time, the Royal Cambodian Government suggested that the International Control Commission might undertake continuing and effective review of activities in the port of Sihanoukville, and it was further suggested that the Commission might be expanded so that it could more effectively monitor the border areas between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam.

In addition, the United States has supported an international conference on Cambodia, and it has also suggested direct, informal talks with Cambodian officials in order to seek an alternative remedy.

The United States is deeply concerned over the critical issue of Viet Cong-North Vietnamese use of Cambodian territory and it wishes to emphasize once more its willingness to cooperate in any reasonable method of controlling this problem.

The Royal Cambodian Government may not be aware of the extent of Viet Cong-North Vietnamese use of its territory, and the United States therefore wishes to provide it with the attached summary of some of the evidence available. The documents and interrogations from which this evidence has been compiled are fully available if desired. Additional evidence received in more recent periods is being assessed, and may be presented to the Royal Cambodian Government at a later time.

The United States believes that the Royal Cambodian Government will share its concern over Viet Cong-North Vietnamese use of neutral Cambodian territory. It is in the spirit of assisting the Royal Cambodian Government in its efforts to prevent violations of its neutral territory that this evidence is presented.” [End text.]

8. Apart from transmitting the note, Deschamps will be instructed to make the following oral statement on delivery to RKG:

“The United States Government has made clear to my Government that the note and attached evidence that I am now presenting is being provided on a confidential basis to the Royal Cambodian Government. This is in keeping with the spirit of the note as stated in its last paragraph.

Inevitably, the United States Government will have to continue to respond to press questions by general statements that it has communicated with the Royal Cambodian Government over a long period on this subject. Moreover, individual reports bearing on this matter may continue to receive some publicity through circumstances often beyond the control of US authority. Nonetheless, the purpose of the United States Government in presenting the full summary of the evidence to the Royal Cambodian Government is as stated in the last paragraph of the note, and the United States Government does not intend to make public the summary of evidence attached to the note.”

[Here follows evidence cited in paragraph 1 above to be presented to the Cambodian Government in conjunction with the note. The remaining portion of the cable totals 20 pages.]

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared in substance with Rostow at the White House, and approved by Rusk.

2 Text also printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 1039–1040.

213. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 213. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Joint Chiefs of Staff 1

Saigon, December 5, 1967, 0815Z.

MAC J00 40588. 1. (TS) Admiral Sharp and I have discussed the enemy situation in the tri-border area and he concurs that action as recommended below should be taken.

2. (TS) We are receiving increasing hard intelligence of enemy force concentrations in the Cambodian “peninsula” of the tri-border area west of Dak To. Generally, the observed NVA presence encompasses all of the Cambodian peninsula north and east of YB6200. We have firm indications that the 1st NVA Div HQ is now located at YB675110, with the 32d, 66th and 174th Regts dispersed throughout the peninsula recovering from the severe beating given them over the past few weeks.

3. (TS) Reports state that enemy units are not disposed in an alert or defensive posture; rather, they are utilizing their Cambodian sanctuary to rest, regroup and reconstitute openly and unmolested. There is no evidence of heavy bunker construction, we believe that the motorable road and bridges at YB736212 and YB736208 are of prime importance to the NVA in the movement of supplies out of Base Area 609 into South Vietnam.

4. (TS) The situation as outlined above, presents a unique opportunity for pursuit by fire. The area is remote; the border is ill-defined; there are no known civilians in the area or Cambodian presence; the delivery of fire easily concealed from scrutiny; and more significantly, the enemyʼs dangerous activities fulfill all the criteria for substantiating the hot pursuit concept. Strike Teams on Station will provide for observation of fire and reports of enemy locations, reaction and subsequent movement.

5. (TS) Request earliest approval to attack this concentration of enemy force by fire employing B–52 strikes for sustained period of at least 72 hours, high intensity TAC air strikes are particularly urged since exposure of this action would be minimal, and this weapons system will provide maximum surprise and shock effect. B–52 strikes only at night would be acceptable.

6. (TS) There are two aspects of this request which I recognize as sensitive. First, the timing may be considered poor because of the efforts which we are right now making to confront Sihanouk with evidence of NVA use of Cambodia. Secondly, B–52 strikes will leave a clear signature in Cambodian territory. However, I feel strongly that the opportunity which exists is sufficiently important that it should be exploited now, and if necessary explain our actions as hot pursuit by fire in an uninhabited area. The key point is to strike this concentration expeditiously and with full force if we are to gain maximum advantage.

7. (U) Amb. Bunker has read this message and concurs.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Top Secret; Limdis; Exclusive for Wheeler. Repeated to Rusk, McNamara, and Sharp. This telegram was retyped in the White House and used at a lunch-eon meeting on December 5; for a record of the meeting, see Document 214; and apparently referred to at the meeting of 6:02 p.m. of December 5, see Document 216.

214. Notes of Meeting 214. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 5, 1967, 1:18–2:37 p.m.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Cambodia.]

Secretary McNamara said two cables came in from General Westmoreland concerning possible campaigns in Laos and Cambodia.2

General Wheeler said that there are 5,000 troops and supplies in the Tri-Border area. There are three regiments and bridges which are important to the resupply of the enemy operating out of Cambodia. The first North Vietnamese division withdrew. Its headquarters is a mile from the border and 15 miles from Dakto.

General Wheeler said the enemy is not to go in. They are refitting and replenishing their manpower.

We propose the use of B–52s and tactical aircraft for 72 hours. The B–52s could operate at night.

General Wheeler said that General Westmoreland discussed this operation with Ambassador Bunker. Ambassador Bunker concurs.

General Wheeler pointed out that there is no question that all of this is in Cambodia.

“We have known for two years that these people have been there.”

Secretary McNamara said this action raises very serious political problems which outweigh the military gains. Secretary Rusk said he would draw a distinction between operations in Laos and operations in Cambodia. He said he would also draw a distinction between full-scale operations and a raid.

Secretary Rusk said that if we hit the enemy in Cambodia and possibly kill Cambodian personnel, this may give them reasons to commit their forces against us.

Secretary McNamara said that the President could veto a “stop the bombing” resolution in the United Nations because of world and domestic reaction. The Secretary said the action against Cambodia would destroy us in the U.N.

In addition, the Secretary said that the U.S. cannot run B–52s around the clock without public knowledge of that.

Dick Helms said he would like to look at this before making a recommendation. Secretary Rusk asked if U.S. forces were going on with night and day raids against infiltration routes used by the regiment which is being brought into South Vietnam.

General Wheeler said yes, to the best of our ability. General Wheeler said the proposal was to use a South Vietnamese Airborne Brigade in area 607 to destroy troops and ammunition. He said it is occupied by supply centers and troops. He said the raid would take three days and would involve 1,500 to 1,600 South Vietnamese troops along with about 30 U.S. advisors.

Secretary McNamara said the Laos situation is different. He said the border is ill-defined. He said the chances of getting caught are much different.

Secretary Rusk said there is not a fraction of as much a problem in Laos as there is in Cambodia.

Secretary McNamara said he recommended going ahead with the Laos operation. Secretary Rusk agreed.

The President approved.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnsonʼs Notes of Meetings. No classification marking. The meeting was held in the living quarters of the White House. Attending were President Johnson, Vice President Humphrey, McNamara, Rusk, Vance, Helms, Rostow, George Christian, and Tom Johnson.

2 For the cable on Cambodia, see Document 213.

215. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 215. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 5, 1967, 4:15 p.m.

Mr. President:

Herewith a possible agenda for the conduct of the meeting at 6:00 p.m. today2 on the question of bombing Communist troops in Cambodia. (Tab A)3

1. What military results can be expected from the 72-hour air offensive? (Gen. Wheeler)

2. How do the forces now regrouping in Cambodia relate to those believed to be coming down the Laos trails? (Gen. Wheeler) (See Tab B)

3. What is the state of our approach through the Australians to Sihanouk on the use of his territory by the Communists? (Sec. Rusk)

4. Is it certain that the 72-hour attack would leak? (Sec. Rusk and Sec. McNamara)

5. What would Sihanoukʼs reaction be to this attack? (Sec. Rusk)

6. What will be the reaction in the U.S. if it becomes known that we are permitting Cambodian territory to be used as a sanctuary for the rest and re-fit of enemy forces? (Sec. Rusk and Sec. McNamara)

WWR comment: My own judgment is: —It would be bad to make this attack at a time when the Australians have just (yesterday) put the evidence before the Cambodians; but

—Given the likely intensity of the conflict in the weeks and months ahead along the Cambodian frontier, we shall not be able to live with this sanctuary;

—Therefore, you may wish to decide that, in turning down Westy on this occasion, it is essential that we make it clear to Sihanouk that we cannot live with these arrangements and he had better do something about them.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Cambodia. Top Secret; Extremely Sensitive.

2 See Document 216.

3 Apparent reference to Document 213.

216. Notes of Meeting 216. Notes of Meeting1

Washington, December 5, 1967, 6:02, 7:15 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

General Wheeler

CIA Director Helms

Clark Clifford

Abe Fortas

Walt Rostow

George Christian

Tom Johnson

Secretary Rusk traced the history of diplomatic relations with Cambodia, pointing out that formal diplomatic ties were broken in late 1964–early 1965.

Walt Rostow said Sihanouk broke relations when it looked as though the U.S. would lose the war in South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk said Cambodia is getting some Chinese aid. As of late, relations between the two countries have improved.

General Wheeler pointed to a map showing the area in which his intelligence shows there are 5,000 enemy troops. Included in this area are three infantry regiments, one division headquarters, and considerable supplies. “These are the troops who were defeated at Dakto. They are licking their wounds and getting re-equipped and having their manpower replenished.

The President asked how soon the decision is required.

General Wheeler said he believes the enemy will be in this area for the rest of this week—possibly longer. He said he feels the enemy will come out of Cambodia and attack our men. He said the 304th division is moving down through Laos now.

The President asked if this operation would involve any invasion of men.

General Wheeler said no, that it would be limited to B–52 strikes along with tactical air.

The President asked how many enemy would be killed.

General Wheeler said that General Westmoreland hopes for 10 percent casualties and very substantial damage to the logistical support. Based on the 5,000 troop figure, this would mean approximately 500 killed and damage to supply depots, and to troop housing.

The President asked how do we get intelligence indicating this concentration.

General Wheeler said the intelligence came from the following sources: —radio detection

—informers

—intercepts

—reconnaissance photographs

—information of the residuals left over from the Dakto battle

The President asked for the size of the area.

General Wheeler said the area is 15 miles wide at its widest point.

The President asked would the operation leak out.

Both Secretary Rusk and General Wheeler said there was no question about it. There would be leaks from the South Vietnamese troops, and, of course, Hanoi would definitely announce it.

The President asked if General Wheeler was implying that there could be 25,000 North Vietnamese troops in the total area potentially surrounding about 5,000 U.S. troops.

General Wheeler said this was possible but not probable since the enemy would not take a chance of concentrating that many men.

The President asked how long can we let Sihanouk get away with giving the enemy this type of protection.

Secretary Rusk said we have tried all along to limit this war. “The action which General Westmoreland is proposing would be a significant act of war against Cambodia. This would change the entire character of the war. If Cambodia is attacked, they may ask the Chinese to side with them. Then we will really have a new war on our hands.

“If we take this action it would be absolutely essential to consult the Congress and our allies. I know that Australia and New Zealand would be against it although Thailand, Korea and the Philippines would probably go along.

“If we could knock out 10 percent of this force why canʼt we do the same thing with the enemy divisions which we have clearly indicated in South Vietnam?

“It would be a major political burden for us to bear with a minimum military gain toward ending the war.”

General Wheeler said the big difference between the enemy troops in South Vietnam and those in Cambodia is clear. He said that the enemy in South Vietnam digs in well, takes cover when B–52s approach and are constantly on alert, and they did not expect any attacks against them.

General Wheeler said there is no information about how many enemy have been killed by the B–52 strikes in South Vietnam but he has reason to believe there have been sizable losses because of the B–52s.

The President said: “Aware as I am of the mistakes Generals have made in the past, I place great confidence in General Westmoreland. Both him and Ambassador Bunker have recommended this action.

“We must tell Cambodia that we will not continue to permit them to house and protect these killers. Do we have to continue to live with this for the duration of the war?”

Secretary Rusk said: “This problem is not really different from the one of mining Haiphong. We run the risk of enlarging the war.”

The President said: “I see this differently from mining Haiphong or bombing the ports.”2

Secretary McNamara said: “This is analogous to a land invasion above the DMZ. This is not the most effective way to do it.

“This raises a basic issue of our policy, and I have thought that this would be the issue to face us in the coming year for sometime.

“I believe, Mr. President, that it is most unwise to expand the war beyond the South Vietnamese borders. My arguments are as follows: —“This action would further divide this nation.

—“This action would further increase our problems in the United Nations.

“Because of these two points, I would strongly recommend against this proposal.”

General Wheeler said: “I would not disagree with the importance Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara place on this issue. The real question we face is how long we can tolerate these people operating from a sanctuary. I take issue with BOB. Above the DMZ, we can bomb and use artillery against their positions. We cannot use our fire power in Cambodia.

“The Joint Chiefs do not want to widen the war either. We only wish Cambodia would be neutral—honest to God neutral, too. Anyone else would not permit enemy troops to use their territory for sanctuaries.”

Secretary Rusk: “I would have thought that Westy would have drug his shirt-tail along the Cambodian border and drawn the enemy fire. Then the rules would permit him to shoot back across the border when fired upon.”

General Wheeler read a section of General Westmorelandʼs letter.3

Secretary Rusk: “I also think that this action would make liars out of all of us who have been saying repeatedly that Bob McNamaraʼs departure would have no effect on the conduct of the war. We have said his leaving does not mean any change. If we undertook this action, it would raise a credibility gap of proportions we could not stand.”

Secretary McNamara: “As you know, Mr. President, I am opposed to this action, but if the decision were to hedge on what Dean has just said I would want you to go ahead and take it.”

The President: “I have never thought that the departure of anybody would make us do or not do anything. I think all of us agree that weʼll do all we can to win the war. We will do what we need to do.”

Secretary McNamara: I am scared to death. I am scared of a policy based on an assumption that by going somewhere else we can war the war.4

“The war cannot be won by killing North Vietnamese. It can only be won by protecting the South Vietnamese so they can build and develop economically for a future political contest with North Vietnam.”

Secretary Rusk: It may be that our main job is building a security in the center of the country. I have often wondered why we concentrate more on Conthien and along the borders.

General Wheeler said that Route 9 is the only route across the northern neck of Vietnam. He said moving back from Conthien would be giving up Route 9 to the enemy.

Secretary Rusk said he was surprised that Ambassador Bunker concurred with this recommendation.

The President asked General Wheeler why General Westmoreland did not take the advice Secretary Rusk suggested—that is, to sweep down the border of Cambodia.

Secretary McNamara said that this action would not draw much fire. He said the North Vietnamese do not fire across the border.

Walt Rostow said in the rhythm of things it would take months rather than weeks to rebuild after a defeat such as the one they sustained. He said we do have some time on our hands.

General Wheeler said you cannot count on that.

Walt Rostow said the political significance of this act is so great that we must ask some military questions: What is the quality of the targeting data?

What would be the pattern of the men during a 72-hour attack by air as proposed.

Rostow said the most important need is to make an issue of Sihanoukʼs neutrality.

The President said that the issue of neutrality being made a major question appeals most to him. He said he thought we should go back to Bunker and ask him to elaborate on the reasons why he agreed with General Westmorelandʼs recommendation. In addition, we should ask General Westmoreland to go into more detail about his recommendation—particularly the question raised of enemy digging in as soon as the first bomb hits and scattering.

The President asked if all the Joint Chiefs agreed with this recommendation.

General Wheeler said that this recommendation is part of the four monthsʼ program for the conduct of the war and how to get it over quicker.

The President said we must let Sihanouk know we will not tolerate this action any longer.

The President also said he wanted Westmoreland to explore other means of getting at the enemy.

“I do not took forward to the day when somebody will say that General Westmoreland asked for this action and we refused it and then a lot of American boys were killed as a result. As I see it, this act could result in Cambodia declaring war against us and in their inviting the Chinese in.”

Walt Rostow said he did not think Cambodia would bring the Chinese in.

Secretary McNamara said this is not an isolated action. It is a basic change of policy.

He said there is a lot that can be done short of a B–52 strike. While I recognize this is a good way to fight a conventional war, this is not a conventional war. It is unconventional, and we must use unconventional means.

Justice Fortas: Based on that which I have heard tonight, there is an overwhelming case against this action. The issue is the whole question of what you do about sanctuaries. It seems we should communicate with Sihanouk. Domestically, we should surface the use of Cambodia as a sanctuary. The sooner this is surfaced the better. The sooner the American people know about this the better.

The President asked what about another try at getting Ambassador Harriman to see Sihanouk. “We must protest this to the world.”

Clark Clifford: General Westmorelandʼs recommendation does not make sense to me. You have a certain number of square miles in which 5,000 men are located. The General asked for a B–52 strike. The enemy are scattered all over the countryside when the first bomb hits the ground. I think it is more valuable to fly photo plans over the area, get good quality pictures, and have them reproduced and released. We need to build up a strong case to proceed to remove this sanctuary. I would be unalterably opposed to the action.

The President: Then we should go back to General Westmoreland and tell him we do not see the justification on an immediate decision on this. Ask for more details from him and also ask for more information from Bunker on why he supports this decision. Tell them all the reasons why we donʼt see this as a good decision. In addition, we should point out to the Australians that the Cambodians are permitting the North Vietnamese to use this as a sanctuary. They should protest the action through their diplomatic mission in Cambodia.

We should ask Sihanouk to see Henry Cabot Lodge, Bill Bundy, or Averell Harriman. We also should get some pictures of what is happening there to show Sihanouk. I think we have been derelict in our duty in bringing this thing to a head. Letʼs give it top priority.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Tom Johnsonʼs Meeting Notes. Top Secret. The meeting was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House. There is also a “Summary of the Meeting on Cambodia on December 5, 1967 in the Cabinet Room 6:02 p.m.–7:15 p.m.,” which has no drafting information. (Ibid., Transcripts of Meetings in the Cabinet Room, 12/5/67) Tom Johnsonʼs record is more extensive, but the few minor differences are noted in footnotes below.

2 The “Summary” version has it: “The President did not agree that it was the same.”

3 Apparent reference to Document 213.

4 The “Summary” has the correct phrase, “we can win the war.”

217. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 217. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Washington, December 6, 1967, 0154Z.

4472. References: A: MACJ00 40588;2 B: CINCPAC 051230Z Dec 67.3

1. Recommendations set forth in references were discussed extensively at highest level conference this evening.4 Decision was made against an immediate affirmative decision stemming from the political problems involved, foreign and domestic, and uncertainty that military results obtained would be commensurate with the political penalties incurred.

2. In amplification of the above, there was exploration of other means of putting pressures on Cambodia by more direct political démarches and by such actions as closing the Mekong River, etc. Apropos of this, questions were raised as to the quality of the evidence we now have; i.e., do the aerial photographs taken to date support adequately and unmistakenly the validity of our charge that NVA troops are located in and operating from Cambodian sanctuaries. Also, there was doubt expressed as to casualties which would be inflicted on the enemy in view of their possible dispersed positions and anticipated efforts to scatter as soon as the first bombs go down. The thought was expressed that, if possible, it would be expedient to provide a cover for Sihanouk to avoid driving him into the arms of the ChiComs by using artillery in lieu of air strikes to punish the enemy; the thought here being that use of artillery could be justified on the basis of returning fire across the border.

3. Perhaps the most important part of the discussion centered about the realization that your recommendation really is part of a larger problem; namely, that of permitting North Vietnamese and VC units to operate from Cambodian sanctuaries wherein they are immune to any form of counteraction. In other words, everyone recognized the weightiness and the pressing importance of the larger problem in connection with achieving our objectives in Southeast Asia.

4. As a result of this meeting I require ASAP your views concerning the following: A. For what length of time do you anticipate the first NVA division will be disposed in its present vulnerable position?

B. How high is your confidence in the quality of your targeting; i.e., do you think that the B–52 strikes can be expected to be on target?

C. Related to the above question, how many targets would you estimate would be available for fighter-bomber strikes?

D. What is the pattern of enemy deployment at present—are they widely dispersed in bivouacs or are they occupying relatively compact temporary camps?

E. What casualties would you anticipate inflicting on the enemy?

F. If the strikes are as successful as you anticipate, what would be the reduction in enemy capabilities you would anticipate and for how long?

G. Regarding other means of achieving the same objectives, can you employ artillery in lieu of aircraft; can you draw fire by means of patrols to which you can respond, etc?

H. What other pressures of a political and economic nature, such as closing the Mekong River, would you advise?

5. I will issue instructions relative to increased aerial reconnaissance in the Cambodian area to include low-level reconnaissance. I would like to have from you any additional recommendations which will assist you in locating enemy facilities and activities and which will support U.S. Government pressures on Sihanouk to obtain his cooperation in dealing with the North Vietnamese Army/VC threat to your forces.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia, 5 E(1)a, 5/66–1/68. Top Secret; Immediate; Specat; Exclusive. No drafting officer appears on the source text; Wheeler approved the transmission. Repeated to Sharp.

2  Document 213.

3 In CINCPAC telegram 01230Z, December 5, Sharp supported Westmorelandʼs recommendations in Document 213. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 E(1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia)

4 See Document 216.

218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 218. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, December 8, 1967, 0027Z.

81314. 1. We have today discussed Cambodian situation with Waller in following terms: a. We now have reasonably clear evidence that NVA forces withdrew after Dak To action into northeast tip of Cambodia, long believed to be significant base area. We believe these forces are regrouping and preparing for further attacks from this sanctuary. Resulting operational implications are extremely serious.

b. In addition to this specific matter, our information now points to a considered NVA/VC strategy to make a series of attacks against positions near the Cambodian border, using Cambodian territory as a sanctuary in direct support of these operations. We also believe that this happened at Loc Ninh, giving rise to the camp discovered by Herndon and MacArthur. In an even larger sense, it has taken place at Dak To. We believe it to be the case in the current activities near the Bu Dop area. The pattern of these three efforts alone, plus other information on the deployment of NVA/VC forces, points to a strategy designed to make considerably more extensive use of Cambodian territory in the coming months.

c. In the light of this assessment, which could be discussed if necessary by the most senior Australian military representatives direct with General Westmoreland if desired, we believe it is essential to bring the situation more acutely to Prince Sihanoukʼs attention than we have done through the note and evidence which the GOA was good enough to transmit this week.

d. At the same time, it remains our objective to induce Sihanouk to take more constructive action within his own borders. This might be in part through the more effective use of his own forces, but we believe there is now significantly more hope that he might be induced to permit ICC to conduct more effective surveillance. The Canadians have told us of their impression on the spot, as well as conversations in New Delhi, that this is the case—even though these same conversations note that the Cambodians would prefer to have the ICC continue to whitewash the situation. Avoiding this would plainly be continuing a difficult problem for the Canadians, with the Indian attitude a question mark.

e. Nonetheless, we think it is well worth a try to make a specific offer of assistance to Sihanouk in the form of helicopters and supporting expenses. This has the additional merit of balancing our disclosure of the UNA/Dak To action and military pattern, and reducing the implication of proximate threat.

f. Furthermore, in addition to bringing the new evidence to his attention and offering specific ICC assistance, we believe the situation is so urgent that it calls for the most serious consideration of suggesting to Sihanouk direct contact in some form with an American representative. An alternative might be a high-level Australian visit to Cambodia, either for itself or to broach the subject of direct discussions with us; we would specifically like GOA reaction to this, including even the possibility that Mr. Hasluck himself might undertake such a mission. With or without such a visit, we have in mind proposing to Sihanouk that an American representative either come to Cambodia or meet with a designated Cambodian representative at some site to be chosen by Sihanouk. In making such a proposal, we would make clear that the American representative need not be an official, but might be someone not now in government for whom Sihanouk has regard. (We would leave him to suggest names, but we would have in mind Hamilton Armstrong, McGeorge Bundy, or someone of that stripe. Obviously, we would not take kindly to suggestions of individual senators not in sympathy with our policy.)

2. We have told Waller that we are firming up a message in this sense, but would appreciate the earliest GOA reaction to the elements of this proposal, individually or collectively. We have emphasized to him the urgency we feel in making a maximum secure diplomatic effort to bring Sihanouk to do more, in light of the developing serious military situation.

3. We are submitting these thoughts today in more tentative form to Ambassador Ritchie of Canada for their judgment, emphasizing that the whole exercise must remain absolutely confidential.

4. We have given Waller a copy of this cable for his own paraphrase and use, and he will make full report to GOA. Thus no Canberra action is required, although you may indicate your full awareness of the proposal. Waller raised obvious question whether this might be pushing Sihanouk too hard at this moment, and particularly noted that any Hasluck visit raised major issues. We again stressed that situation was developing to serious point very rapidly.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32–1 CAMB–VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Bundy, cleared with Lacey, Steadman of DOD/ISA, Rostow, and in substance with Rusk. Repeated to Saigon and Ottawa.

219. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 219. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, December 12, 1967.

SUBJECT

What to do about Cambodia

You asked for an alternative to a military “solution” to the Communist use of Cambodian soil.

1. Close the Mekong River to Cambodian-bound traffic. (Before the end of the day I should have a study from the Agency on the effects of this. Frankly, I do not expect its economic impact would be anything like crippling. But it would have a good psychological effect both here and there.)

2. Vigorous pursuit of the preclusive buying of Cambodian food supplies available to enemy. We do not know how effective such a program could be. At least, however, we ought to be able to complicate and make more expensive Communist use of Cambodia as a supply source.

3. Make use of the anti-Sihanouk Khmer Serei elements in South Vietnam and Thailand. There are dangers in this but they are dwarfed by the disadvantages of overt military action against Cambodia. If a rejuvenated Khmer Serei does nothing else, it might convince Sihanouk and others in the Cambodian Government that their own interests lie in trying to minimize Cambodiaʼs availability to the Communists as a sanctuary.

4. Mount a black operation to create in Phnom Penh Rangoon-type riots and demonstrations (ostensibly the work of the Chinese community). Sihanouk has already proved his extreme sensitivity to Chinese misconduct. We would not have to create much of a “Chinese disturbance” to send him up the wall again with all that this would imply for a more vigorous approach by him to restrain Communist freedom of action in Cambodia.

5. A re-invigorated effort against the Communist supply line in Southern Laos. [2 lines of source text not declassified] Before we go down the road of a widened war in Cambodia, we ought to try the intensification of the one everybody knows about in Laos. (There was a technical discovery some months ago of tremendous promise for making the Ho Chi Minh trail unusable for a substantial part of the year. Its name was Operation Mud.2 I do not know its present status, but if it lives up to its promise it would go far to reducing the Cambodian problem to manageable proportions.

Of course, all of the above will not work. But they do not all need to work to bring or to keep the Cambodian problem down to tolerable levels. They would serve also to alert domestic and world opinion to this problem and give us a period in which people could be prepared for sterner action should it become necessary.

Although I know you are aware of my views on this, I feel bound to repeat that I believe American public reaction to military action against Cambodia would be God-awful. I cannot believe that the military significance of the enemyʼs use of Cambodia is so great that it justifies taking a step so destructive of American public support of the war in Vietnam. In time, the American public could be prepared for what will certainly be viewed as a widened war. But it has not been prepared yet.

Marshall

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E(1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Top Secret; Nodis.

2 Operation Commando Lava, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XXVIII, for documentation on this operation.

220. Special National Intelligence Estimate 220. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, December 14, 1967.

SNIE 57/1–67

SIGNIFICANCE OF CAMBODIA TO THE

VIETNAMESE COMMUNIST WAR EFFORT

The Problem

To estimate the extent and significance of Vietnamese Communist use of Cambodian territory in support of the Communist war effort in South Vietnam.

Conclusions

A. During the past year, increasing Allied pressure on the Communistsʼ military structure in South Vietnam has caused them to depend more heavily on the use of border areas. They use Cambodian territory as a sanctuary to evade Allied forces, as a refuge for rest, training, medical care, and in some degree as a route for the infiltration of personnel and military supplies from North Vietnam. We believe that Cambodian rice currently provides an important proportion of the food requirement of the VC/NVA regular forces in South Vietnam.

B. We still have no good evidence that military supplies or equipment are moved through Sihanoukville or other Cambodian ports to Communist forces in South Vietnam. But the Communists continue to smuggle small quantities of arms and other military equipment from Cambodia, some of which probably represents unauthorized diversions from arms imported by the Cambodian Government for its own forces.

C. If the Communists continue their present strategy, the importance of Cambodia to their war effort will probably grow in 1968, particularly as a sanctuary and as a source of rice. Denial of Cambodian sanctuary would probably not cause the Communist war effort to collapse in the neighboring areas of South Vietnam, but would make it much harder for the Communists to conduct effective military operations in these areas.

D. Over the past year, Sihanouk has become more aware of the extent of Vietnamese Communist use of Cambodia and more apprehensive over US intentions. He has made some small efforts to control activity in the border area but he lacks the military capability to impose effective measures. Sihanouk is likely to move toward more criticism of the US for real or imagined violations of Cambodian sovereignty, hoping to deter the US from carrying the war into Cambodian territory and thus avoiding direct involvement in the war.

Discussion2

1. Communist use of Cambodian territory for tactical sanctuary, for base areas, for infiltration of personnel, and as a source of supply does not appear to have changed fundamentally over the past year. However, as a consequence of growing pressure on the Communist military structure in South Vietnam, border areas have become of increasing importance in Communist strategy. Bases straddling the Cambodian-South Vietnamese border have facilitated Communist operations by providing safety for command and communication elements and refuge for Communist forces.

2. Base Areas.3 Of the major Communist base areas that make use of Cambodian territory, the most northerly is in the tri-border region where Laos, Cambodia, and South Vietnam meet. The Chu Pong and Se San bases in western Pleiku and southern Kontum provinces and the large War Zone C complex in northern Tay Ninh province also lap over into Cambodia. The Kas Kok base appears to lie principally in Cambodian territory, near where the Mekong River crosses into South Vietnam. There are less important base areas along the borders of the Cambodian province of Svay Rieng and the South Vietnamese province of Quang Duc and Kien Giang.

3. The functions of these base areas have remained about the same as last year. They include facilities for resupply and training prior to major engagements, and various medical facilities to treat wounded after combat. Some Communist combat regiments, which were subsequently engaged in the battles of Loc Ninh and Dak To, used Cambodian territory to refit and prepare for these attacks.

4. Tactical Sanctuary. The Communists continue to use Cambodian territory as a safe haven after combat, but the pattern varies and depends to a great extent on the circumstances of the engagements with Allied forces. During a major US search and destroy operation into War Zone C in early 1967, elements of COSVN took refuge in adjacent Cambodian territory. On the other hand, we have no evidence as yet that Communist combat elements withdrew into Cambodia after the Loc Ninh battle this fall.

5. Prior to the battle of Dak To, two elements of the Communist B–3 Front Headquarters and the NVA First Division moved north from the Chu Pong base to the tri-border area. At least part of this movement probably took place over trails on the Cambodian side of the border. During the actual battle the two elements of the B–3 Front Headquarters remained inside the northeastern tip of Cambodia, apparently directing the fight, and afterwards the First Division Headquarters and the headquarters of at least one of its component regiments moved into Cambodian territory for sanctuary.

6. Communist troops withdrawing into northeastern Cambodia penetrate less than 10 kilometers. Along the more populous southern half of the border, the penetrations of Cambodia are shallower, and smaller numbers of Communist troops are usually involved.

7. Infiltration of Personnel. In general, infiltration trails continuing southward from Laos follow the Cambodian-South Vietnamese border as far south as the Phuoc Long-Binh Long region of South Vietnam. They cross back and forth across the border in many places and lie less than seven kilometers inside the border on the Cambodian side. Along the trials are a number of way stations for rest, resupply, and medical attention. We have little evidence on the actual use of the trails for infiltration during 1967. We do know, however, that units in the B–3 Front and COSVN received replacements this year, and it is likely that many of these replacements used trails in Cambodia for some portion of their journey south.

8. Routes of Supply. We have observed few improvements on the numerous supply routes from Cambodia into South Vietnam in the past year. In general, movement on the roads appears to be about the same as last year while movement on the waterways in the northeast appears to have increased somewhat. The main direction of movement on these routes is north and east from Cambodia into Laos and the highlands of South Vietnam, and the supplies moved consist primarily of food. Some of the military supplies moving southward from Laos to Communist forces in South Vietnam are apparently portered through Cambodia over a system of trails. But there is still no good evidence that the Communists have been using Cambodian roads and waterways for this purpose.

9. Food. Food shipments from Cambodia to the Communist forces in South Vietnam and Laos have continued in 1967 but it is difficult to determine the quantities involved. We believe that the VC/NVA regular forces and administrative support troops in South Vietnam require about 180 tons of food per day, of which 15 to 20 percent probably comes from Cambodia either directly or via Laos. Cambodian food is also shipped northward into Laos to support the infiltration network there.

10. Cambodian rice is particularly important for Communist troops operating out of the tri-border, Se San, and Chu Pong base areas in the rice-deficit highlands. Communist troops in these areas are almost certainly unable to obtain sufficient rice locally or from the coastal plain. If Cambodian rice were not available, Communist forces in the tri-border base area probably could be supplied by shipments of North Vietnamese rice down the Laotian route system. This would substantially increase the daily tonnage of supplies moved and the movement would be more vulnerable to US aerial interdiction. It would, however, be exceedingly difficult to move sufficient rice farther south to the Se San and Chu Pong base areas, and Communist troops there might be forced to relocate. In the War Zone C complex, loss of Cambodian rice would probably force the Communists to allocate additional personnel to the task of collecting rice from nearby areas.

11. Weapons and Ammunition. Because of South Vietnamese controls, it is unlikely that any sizable amount of arms or ammunition is being smuggled up the Mekong to Phnom Penh and thence to South Vietnam. There is a greater chance that such material could be brought in through Sihanoukville or elsewhere along the coast. But despite occasional reports we still have no good evidence of such movements. We believe that in time we would have tangible indications of any continuing substantial shipments of arms and ammunition to Communist forces through Sihanoukville, should such movements occur. The Communists do, however, continue to smuggle small quantities of arms and other military equipment from Cambodia, some of which probably represents unauthorized diversions from Communist arms imported by the Cambodian Government for its own forces.

12. Chemicals and Other Supplies. Some potassium chlorate and other chemicals useful in the manufacture of explosives continue to reach the Communists via Cambodia. But we have little more information concerning the quantities involved than we did a year ago. The amount of drugs, communications equipment, and other supplies obtained from Cambodia appears to have increased slightly over the past year probably because increased Allied pressures make it harder to procure them within South Vietnam.

13. Outlook. If the Communists continue their present strategy, the importance of Cambodia to their war effort will probably grow in 1968, particularly as a sanctuary and as a source of rice. Denial of Cambodian sanctuary would probably not cause the Communist war effort to collapse in the neighboring areas of South Vietnam, but would make it much harder for the Communists to conduct effective military operations in these areas.

14. Sihanoukʼs Position. Over the past year, Sihanouk has become more aware of the extent of Vietnamese Communist use of Cambodia and he has made some small efforts to curtail it. Nevertheless, we do not believe he is likely to make a major effort, principally because the Cambodian Armed Forces are just not strong enough. The army totals only 32,000 and less than 9,000 regular troops are stationed in provinces along the entire 700 mile border with South Vietnam. In the two large northeastern provinces of Cambodia, moreover, there are only eight border posts and these are manned by small paramilitary units. Four of these are clustered around the junction of Route 19 and the South Vietnamese border, just north of the Communist Chu Pong base area. Along this sparsely manned frontier from Kontum to northern Tay Ninh are over 20,000 regular Communist troops.

15. Sihanoukʼs basic aim continues to be to avoid involvement in the war. He is increasingly apprehensive that the US will carry the war against the Communists into Cambodian territory. Since he cannot keep the Vietnamese Communists from using its territory, Sihanouk is likely to move toward more criticism of the US for real or imagined violations of Cambodian sovereignty, hoping thus to deter the US.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 79–R 01012A, ODDI Registry. Secret/[classification indicator not declassified]; Controlled Dissem. A note on the covering sheet indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of Defense and State, and the NSA prepared this estimate. It was concurred in by all members of the USIB except representatives for the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 SNIE 57–67, “Significance of Cambodia to the Vietnamese War Effort,” dated 26 January 1967, Secret, provides a considerable amount of background and detail on Communist use of Cambodia, most of which is still valid. [Footnote in the source text. For SNIE 57–67, see Document 199.]

3 See centerspread map. [Footnote in the source text; the map is not printed.]

221. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson 221. Memorandum From the Ambassador at Large (Harriman) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Violation of Cambodian Borders

I well remember the horror felt throughout the civilized world when in 1914 the Kaiser violated the neutrality of Belgium. Of course the present situation in Cambodia as we see it is very different from Belgium in 1914. But the world at large (and a substantial section of the American public) has not yet been presented with convincing evidence that expanding the war into “a tiny, helpless country” is justified.

The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces do in fact have bases and rest areas at several points along the jungle covered, poorly defined border of Cambodia. Some of those areas seem to straddle the border, some are entirely within, by several kilometers, Cambodia itself. It is worth noting, however, that neither air attacks nor ground sweeps (within South Vietnam itself) have eliminated Viet Cong jungle bases; nothing short of actual occupation of the territory would seem to be able to accomplish this.

We do not as yet have evidence that would convince a skeptic that Cambodian territory is regularly being used as a sanctuary by the Viet Cong in the sense that the Viet Cong are staging substantial unit attacks directly from Cambodia and retiring into Cambodia immediately after the engagements. The evidence that we do have (and most of this comes from sources that could not be revealed) demonstrates only that for periods, sometimes of considerable length before engagement, some of the units involved were reinforced and refitted in Cambodia but that most of these units were redeployed into South Vietnam well before the engagement began.

I am impressed by the “personal message” of December 12, from Australian Foreign Minister Paul Hasluck to the Secretary: “If the Allied forces in Viet Nam move militarily against … Cambodian territory, even in hot pursuit, the area of hostilities will have been widened. The Government of Cambodia itself will become involved, and it will charge the United States with aggression and will bring the matter before the United Nations … there will be little sympathy and support in the United Nations for any such Allied action. It is very difficult to get the facts across and accepted either in the United Nations or inside individual countries, and in both the United States and Australia there would be great sympathy for Cambodia even from those who hitherto have been lending their support to our policies … . International opinion, and opinion in our own countries, while in a sense intangible, could become a very material factor working against a successful outcome for our efforts in Vietnam.

“Furthermore, instead of our fighting being confined to South Vietnam, we may find a much bigger area of operations has developed in Cambodia requiring the deployment of forces and making other material demands. It is important that, before any decision is made to expand hostilities, both sides of the equation be brought into the balance—the new demands that will be made on our men and resources no less than the opportunities for action against communist military forces.”

We are currently in the midst of a political-diplomatic campaign to induce the Cambodians to do what they can to discourage Viet Cong use of their territory. On November 26, Prince Sihanouk publicly stated that he would welcome strengthening the ICC with helicopters. On December 4, the Australians delivered a United States note to Sihanouk indicating our concern over Viet Cong use of his territory and our willingness to assist him in preserving his neutrality plus a summary of our evidence of such Viet Cong use.2 While we have received no direct response to that message the absence of vehement denial may itself be significant. We are in the process of sending Sihanouk a note explicitly responding to his November 26 statement and offering two helicopters and related funding to the Cambodian ICC. In anticipation of the probable need to increase the pressure on Sihanouk, we have already prepared the American Embassies in a number of countries which may have influence with Cambodia to present the documentation of our concern to their host nations and to request that they take it up with the Cambodians. If this proves unsuccessful we would then begin to present to the public our efforts to preserve Cambodian neutrality and the details of violations of that neutrality by the Viet Cong.

Until the conclusion of this diplomatic campaign and until we have publicly presented convincing evidence of Viet Cong violations of Cambodian neutrality, we should not consider any action in Cambodia that would be an obvious intentional violation of its borders. I greatly fear that such violation will not bring us any meaningful advantages but will decrease our support both at home and abroad and cause very troublesome problems at the United Nations. We should of course continue and perhaps consider augmentation of reconnaissance and information-gathering activities in Cambodia.

Therefore, I specifically recommend disapproval of General Westmorelandʼs proposal that he be authorized to subject a portion of Cambodian territory to 72 hours of B–52 and tactical air strikes.3 In addition steps should be taken to prevent ARVN forces from crossing the Cambodian border in hot pursuit. The major political difficulties that would result from either move should preclude such action at this time.

Averell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Memos and Cables, 1/67–12/68. Top Secret; Nodis. Also sent to Acting Secretary Katzenbach. Rostow sent this memorandum to the President on December 16, noting Harrimanʼs “deep opposition to military action” and his urging of diplomatic action via the ICC. Rostow stated that if renewed ICC action failed, a campaign to educate the public should be undertaken. Only after these steps were taken, should American military power be taken in violation of Cambodiaʼs borders. Rostow observed that, “at the moment he [Harriman] is supporting the track we are on.”

2 See Document 212.

3 See Document 213.

222. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 222. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Saigon, December 26, 1967, 1009Z.

MAC 12674. Subj: Operations in the Tri-border Area of Cambodia.

Ref: A. MACV 40588 DTG 050815Z Dec 67 (TS-L).2

B. MACV 40871 DTG 071215Z Dec 67 (TS-L).3

C. JCS 11397 DTG 231731Z Dec 67 (TS).4

1. Your recent message (Ref C) indicates that no further decision has been made on my recommendation and no further action will be taken at this time.

2. I regret the existence of those factors you point out which prevent the engagement of enemy forces operating in the tri-border area. To bring you up to date, for several weeks running, Rosson has had the area subjected to an intense analysis. The team doing this analysis has had access to highly reliable intelligence data from all available sources. Its findings continue to show that within the area: A. Major enemy command headquarters are actively engaged in controlling operations.

B. Major enemy combat forces routinely move through, stage, and train in this area.

C. Logistical bases and supply points sustain and support enemy units in contact in RVN.

D. The enemy is present in large numbers, and his vulnerability is such that he could be punished severely if pursued by fire.

3. The many targets mentioned would be most suitable for B52 strikes now, and the continuing intelligence collection effort can be expected to produce new targets as well as additional information on those already located.

4. I think it worth repeating that the border in this area is ill-defined and traverses rugged jungle-covered terrain which stretches great distances. The border is indistinguishable from the air and the ground. It is not marked by readily identifiable terrain features. Night B52 strikes and artillery firing only at night would minimize the risk of compromise of the operation. Moreover, there appears to be a good probability that attacks under these conditions can be made without publicity.

5. Amb Bunker is in strong support of my position and intends to again make his views known.

6. I am renewing my request through front channels.

1 Source: Center for Military History, Westmoreland Papers, Message Files, COMUSMACV, 1 Dec-31 Dec 1967. Top Secret; Limit Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

2  Document 213.

3 Not found.

4 Not found, but summarized below.

223. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas 223. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, December 27, 1967.

CAP 671186. Herewith a situation report on Cambodia.

1. U.S. policy toward Cambodia was stated most recently in a note delivered to the Cambodian Foreign Ministry December 4, 1967.2 That note expressed our deep concern over continued enemy use of Cambodia, provided a summary of evidence to explain our concern, and offered our support for a more effective ICC monitoring of border activity or any other reasonable proposal for remedying this dangerous problem.

2. On December 20, the Cambodian Government flatly rejected our contention that Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces make extensive use of Cambodian territory, publishing its note of reply on December 24. This Cambodian response crossed with our preparation of a second diplomatic note offering helicopters to the ICC, so as to enable that organization to perform more effective surveillance of the Cambodian/South Vietnamese border. Despite the Cambodian Governmentʼs negative reaction of December 20, our offer of helicopters was made to the Indian Chairman of ICC/Cambodia on December 26, following courtesy notification to the Cambodian Government the previous day.

3. In order to promote the possibility of ICC acceptance of our offer, we have made follow-up diplomatic approaches: (a) To the Indian Government, both in Washington and in New Delhi;

(b) To the Soviet Union in Washington, and a similar demarche is being made in Moscow;

(c) The Secretary is meeting with Canadian Prime Minister Pearson December 28 to urge that Canada make more active efforts to improve the performance of ICC/Cambodia;

(d) We are also preparing a letter to Indian Prime Minister Mrs. Gandhi for the Presidentʼs signature.3 This letter will emphasize the potential dangers inherent in a passive posture and urge the GOI to make all possible efforts to improve ICC effectiveness, which is a most important element in containing the area of conflict and preserving Cambodian neutrality. The letter will be forwarded for approval under a separate memorandum.

4. In order not to jeopardize these peace efforts, we continue to believe that it is unwise to approve more militant lines of action, such as blocking the Mekong or Sihanoukville. First, these ports are not significant sources of Viet Cong supplies; second, such actions would be unjustifiable under international law; third, it would create a sharp adverse hue and cry.

5. The Cambodian reaction to our December 4 note has aroused considerable public and international interest in regard to both the basic problem of enemy use of Cambodia and to U.S. intentions in dealing with the problem. (a) The latest review by the U.S. Intelligence Board concludes that the extent of enemy use of Cambodia has probably remained at about the same level as last year, but the strategic importance of Cambodia to the enemy has probably increased.

(b) Because of the serious domestic and international problems that would arise out of any attempts to resolve the problem militarily or to retaliate by economic warfare measures, the most feasible approach for the present is to persist in diplomatic initiatives which seek to obtain Cambodian cooperation or acquiescence in more effective ICC frontier patrols or in some other means of ameliorating the problem.

6. We should not expect any immediate indications of improved ICC effectiveness. Even if our diplomatic efforts succeed in impelling the Soviet Union (and consequently the Polish members of the ICC) and the Indian Government to accept our offer of helicopters, it will take a month or six weeks to deliver the helicopters and train crews in Phnom Penh. It will probably take another month to judge whether the ICC can indeed prove itself to be a useful tool in keeping down hostile use of Cambodian territory.

7. In the meantime, we will carry on planned diplomatic moves: (a) We are preparing evidence of specific areas of enemy activity in Cambodia, which can be conveyed to the ICC for use in investigations.

(b) Part of this evidence derives from cross border intelligence operations whose mission, however, is primarily tactical. In order to avoid explosive reactions that might occur if these operations became known, we wish to restrict them to those which are essential for the immediate defense of allied forces in Viet-Nam and, to the extent possible, to the remote areas in northeastern Cambodia. However, we have very much in mind promptly authorizing additional reconnaissance missions as they become necessary.

(c) We are also instructing certain posts in the field to provide, on a confidential basis, the essential background of U.S.-Cambodian differences along with evidence of enemy use of Cambodia. By this means, we will set straight the record on the nature of U.S. approaches to the Cambodian Government; and, as a result, we expect to enlist some active third-country support for U.S. policy.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 8:55 p.m. This was originally a Department of State situation report on Cambodia, drafted by Lacey and Perry and cleared by Habib. Read sent it to Rostow on December 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 2 CAMB)

2 See Document 212.

3 Text transmitted in telegram 90288 to New Delhi, December 28. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB)

224. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas 224. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, December 29, 1967.

CAP 671233. Herewith the message I have just dispatched via back channel, in your name, to Ambassador Bowles, as instructed by Jim Jones.

In my four years of the Presidency, I have asked very little, if anything, of the Indian Governments. I am asking something now; namely, that at the highest level they make a maximum effort, through the ICC, to end Communist use of Cambodian territory.

I believe the Indians sincerely want peace in Southeast Asia and desire authentic neutral status. This is the time for them to act in terms of both objectives.

Unless the ICC can, at last, perform effectively in the case of Cambodia, the war may well spread.

India should now move promptly and effectively to prevent this.

I count on you to devote full time, if necessary, to this task.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Confidential. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 10:20 a.m. Central Standard Time.1

225. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas 225. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, December 29, 1967.

CAP 671237. Herewith Sec. Ruskʼs recommendations on followup actions to the Sihanouk interview.

The full Washington Post text of Sihanoukʼs interview with Karnow is attached.2 The highlights are as they appeared from yesterdayʼs excerpts,3 but I believe you will wish to read the whole to get its tone—which seems to us reasonable and wholly remarkable from this source. On the other hand, we must always remember that the Prince can reverse himself on a momentʼs notice, and that Hanoi and others may well put tough pressures on him in the light of the interview.

I propose the following actions, in which Secretary Nitze concurs: 1. We should avoid all public comment, saying merely that we are studying the interview carefully and that our basic position has been made clear over a long period. We should get hold of Senator Mansfield and Governor Harriman to be sure that they avoid comment also. It would be potentially disastrous if we present any appearance of “crowing” or regarding Sihanouk as now “in the bag.” Moreover, any comment by us would only increase rather than dampen speculation in what may be a critical next few days.

2. We should use the interview at once to step up the pressure on the Indians, Soviets, and Poles. Harriman yesterday sent the advance text to Dobrynin, and the latter will doubtless already have reported it fully. But we should follow up at both ends with all three governments. I have already talked to Mike Pearson, who is totally aboard and has Canadian pilots and crews ready to man the helicopters for the ICC. Ambassador Thompson would see Gromyko again.

3. We should get the Australians to instruct their Ambassador in Phnom Penh to see Sihanouk at once: A. To confirm Sihanoukʼs willingness to accept an emissary from us, and to suggest Ambassador Bowles specifically and as soon as possible.

B. To inform Sihanouk that we welcome the sentiments expressed in the interview concerning the ICC, and that we are calling these sentiments urgently to the attention of the Indians, Soviets, and Poles, as we have already done with the Canadians. Note: We would not have the Australians say anything about Sihanoukʼs remarks distinguishing uninhabited and inhabited areas.

4. DOD is taking immediate steps to insure that the two helicopters we have already offered are immediately available for delivery in Cambodia.

5. With respect to ground rules for our forces in Viet-Nam, we will make no significant change for the present in the so-called Daniel Boone operations, which call for a carefully controlled program of reconnaissance on a very limited scale. At the same time, we would send out a military message to Saigon to caution all elements to refrain from any speculation that Sihanoukʼs remarks are changing our standing instructions in any respect. The danger here is that people down the line in the military may jump to the conclusion that Sihanouk is as good as inviting us in so long as we stay in uninhabited areas. Whatever he in fact means, speculation in this direction can only harm our attempt to get the ICC going and to organize a Bowles (or Harriman or Mansfield) mission to Cambodia.

I recommend your approval of these actions.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia. Secret. Repeated to George Christian. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 12:50 p.m. Central Standard Time and relayed to San Antonio Communication Center at 1:10 p.m. These recommendations were drafted by William Bundy. (Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron, Nov-Dec 1967)

2 Attached but not printed.

3 In the Presidentʼs Evening Reading of December 28 and in summary form in telegram CAP 671213, Rostow to Johnson, December 28. (Johnson Library, National Security File. Country File, Vietnam, 5E (1)a, 5/66–1/68, Cambodia)

226. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas 226. Telegram From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, January 3, 1968.

CAP 80079. Subject: Bowlesʼ Mission to Cambodia.

Sihanouk has put a 24-hour hold on the announcement of the mission for “technical reasons.”

Following are the instructions to the Bowlesʼ mission. The cable has been personally cleared by both Rusk and McNamara.

There is ample time for any changes you may direct.

The instructions look good to me.

Subject: Substantive Instructions for Bowles Mission.

1. Following substantive instructions are for personal use of Ambassador and his group, and at Saigon, Bangkok and Canberra should go initially to Locke, Westmoreland and Calhoun, and to Unger and Cronk only. We expect to send instructions tomorrow to Saigon and Bangkok as to those parts that should be the subject of coordination in respective capitals, and would welcome your suggestions in this regard to reach us by tomorrow morning. However, instructions themselves should be held in closest confidence at all times.

2. Subject any further amendments that may be decided here, following is text of instructions. In view of our close ties to the Australians and our probable continuing dependence on their channel, we would expect to share whole of instructions with them, subject to any comment you may have.

Begin Text.

A. Review of U.S. Policy

3. The basic U.S. policy toward Cambodia remains recognition of its sovereignty, independence, neutrality and territorial integrity. We do not seek to engage Cambodia in the war in Viet-Nam, nor do we seek to expand the war to Cambodian territory. It is evident to all, and has been publicly recognized by Prince Sihanouk, that the U.S. has been acting with great restraint. It wishes to continue to do so.

4. Whereas the United States Government does not speak for the Government of South Viet-Nam, we have every reason to believe that U.S. respect for the sovereignty of Cambodia, as expressed above, is adhered to by the South Vietnamese.

5. It has been increasingly difficult for the United States to maintain a policy of respect for Cambodiaʼs position in the face of continuous and intensified violation of Cambodiaʼs sovereignty by the VC and NVA forces. It is our concern for the consequences if our position in Viet-Nam were to continue to be jeopardized by Viet Cong utilization of Cambodian territory, that has led us to propose careful consideration of meas-ures to meet the needs of the situation.

B. General Approach

6. We should convey to Prince Sihanouk from the outset the seriousness with which the United States views the problems resulting from VC and NVA use of Cambodian territory. Sihanouk should not be left under any illusion that we would be satisfied with lip service paid to the problem nor would we accept promises that cannot be translated into reality. Our general stance should be one of firmness and realism.

7. It is important that Sihanouk have a clear view of what the United States Government believes is going on inside Cambodia, and the depth and extent of our growing concern. We cannot afford to leave Sihanouk with the impression that having gone through the exercise of talking about the problem and making a few gestures toward translation into practical measures, we would then be satisfied to abandon our often expressed concern over the misuse of his territory.

8. We believe that Sihanouk has agreed to talks because he is genuinely concerned about the imminent possibility of large-scale U.S. military action against VC/NVA forces in the border areas of Cambodia. Without threatening Cambodia, we do not wish to diminish his concern. Additionally we do not wish to foreclose any future courses of action which we may feel are necessary. We would not be prepared to deny ourselves the right to take action in Cambodia simply because he has agreed to discuss the problem The talks themselves are not sufficient. There has to be some definite indication of practical and useful results in respect to measures to inhibit the enemyʼs unauthorized use of Cambodian territory.

9. Our general approach envisages the following possible results consistent with our objectives: a) expansion of the competence of the ICC to deal with border violations; b) increased Cambodian efforts to deal with the problem; and c) some reasonably clear indication of what unilateral U.S. activity Sihanouk is prepared to allow on Cambodian territory to meet a direct threat from enemy forces.

C. Nature of the Problem

10. The United States has submitted under cover of its note of December 4,2 evidence of the increasing use of Cambodian territory by VC/NVA forces. That material is only a small part of a larger body of evidence. We are also prepared to provide additional evidence along these lines, establishing without question the growing reliance of the enemy on Cambodian sanctuary and base areas.

11. We do not accuse Cambodia of complicity with Viet Cong and NVA forces. We are willing to regard enemy activity in Cambodia as a mutual problem subject to reasonable solution. Moreover, we believe that Cambodia can take measures both through its own efforts and through the efforts of the international control commission to restrict such misuse of its territory. We are aware that at times the Cambodian Government has been able to prevent unauthorized use of its territory. We welcome this and urge that such efforts be increased. We are also aware that Cambodia has expressed its willingness to have the International Control Commission fulfill its functions with greater efficiency. It is to this proposition that we now wish to address ourselves in some detail.

D. Focus on the ICC

12. The United States seeks an impartial and effective means of establishing the facts along the border. We have consistently supported the Cambodian Government in its expressed desire to make the ICC a more effective instrument for protecting the neutral status of Cambodian territory.

13. Frontier and territorial violation by the VC/NVA forces can be detected and observed by the ICC if it is given the equipment, information and the direction required. The need for more facilities and equipment, more personnel, and more efficient impartial operating methods, has been recognized by interested parties. We have already offered assistance in the form of helicopters and stand ready to consider sympathetically any further request for material assistance which would increase the effectiveness of the ICC operation. We do not restrict our offer of assistance to helicopters but would be prepared to consider requests for other types of communication and transportation equipment useful in the task.

14. There may be some question as to the willingness of the international commission to receive material assistance from the United States directly. We do not see anything in the terms of the agreement that would prevent such transfer. However, if it becomes an issue we would be prepared to provide the equipment on loan to the Cambodian Government for subsequent transfer to the commission.

15. The Government of Cambodia has on a number of occasions expressed the desire for the assistance of the ICC in monitoring activity along its borders and main ports of entry. Past ineffectiveness of the ICC is not simply a consequence of insufficient equipment but also stems from inadequate operational procedures. We see the need for a number of changes. For example, we hope the commission will establish fixed posts in key areas, institute procedures for random investigations of suspected violations, and aggressively follow up on information supplied to the commission. The ICC should be urged to conduct investigations at its own initiative, as well as in response to specific requests.

16. The important thing is for the commission to accept its responsibilities for proper administration of those aspects of the agreement with which it has been charged in the past and with which it may be charged in the future. The improved effectiveness of the ICC depends importantly on administrative and facilitative decisions subject only to the majority rule of the commission itself. Operational procedures determined by the commission, for example random investigations, are in our opinion also within the authority of the commission to determine by majority rule—a procedure which has been the practice. There may be some legal questions raised as to the competence of the Commission to function within these guidelines. It is our view there is nothing in the terms of the agreement to interfere with these functions and that any attempt to block more effective ICC action through restrictive interpretation of the Geneva Accords, will be a legalistic ruse.

17. It has been clear for some time, as the Prince has recognized, that the Polish member of the ICC has restricted the Commissionʼs fulfilling its proper function. We hope that the Government of Cambodia will impress upon all members of the Commission, and other interested parties, its desire for an expansion of the Commissionʼs capability and its expectation that the Commission will function more effectively within broader guidelines than heretofore.

18. It is of particular importance that the Cambodian Government discuss this interpretation of the functions of the Commission with the Indian Government to ensure the necessary support of the Chairman of the Commission. Much depends upon the extent to which the Indian Commissioner is prepared to deal with the practical requirements of a deteriorating situation. The success of these efforts to revive the ICC depends in great measure upon the manner in which the Indian Chairman exercises his responsibilities.

E. Cambodian Efforts

19. Even with the best of facilities and equipment and an improved willingness to exercise its responsibilities impartially, the ICC cannot by itself deal with the problem. It would still be possible, indeed it is likely, for the VC and NVA to violate Cambodian territorial integrity without immediate discovery and without regard to the possibility of public disclosure.

20. It is apparent, therefore, that the Cambodian Government must itself take what measures it can to deal with the problem. We recognize that Prince Sihanouk has mentioned the limited capacity of his government to protect its territory. We do not wish to propose any joint Cambodian-United States military efforts in this regard. We have taken note of Prince Sihanoukʼs reference to the unacceptability of mixed patrols. The U.S. has at no time proposed such patrols nor do we do so now. On the contrary, we would agree that protecting its frontiers is up to the Cambodian Government which could as it desires increase patrols and the number of posts in border areas. We would also point out, however, that when it discovers violators of its neutrality, the Cambodian Government might follow normal international practice in this regard and promptly intern or repel the violators.

21. We have also noted that enemy forces have utilized Cambodian sources of supply and transportation to meet their needs in the border areas and within Viet-Nam. We have noted the Cambodian Governmentʼs contention that supply of non-contraband material is within the rights of a nonbelligerent in accordance with international practice. However, we are also aware of how important this source of supply is to continued VC and NVA operations in Cambodia border areas. One way of reducing VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory would be to cut off their sources of supply in Cambodia. Just as Prince Sihanouk has welcomed the restraint with which President Johnson has responded to demands for U.S. action along the border, so would we hope the Prince or the Cambodian Government would seek to restrain these activities which sustain the VC/NVA war effort.

F. U.S. Operations

22. The United States Government has noted recent statements by Prince Sihanouk both publicly and privately to the effort that he is aware of the possibility that United States forces might find it necessary to deal with VC and NVA elements in remote areas along the Cambodian border. In effect, Prince Sihanouk has indicated his tacit approval of U.S. operations in the particular circumstances where Cambodian nationals are not present or in any way involved. We are interested in determining just what Prince Sihanouk had in mind in regard to tolerable U.S. counteraction.

23. VC and NVA use of Cambodia may, for example, lead to certain consequences: a) it may impose a need on the U.S. commander to conduct reconnaissance across the border with very limited forces as required to protect his forces from the enemy massing its forces or preparing a surprise attack; b) there may arise a situation in which allied forces operating close to the border will be fired upon from within Cambodia and be forced to return that fire; c) U.S. forces may be maneuvered against from across the border and be forced to react tactically to protect themselves by crossing into Cambodia.

24. We have noted Prince Sihanoukʼs remarks concerning the freedom with which U.S. forces can protect themselves in these border areas without provoking Cambodian reaction. He should be fully aware of the difficulty of maintaining secrecy in such operations. If, as is likely, they were to become known publicly the United States would not deny the measures it had taken in defense of its forces. Moreover, it would be difficult to clearly differentiate between inhabited and uninhabited areas. For us to honor the distinction between these areas, more effective measures would have to be found to keep the VC/NVA out of the inhabited areas. However, we wish to make it clear that we do not seek to take military action in the border areas, inhabited or uninhabited. What we do seek is the prevention of enemy use of Cambodiaʼs territory. If this is done through ICC and Cambodian efforts, the question of U.S. action does not arise.

G. Contingencies

Diplomatic Recognition and the Border Problem

25. We must anticipate Prince Sihanoukʼs raising the question of restoration of diplomatic relations. (FYI. We do not wish to raise this ourselves. End FYI.) If, as expected, he does so and couples it with the usual condition—a declaration of respect and recognition of Cambodiaʼs “present borders”—we should state clearly our difficulty with making such a declaration with respect to one state which would not be made with other states. We should make clear our established position of being unwilling to make a declaration governing border disputes between neighboring countries. However, we should as we have said on a number of occasions, assure Prince Sihanouk that we ourselves are not in any sense challenging the validity of Cambodiaʼs frontiers.

26. Depending upon the mood of the conversation and the way in which this subject comes up, we should explore with Sihanouk whether he really wishes a U.S. presence in Phnom Penh at the present time. We should refer to the conversation of last spring which he had with Hamilton Fish Armstrong and say we are inclined to share what we understand to be the Princeʼs feeling at that time that a U.S. presence might be disturbing to the atmosphere in Phnom Penh. We ourselves believe, as we gather Sihanouk does, that there is effective communication through the assistance of the Australians. FYI. We should keep in mind the possibility of intermediate steps that fall short of reestablishment of relations but provide regular contact between the U.S. and Cambodia: One possibility would be the setting up of an “American Interests Section” in the Australian Embassy, with a staff of three or four officers. Another way would be to establish channels for continuing contact between our officials at New Delhi or New York. End FYI.

27. In short, we wish to indicate considerable reserve, but do not wish to appear negative. Basis of our position on border declaration should be spelled out with some care noting that this is part of our world-wide policy not to take or appear to take a position on any border question involving nations with which we have friendly views. We will be supplying other instructions where we have applied this policy, for contingent use as required. In addition, as indicated above, we wish to probe Sihanouk—if he raises this subject—as to whether in fact he really wishes a U.S. presence in Cambodia.

28. Sihanouk may raise the question of claims arising from previous incidents. (FYI. We are not clear as to just how many incidents and what claims are involved. In the past Sihanouk has made excessive demands without any real justification. End FYI.)

29. We should make clear that although we are willing to discuss at a later date any outstanding claims, that payment for such incidents would normally be taken care of by the South Vietnamese Government. We believe the South Vietnamese have made several offers and that they would be prepared to consider appropriate indemnification for established damages.

Mekong River

30. It is possible that Sihanouk will raise the question of interference by the South Vietnamese Government with traffic on the Mekong River. Our position in this regard should be to avoid acting as an arbitrator between Cambodia and South Viet-Nam. We believe this is wholly a matter for settlement within the Mekong convention and is a subject for the governments directly concerned.

Further Meeting

31. There may arise a need for subsequent meetings at either this or the technical level. We wish to keep these options open. At the end of the present discussions there should be agreement in principle to reconvene at an appropriate level if further discussions are necessary.

Press Guidance

32. We would hope to avoid daily report to the press during the discussions. We would propose to the Cambodians at the outset that press comment be avoided and that a joint communiqué be issued at the conclusion of the discussions. This may only be a faint hope given the possibility of regular leaks and we will therefore be prepared to do some judicious backgrounding of the press ourselves as necessary.

End of Text.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. Secret; Eyes Only. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

2 See Document 212.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 227. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 1

New Delhi, January 7, 1968, 1649Z.

8080. For Secretary Rusk from Ambassador Bowles.

1. While I recognize that Cambodian border problem is a ticklish question in our relationship with Thailand and Viet-Nam, I believe it is quite possible that success or failure of our mission to Cambodia may hinge on our finding some language, however fuzzy it may be, that is acceptable to Sihanouk and which both the Thais and Vietnamese could be persuaded to live with. If this can be accomplished, a major breakthrough would be possible which could have important implications for all of Southeast Asia. Consequently, I am hopeful that our present position will be carefully re-examined and a genuine effort made to bridge the present impasse. In view of our vast investment in preserving Thailand and Viet-Namʼs independence, I believe that we are entitled to press them to take a less rigid position.

2. Please let me know how far I am authorized to go if, as I expect, this subject is raised. For instance, would it be feasible for us to state that we respect (not recognize) Cambodiaʼs borders and, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, would oppose any efforts to change them by force?2

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 CAMB. Secret; Nodis. Rostow sent a copy of this telegram to the Johnson Ranch in Texas for the President as CAP 80186, January 8. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia)1

2 In telegram 94742 to Phnom Penh, January 8, a copy of which was also sent to the Johnson Ranch as CAP 80186, January 8, the Department responded that the position on a declaration on Cambodiaʼs borders “was carefully weighed at all levels.” The Department noted that since Sihanouk already construed the vague Australian declaration as an endorsement of his position, he would certainly do the same with a U.S. statement. Furthermore, the Department believed Sihanouk did not really expect the United States to make such a declaration. (Ibid.)

228. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 228. Information Memorandum From the Legal Adviser (Meeker) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 10, 1968.

SUBJECT

Possible U.S. Statement on Territorial Integrity of Cambodia

For over a year the United States has confronted the issue of whether to make a declaration affirming U.S. respect and/or recognition for the territorial integrity of Cambodia within its present borders. During most of this period the issue has been considered in the context of a possible resumption of diplomatic relations. In the last week the issue has come up in the additional context of the Bowles mission. Ambassador Bowles himself has asked what flexibility he might have on a statement if this became a significant element in his discussions. At the first meeting in Phnom Penh on January 9, Prime Minister Son Sann made a general reference to the matter in saying “A primary consideration of Cambodiaʼs foreign policy concerns the recognition of Cambodian borders.” In a subsequent meeting, he or Prince Sihanouk might bring the border question directly into the conversation and ask what kind of declaration the United States would be prepared to make as part of whatever arrangement we might work out concerning ICC operations and VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory. We should be in a position to respond promptly if this occurs. Ambassador Bowlesʼ initial instructions were understandably reserved on the issue of a border statement, but we believe the United States enjoys considerable flexibility about this whenever it may become useful to engage in discussion of the subject with Cambodia.

In essence, a U.S. declaration would state that the United States respects the sovereignty, independence, neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia within its present frontiers and recognizes the inviolability of these frontiers. Such a statement says two things. First, it says that we respect the territorial integrity of Cambodia within its present frontiers—without defining what those frontiers are or committing ourselves to the precise borders claimed by Cambodia. A declaration in the form outlined above would not commit the United States to any position on the precise location of boundary lines where those lines may be subject to dispute. It would commit the United States to oppose any large-scale irredentist claims. Some claims of this nature were advanced by the Diem regime a number of years ago and were reciprocated by equally flimsy claims on the part of Cambodia.

Second, such a declaration would say that we recognize Cambodiaʼs lawful frontiers, whatever they may be, to be inviolable. This would certainly be construed as an undertaking not to change Cambodiaʼs frontiers by force. This is the sense in which Sihanouk and declaring governments have used the term “inviolable”. Recognition of inviolability of frontiers could also be asserted to mean that incursions across these frontiers into Cambodian territory would not be made unless there was a legitimate basis for doing so under the United Nations Charter. One such basis, recognized by Article 51 of the Charter, is the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense. Prince Sihanoukʼs recent statements regarding possible U.S. incursions into Cambodia to pursue NVN/VC forces operating illegally there seem to recognize this self-defense exception to the inviolability of Cambodiaʼs borders. In making any statement that included the concept of inviolability, we would want it made clear to all—Sihanouk included—that inviolability does not, of course, imply an obligation not to cross a border temporarily when there is a legitimate reason—such as self-defense—for doing so.

In summary, a declaration respecting Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity and recognizing the inviolability of its frontiers would commit us to no more than is already in the United Nations Charter.

Some arguments have been advanced against a U.S. declaration on Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity. First, that Australiaʼs experience with such a declaration was unsatisfactory. If Sihanouk should try to interpret a U.S. declaration as supporting his claims as to the precise location of boundaries, we could, of course, do what Australia did and make it plain that we support the territorial integrity of all countries in the area. Indeed, if any U.S. declaration were to grow out of the Bowles mission, we could let the Cambodians know very clearly what our interpretation of the statement was. We might wish to preface the declaration with an explanatory clause designed to show that it constituted one particular application of a general principle. For example, we could include in our declaration the statement that it was being made “in accordance with the Principles of the United Nations set forth in Article 2 of the Charter”.

The suggestion has also been made that a U.S. declaration would offend Thai and South Vietnamese sensitivities on the issue of borders. In the case of Thailand, this seems particularly unlikely. Foreign Minister Thanat has said that Thailand has no border disputes with Cambodia—apart from the question of the Temple of Preah Vihear, as to which he made a reservation to the 1962 decision of the International Court of Justice that has no effect. In the case of South Viet Nam, it may be noted that there has been no reaction from Saigon to the various statements made by other governments concerning Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity. Such statements have been made by France, Singapore, Australia, India, Indonesia, the Philippines and the Federal Republic of Germany. The Japanese have now told us that they will probably make such a statement within the next few days.

Moreover, there might be the following disadvantage in refusing to make a statement on Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity if the issue should be pressed by the Cambodians: our refusal could be taken as implying that the statements made by a number of other countries do endorse Cambodiaʼs claims as to the precise location of its boundaries in areas where there are disputes—principally the boundary with South Viet Nam.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Meeker, Salans, and Aldrich. Copies sent to Harriman and Bundy.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 229. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 1

New Delhi, January 12, 1968, 1523Z.

8395. Bowles Mission.

1. Our discussions in Phnom Penh terminated this morning (Jan 12) with formal signing of joint communiqué and expressions of mutual respect and goodwill.2

2. Three objectives were accomplished: A. Sihanouk has reaffirmed in a formal written message to chairman of ICC his request for strong, vigorous, adequately equipped commission with authority to operate mobile inspection teams and fixed inspection posts backed by helicopter observation. I was assured that Princeʼs message will be delivered today.

B. Sihanouk specifically asked us to supply him on regular basis with whatever information we may have on suspected locations of VC/NVA units on Cambodian soil. He promised promptly to inform ICC, to order his own troops to make full inspection and to move whatever intruders may be discovered off Cambodian soil.

C. Sihanouk has expressed desire to re-establish normal relations with USG and when this has been accomplished to permit US Military Attaché to visit any part of his country as an additional safeguard.

3. As quid pro quo, Son Sann, Chairman of Cambodian delegation, requested from USG “flat assurances” that there be no further “aggression or intrusion” on Cambodian soil by Americans and/or South Vietnamese. He supported his case with an emotional enumeration of Cambodian casualties and property damage. At one point Son Sann stated that Cambodian Government could not agree to deliver Princeʼs message to ICC until we reached agreement on this point.

4. We firmly rejected this request emphasizing that the vigorous ICC operation which RKG had requested was primarily to help Cambodia maintain its neutrality and sovereignty. Cambodia was on the edge of a bitter war and we could not guarantee that there would be no incidents. We could and would, however, state as we have before that we deeply regret any incidents that may have occurred in the past and assure the RKG that USG had no intention or desire to infringe on Cambodian territory. Hot pursuit, we said, is not an issue. After considerable discussion, Son Sann and his delegation accepted our position.

5. The negotiations were conducted in atmosphere of great cordiality. At no time was there any sign of contentiousness. It was obvious that the Prince and his associates were anxious to find common ground, and were pleased that we were prepared to cooperate.

6. Throughout discussions the Prince and his ministers placed primary and indeed sole emphasis on Cambodian national integrity. I came away deeply convinced, as on previous visits to Cambodia, that Sihanoukʼs decisions and attitudes, however bizarre, are shaped by intense and deeply rooted nationalism in which ideology has little or no part. The Prince stressed again and again that his is a small country caught in the middle of an unpredictable international conflict and that Cambodia must strive to maintain maximum degree of goodwill not only toward its neighbors, but particularly toward great powers, USSR, China and USA.

7. Nevertheless, I came away convinced that for whatever reason, approach of Cambodian Govt to these negotiations reflects significant change in emphasis in its foreign policy. On several occasions the Prince, Son Sann, Gen. Nhiek Tioulong and others expressed their “dislike and suspicion all Vietnamese, North or South, blue or red.” The Prince went so far as to say facetiously that the longer the Vietnamese people fight each other the more secure Cambodia will be in the years ahead. There was no similar reference to the Thais.

8. One contributing factor in this significant shift of attitudes may be the Princeʼs concern with the recent arrogant and contemptuous behavior of the North Vietnamese, NLF and Chinese representatives in Phnom Penh. The Prince told me that reps of all three groups had rudely rejected his invitations to various state functions in honor of President Tito during his forthcoming visit to Cambodia next week. We also heard reports of other recent NLF and North Vietnamese slights to the Prince.

9. Throughout negotiations there were frequent references by Cambodian delegation to desirability further talks and the hope that our present discussions could be beginning of continuing dialogue. After dinner given for us January 9, Son Sann took me aside to express hope that we can develop mutually acceptable basis for resumption of normal relationship. Son Sann took occasion at opening of meeting following day to reiterate his hope that [garble—Ambassadors?] could soon be officially accredited representation in both capitals.

10. I emphasized on each occasion that while I had no authority to negotiate on this subject. I would like to know their minimum requirement in regard to Cambodian border question that I could pass on to President and the Secretary. Sonn Sann described the language included in present agreements with Germans, Indians, Filipinos, and soon, he anticipated, with Japanese. At lunch on January 11, Sihanouk again brought up subject stating that USG Embassy in Cambodia would give us opportunity to see for ourselves what is going on along Cambodian borders; he added that “your Military Attaché will be allowed to go anywhere he wishes.”

11. Just before leaving for the airport I called Son Sann aside to ask if RKG was as seriously interested in representation question as he had indicated, pointing out there were certain difficulties on both sides. Again, Son Sann asserted that the quicker USG and RKG find a basis to establish normal relations the better he and Prince would like it.

12. I understand and appreciate difficulties we face in finding language in regard to boundary question which would be satisfactory to US and to Cambodia; I also recognize likely objections by Thais and Vietnamese. However, while I believe that we should proceed with caution, I am convinced that we should make a determined effort to develop a mutually satisfactory formula. An official American presence in Cambodia would do much to maintain and promote friendly attitudes and contribute significantly towards our objectives in the area.

13. I might add that I am fully conscious of mercurial and unpredictable characteristics of the Prince. In any dealings with Cambodia we must expect sudden switches and caustic and unfair criticism. However, we should not let Sihanoukʼs intemperate and sometimes childish outbursts deter us from the main business at hand: to keep Cambodia neutral, to keep the Viet Cong and NVA out of its territory and, with an eye to the future, to improve our own relations with this small but important country.

14. In regard to immediate business of strengthening the ICC, I believe that major question mark is attitude of Soviets, Poles and Indians. In two discussions with Indian ICC Chairman, Paranjpe, in Phnon Penh, he expressed personal conviction that problem of what nation or body accepts helicopters can be worked out. It was his hope that adverse Russian and Pole comments were designed to protect their relationship with NVN and to avoid appearance of being less aggressive than China.

15. If this turns out to be wishful thinking and Soviets dig in their heels, they will undoubtedly create difficulties for us with the Indians. Before I left Delhi, Kaul assured me that GOI was in agreement with US that no change of ICC policy was needed: It was purely a matter of more effectively carrying out present policy; therefore, a majority vote was all that would be required. However, Mrs. Gandhi may be influenced toward a more negative position by Moscow.

16. At background press conference tonight, I shall do what I can to box in Indians and Soviets so that if there is hold-up in implementation of ICC program worked out in Phnom Penh, their responsibility will be clear.

Bowles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Bowles. Secret.1

2 For text, see Department of State Bulletin, January 29, 1968, pp. 133–134.

230. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 230. Telegram From the Embassy in India to the Department of State 1

New Delhi, January 12, 1968, 1653Z.

Unnumbered. To the President and Secretary of State.

1. By the time you receive this cable you should have on your desks all our reports from Phnom Penh including my personal estimate of the situation.2 The purpose of this special message is to express my conviction that we should do whatever we reasonably can to re-establish normal diplomatic relations with Cambodia. There are a number of advantages: A. A small but experienced US Mission in Phnom Penh would help to hold the line in regard to the agreement we have just reached and perhaps gradually open door for broader understanding and ultimately even cooperation.

B. Cambodiaʼs apparent willingness to establish normal relations with USG would be clear signal that Sihanouk, an astute Asian political leader, no longer assumes that the Communists may force the US out of East Asia.

c. The restoration of normal relations with Cambodia would also have reassuring effect not only on our friends and neutrals overseas but on the American people.

d. Sihanoukʼs change of direction would arouse bitter attacks by Chinese, NLF and NVN and possibly Soviets which would further promote favorable US image as a nation eager for peace.

2. At present the administration is often charged, however unreasonably, with a rigid and uncompromising view in regard to negotiations in Southeast Asia. This criticism could be significantly eased if we could announce in reasonably near future that we have not only reached an understanding with Sihanouk in regard to the ICC role in curbing Viet Cong-NVN infiltration but also have restored normal diplomatic relations with Cambodia.

3. On several occasions the Prince, Son Sann, and the C-in-C General Nhiek Tioulong, as well as others, urged me to maintain close contact with Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny in New Delhi. With your approval it should be possible for me over next few weeks quietly to determine basis on which normal relations could be established. If understanding is reached through Nong Kimny, I could return to Phnom Penh and complete negotiations with the Prince.

4. I realize that such a move would be frowned on both in Bangkok and Saigon. However, I cannot see why we should allow two countries which are totally dependent on USG for their survival to veto a policy decision which would significantly promote national interests of USG as well as their own security.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret; Eyes Only; handled as Exdis. A copy of this telegram was sent to the Johnson Ranch as CAP 80311, January 12. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Cambodia 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68)

2 Telegrams reporting on the progress of Bowlesʼ Mission are ibid., POL 7 US/Bowles. For Bowlesʼ assessment, see Document 229.

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

231. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 231. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Read) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, February 27, 1968.

SUBJECT

Australian Declaration on Cambodiaʼs Borders—Implications for the United States

For the Presidentʼs information there is enclosed a memorandum that discusses the implications for the United States of the recent Australian recognition of Cambodian borders.

BHR

Enclosure

Australian Declaration on Cambodiaʼs Borders—Implications for the United States

The Statement and Its Background. At the conclusion of a visit by the Cambodian Foreign Minister on February 21, the Australian Government in Canberra made its long-awaited statement on Cambodiaʼs frontiers, in the following terms: “In conformity with the United Nations Charter, Australia recognizes and respects the territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia within its present frontiers.” Cambodia has threatened to “freeze” diplomatic relations with all remaining countries that refused to issue statements recognizing Cambodiaʼs present borders. The Australian statement derives special significance from the fact that an earlier statement (July 1967) had at first been accepted but then rejected when Australia had made clear it had not intended to imply an endorsement of the specific demarcation of Cambodiaʼs frontier.

Cambodian Interpretation. When the Cambodian Foreign Minister pointedly commented in a February 21 press conference that the Australian declaration provided “moral and legal support” for Cambodian claims against its neighbors, the Australian Government stuck to its decision not to correct the Foreign Ministerʼs interpretation nor to comment or amplify in any way on its own declaration.

The Cambodian official also said in Canberra that Cambodia would like to have the United States, too, issue a declaration recognizing its borders. The U.S. is in fact the only great power that has not issued a declaration and we are coming under increasing pressure to do so.

U.S. Position. We have no legal problems with issuing a statement similar to that made by Australia, or even one more sweeping and without such qualifications as “in conformity with the UN Charter.” While there could be some advantage in issuing such a declaration since it might help pave the way for an eventual restoration of relations with Cambodia, we would have real political problems because of the reactions of Cambodiaʼs neighbors to the public interpretation that Cambodia would place on our border statement. Cambodiaʼs frontiers are still not clearly defined in some cases.

While we might attempt, as Australia is doing, to avoid any comment on Cambodiaʼs interpretation, we would have to explain our statement in advance to the Governments of Laos, Thailand and South Vietnam, and there would be no guarantee that they would not make our position public. In such a case, the Cambodians would be quite apt to do what they did with Australiaʼs earlier declaration, i.e., declare it to be null and void. We would also be accused of duplicity.

Another problem that exists for us, but not for the Australians, is that Cambodia has indicated that it interprets statements of “respect and recognition” of its borders as a sort of guarantee against border violations. As long as the enemy makes use of the Cambodia/Vietnam border areas, including Cambodian territory, it is virtually impossible to avoid border violations without surrendering the border regions to the enemy.

Strategy. Because of these problems we believe it best to proceed slowly, and step by step: We can first explore with the Cambodians some mutual understanding—even tacit—of what a U.S. border statement would and would not mean. We are prepared to undertake such exploration at a propitious time. Unless such discreet advance preparation is made, we run the serious risk of having a U.S. declaration blow up in our face.

At the present time we are waiting to see what the Cambodian Government does with the information we recently provided it about VC/NVA use of their territory. We also wish to see how anxious Cambodia is to renew relations with us. The Cambodian Foreign Minister gave his Australian hosts the impression of being not very eager. He said Cambodia would need, in addition to a border declaration, “guarantees” against American border violations.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 32 CAMB. Confidential. Drafted by Herz and Perry on February 23 and cleared by Bundy.

232. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 232. Note From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 19, 1968, 12:20 p.m.

Mr. President:

You may wish to take into account at lunch2 these thoughts of the meeting of the Southeast Asian Ambassadors and Gen. Westmoreland at Cam Ranh Bay.

They raise, among other matters, the possibility of: —a feint against North Vietnam;

—limited operations in Laos.

W.W. Rostow 3

Attachment4

Saigon, March 19, 1968.

Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee Recommendations

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam and Laos printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume, XXVIII, Document 345.]

C. Cambodia—Political 1. Discussion at the SEACOORD meeting emphasized the great importance of the collection and exploitation of specific hard intelligence on Viet Cong/North Vietnamese Army use of Cambodia, as well as of circumstantial evidence which is convincing by dint of its quality and quantity. Collection of all types of intelligence on Cambodia should be given higher national priority than heretofore. Use of more aggressive intelligence collection methods should be authorized where necessary to obtain such intelligence. Movement of supplies to and through Sihanoukville is a particularly important area for an increased intelligence collection effort. Internal political and insurgency developments should also be covered in new tasking for CIA collection efforts.

2. We should do more to exploit the intelligence assets of other countries. [6–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Efforts should be made to obtain substantially more intelligence on Cambodia from [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] friendly missions in Phnom Penh, such as the British and Japanese. (Embassy Bangkok and Embassy Saigon see very little information from these sources; if it is coming to the Department, they would appreciate being put on distribution for it.)

3. Sihanouk should personally be presented with evidence of Viet Cong/North Vietnamese Army use of Cambodia on a regular and continuing basis. He should be asked what his investigation of the material we have already given him has revealed. The Australians should be asked to impress him again with the seriousness with which we view the situation and call for action on the evidence provided him.

4. Assuming there is no sign of real action to correct the situation of Sihanoukʼs part in the near future, we should bring our evidence of VC/NVA use of Cambodia to the attention of other friendly governments and ask them to stress our concern to the Cambodians.

5. Pressure should be maintained on the Indians to work to make the International Control Commission an effective instrument for policing VC/NVA use of the border, though we recognize that such a transformation is unlikely. Meanwhile, evidence of VC/NVA use of Cambodia should be presented to the ICC on a regular and continuing basis.

6. No particular pressure should be applied to the Vietnamese to open up the Mekong. The closing of the Mekong puts additional pressure on the port of Sihanoukville, complicating any movement of VC/NVA supplies through that port.

7. The question of reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Cambodia should be kept under continuing review. While presence of a U.S. military attaché with freedom to travel would be helpful, the present movement—one in which we do not wish to make a major conciliatory step at a time we are pressing him toward more effective action on his own to deny VC/NVA use of his territory—does not seem an appropriate time to move toward a reestablishment of relations.

8. It is recommended that the Secretary brief his colleagues on Cambodia in the seven nations meeting in Wellington, with a view to bringing them to understand the lines of action we have in mind and to enlist their cooperation where pertinent. Such a presentation would be an opportunity both to encourage governments with access to Cambodian government to join in emphasizing to it their concern over security problem posed by NVN/VC sanctuary and to explain to all the need for restraint in short term actions against Cambodia while determining what Sihanouk can and will do.

D. Cambodia—Administrative 1. Primary U.S. field responsibility for matters relating to Cambodia (except for VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory) should continue to be vested in Embassy Bangkok. Bangkok will also take initiative in formulating recommendations on appropriate action as viewed from the field, keeping other SEACOORD posts informed. Embassy Bangkok should be given necessary resources to do the job. Saigon will continue to have primary responsibility for reporting and policy recommendations relating to VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory, keeping other SEACOORD posts informed. Embassy Bangkok will be sending follow-on telegram which will contain specific recommendations for improving collection, collation and dissemination of information.

2. It is recommended that member agencies assign a high priority to the interdepartmental working group under State Department chairmanship that has been established in Washington to coordinate and take action on matters pertaining to Cambodia.

E. Cambodia—Military

Meanwhile, it would be desirable, in the aftermath of the VC/NVA use of Cambodia in connection with the Tet offensive, to take Sihanouk up on his willingness to have us conduct limited military operations in unpopulated areas of Cambodia. We recommend that increased military activity by U.S. forces against NVA/VC in Cambodia begin now on a small scale, gradually increasing our operations as the situation permits, using care to avoid foreclosing through this program the possibility of obtaining Sihanoukʼs cooperation with us to reduce VC/NVA use of his territory. We recommend a scenario for U.S. operations in Cambodia as follows: 1. Beginning immediately: A. The present restrictions on the number, depth, and frequency of Daniel Boone insertions be relaxed in Zone A and that more helicopter support be authorized for cross border operations in Zone A of the Daniel Boone area. This is essential if we are to develop better intelligence for use in the Vesuvius Operation. Further we need to develop hard targets that can later be exploited by fire in the unpopulated areas of Cambodia.

B. Exercising extreme caution to ascertain no Cambodian presence, initiate active defensive measures of short duration in remote, unpopulated sections of the Cambodian border area. (1) Reconnaissance. Beyond present Daniel Boone squads, author-ize U.S. platoon/company size forces be inserted by helicopter and/or ground.

(2) Pursuit by fire on enemy targets retreating into unpopulated areas of Cambodia by use of artillery, gunships and tactical air.

C. Task [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] agencies as appropriate to develop resources for the conduct of black psychological operations to exploit differences between the Cambodian government, on the one hand, and the VC/NVA, ChiComs and their Cambodian supporters on the other.

D. Expand the area of coverage south to the Gulf of Thailand, exercising safeguards to preclude loss of an aircraft in Cambodian territory.

2. Subsequent military operations:

Depending on Sihanoukʼs reactions to our political pressure and to our increased military operations recommended above, we visualize a carefully controlled and gradual increase in strength and effectiveness of U.S. operations into Cambodia, while at the same time avoiding actions which would jeopardize any political progress we are making with Sihanouk.

The following subsequent military operations are recommended for initiation if it becomes clear that efforts to induce Sihanouk to act more effectively are not going to produce results and in circumstances where there would be a clear military imperative. A. Increasing our reconnaissance capability by authorizing over-flights to a depth of 20 kilometers along the entire Cambodian border area with the QT–2 noiseless aircraft as soon as it proved its operational capability. Also allow the airborne personnel detector (people sniffer) to be employed along the border as an additional airborne sensor. In order for this to be employed effectively, authorize additional low-level reconnaissance coverage.

B. On a case by case basis, authorize night-time B–52 strikes on clearly defined significant targets in unpopulated, remote areas astride the South Vietnam-Cambodian border.

C. Increase the strength of our active defensive measures of short duration in remote, unpopulated sections of Cambodia close to the border by: (1) Raids. Attack specific enemy targets with company/battalion task force supported by artillery, gunships, and tactical air.

(2) Pursuit. Forces not to exceed battalion task force size forces to maintain contact and destroy enemy forces retreating into Cambodia.

(3) Reaction forces. Employment of company/battalion task force size forces to reinforce reconnaissance/raid action and to assist disengagement and withdrawal of forces as necessary.

Bunker

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. Top Secret.

2 According to the notes of the March 19 Tuesday luncheon meeting, neither this cable or the issue that it raised were discussed. (Ibid., Tom Johnsonʼs Notes of Meetings, 3/19/68)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 The attached telegram was a copy retyped in the White House and classified Top Secret; Exdis.

233. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 233. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence of the Central Intelligence Agency (Smith) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, April 22, 1968.

Attached in response to your request this morning are copies of two recent memoranda2 which discuss the increasing evidence that Vietnamese Communists are receiving substantial amounts of military equipment via Southern Cambodia.

Joe Alsop has undoubtedly drawn upon MACV sources for his article in todayʼs Washington Post. We believe, however, that his tonnage estimates are too high.

R.J. Smith

Attachment3

Washington, March 7, 1968.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence

RECENT COMMUNIST USES OF CAMBODIAN TERRITORY

Summary

The Communists continue to use Cambodian territory for tactical sanctuary, for base areas, for the infiltration of personnel, and as a source of rice, medicines, and sundry supplies. Communist base areas on the eastern border of Cambodia have continued to expand as the tempo of the war in South Vietnam has increased. We do not believe, however, that the step-up in military activity since the Tet offensive has taxed the capability of the established supply route from North Vietnam via Laos and the trail system along the Cambodian border.

There is a growing body of circumstantial evidence, however, that the Communists may have stepped up the acquisition of supplies through southern Cambodia. The appearance of new weaponry in the IV Corps area, along with the heavy expenditure of ammunition in the III and IV Corps areas, point to an increasing likelihood that Cambodia may be used to at least augment the military equipment which is reaching this area over more established routes from North Vietnam via Laos and the trails into South Vietnam.

[Here follow the body of the memorandum and a map entitled: “Major Vietnamese Communist Infiltration Routes and Base Areas Along the Cambodian Border.”]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (2)a, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia. No classification marking.

2 No documents were attached. The information memorandum of March 7 was apparently an attachment and its summary is printed as an attachment. (Ibid.) The other attachment was apparently CIA memorandum SC No. 01939/68, April 4, 1968, a more detailed 14-page account of North Vietnamese/Viet Cong use of Cambodia, not printed. (Ibid.)

3 Secret.

234. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 234. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, May 27, 1968.

SUBJECT

Special Fire Authority Against VC/NVA in Cambodia

1. At Tab A is a request by General Westmoreland for authority to employ B 52ʼs, tactical air, and artillery against VC/NVA in the tri-border area of Cambodia in the near future to exploit the expected defeat of a major NVA offensive against the Central Highlands of SVN.2 Tab B is a strong endorsement from Ambassador Bunker.3

2. We expect this matter to be discussed at the Presidentʼs meeting at 8:30 AM May 28.4

Discussion

3. General Westmoreland points out that B–3 front forces are out from their Cambodian tri-border sanctuary and into Kontum Province in the II Corps Tactical Zone. In his judgment, a major battle is imminent, and may in fact have begun. Enemy forces consist of the 325 C and 1st NVA Divisions supported by the 40th NVA Artillery Regiment. Based on current intelligence and past enemy performances, General Westmoreland has outlined a scenario in which the NVA objective is Kontum City. He posits an enemy defeat and withdrawal under pressure along known routes into his sanctuary in Cambodia. To take maximum advantage of the situation and prevent renewal of attacks, General Westmoreland proposes to pursue by B 52ʼs, tactical air, and artillery along retreat routes and against known targets in the tri-border area of Cambodia North and East of YB 6100 (see map5 ). Combat timing is such that he needs advance authority, which he would use only if the scenario develops as outlined. If used, notification will be made prior to beginning the cross-border attacks.

4. Ambassador Bunker in recognizing the political implications argues that increased enemy activity since January 30 and the military and psychological dangers to our position in SVN and at Paris dictate inflicting maximum punishment on the enemy. To give the enemy his tri-border sanctuary, would permit him to come out again, thereby possibly prolonging enemy hopes, the war, casualties, and negotiations.

5. We do not yet have CINCPAC or JCS views. We are advised that General Wheeler strongly supports Westmorelandʼs proposals and will vigorously endorse them tomorrow, citing enemy mass, fewer friendly forces in the area than six months ago when a similar request was rejected, and the need to correct the ground disparity by B 52ʼs.

6. Although the area concerned is remote, rugged, and unpopulated, we can expect the operation to receive publicity and public denunciations by Sihanouk (despite an earlier statement that he would not mind “hot pursuit” into unpopulated areas). We think it unlikely North Viet-Nam would break off the talks, although they probably would threaten to do so—it is unlikely they would acknowledge presence of their forces in Cambodia.

7. Our reservations concern whether the targets will be sufficiently remunerative to justify the political risks and whether they could be taken by Tac Air and artillery without the use of B 52ʼs. You may wish to have a full discussion of both points. If the case is made on each, we would support Westmorelandʼs proposal and his rationale. Westmoreland expects that the battle for Kontum may last a month, and in view of the Paris talks, we believe we should reassess the situation before the cross-border phase is initiated.

Recommendation 6

8. That, depending on the consideration outlined in para 7 above, you approve for planning purposes the proposal to employ B 52ʼs, tactical air, and artillery against NVA forces in the tri-border area of Cambodia as outlined in the scenario.

9. That the actual execution of the cross-border phase be subject to Washington review based upon the situation obtaining at the time, principally the Paris talks, and prior to an Execute order.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 CAMB. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Cowherd and Leonhart.

2  COMUSMACV telegram 14988/250450Z May 1968, attached but not printed.

3 Telegram 28267 from Saigon, May 25, attached but not printed.

4 President Johnson held a breakfast meeting at 8:30 a.m., May 28, attended by Clifford, Taylor, Vance, Wheeler, Helms, USIA Director Leonard Marks, Christian, Rostow, World Bank President McNamara, Justice Abe Fortas, Katzenbach, and Tom Johnson. Australian Prime Minister Gorton joined the meeting at its end. According to Tom Johnsonʼs notes of the meeting, the only discussion on Cambodia was Vanceʼs statement that “We should stay away from talks about Cambodia.” (Johnson Library, Tom Johnson Notes of Meetings) Johnsonʼs notes are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume VI.

5 Not attached.

6 There is no indication on the source text of Ruskʼs approval or disapproval of paragraphs 8 and 9. Bundy wrote the following note next to the approval lines: “I am somewhat more reserved, but this gives the facts.”

235. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 235. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 28, 1968, 10:40 a.m.

Mr. President:

George Christian says you wish to have for the 11:30 a.m. meeting with Prime Minister Gorton 2 the situation with respect to North Vietnamese troops in Cambodia and the problem that we face.

1. As the attached paper (Tab A) from the CIA,3 which Dick Helms distributed this morning, indicates, the North Vietnamese have been using the Cambodian salient in various ways for the past 3 years.

2. At the present time some 12,000 enemy troops are arrayed against allied positions in western Kontum province; we know that an offensive has been planned for some time; it is Westyʼs intention to pre-empt this offensive, if possible, if not, to defeat them and drive them back.

3. The two maps at the end of the CIA paper, marked with paper-clips, show the transport routes, headquarters, bivouac areas, etc. now in the Northeast Cambodian salient.

4. At Tab B are Bunkerʼs and Westyʼs cables4 which request your permission to attack this salient if and when the North Vietnamese are driven back from their assault on Kontum. The map attached to those cables shows the squares which Westy wishes to attack in this uninhabited base area.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables & Memos, 1/67–12/58. Top Secret.

2 President Johnson met with Prime Minister Gorton at 11:42 a.m. on May 28. The meeting lasted until 12:16 p.m. Johnson and Gorton were joined by Australian Ambassador Sir Keith Waller, C.L.S. Hewitt, Secretary of the Prime Ministerʼs Department, Bundy, Rostow, and Chief of Protocol Angier Biddle Duke. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No memorandum of discussion of Cambodia has been found, but see Document 236.

3 No Tab A was attached. The CIA paper probably was SC No. 08367/68, May 28, not printed. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam, 5E (2)b, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia)

4 See footnotes 2 and 3, Document 234.

236. Telegram From the White House to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) in Texas 236. Telegram From the White House to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) in Texas1

Washington, May 29, 1968.

CAP 81159. Message to the ranch. Personal for Rostow from Bundy.

1. For the Presidentʼs meeting with Gorton tomorrow,2 and continuing discussion of Cambodia, you should have the following background for such use as you see fit in briefing the President: A. President went over situation at last meeting with Gorton,3 explaining it on the map and quoting from Bunkerʼs cable recommending authority for action.4

B. Specifically on the tri-border area, the Australians transmitted for us some evidence concerning the area in February. This consisted of visual sighting by our own patrols (not attributed), plus some photographs. These materials showed roads and one new small bridge, plus some rather scratchy fox holes—but nothing really impressive by way of a fixed installation or clear proof of present occupancy.

C. Since February, we have received additional material mostly photographs. However, in view of Sihanoukʼs reaction to the February package (reported by the Australians) that photographs by themselves did not show where they were taken and in view of the fact that the evidence showed only somewhat clearer roads, it did not seem to us then—and does not now—that this evidence would add much to what we have done. Finally, photographic evidence runs the risk of triggering Sihanoukʼs reaction that we are violating his air space.

D. At the present moment, we are awaiting a MACV officer who is supposed to be bringing the very latest evidence. It may be that Westy himself will have this with him, and that this will be more convincing than what we have hitherto been able to pull together.

E. Perhaps more to the present point, Sihanouk was well aware in November of the Dakto engagement and our clear belief that the NVA/VC went into the tri-border area afterward. During the Bowles visit, Phil Habib expressly included this in the briefing given to Sihanouk, and used arrows to show NVA/VC forces moving into the area in November.

2. You will note that para B in our possible message5 would put the message in the mouth of the Australians and would avoid a direct message of warning from us. At the same time its import would be wholly clear to the Cambodians. We feel here that any direct warning from us would have a decidedly negative effect on Sihanoukʼs reaction if the matter comes to a head. On the other hand, Gorton might well feel that we were asking the Australians to serve as our stalking horses—and might have reservations about going this far. Both we and the Australians value their continued presence and effectiveness in Cambodia, and if Gorton were to react that this was putting him out on a limb, we frankly doubt if he should be put under strong pressure to do it. However, this is clearly for the President to judge.

3. Lest anyone think this is State Department soft-headedness, I went over the matter this morning with Bill Depuy and DOD. Bill at least has reservations even about submitting a new package, on the present state of our evidence, and unless Westy has something more convincing. At the same time, he, and above all General Wheeler, obviously wish to act strongly if the case arises. Our own views on what we do in the military sphere were covered in Nickʼs memorandum to the President of this noon.6 In sum, we all agree that we should be prepared to act, and this is the gut issue. The only question, for the Presidentʼs conversation with Gorton, is whether any message other than a possible new package of evidence would in fact be useful in tempering Sihanoukʼs reaction or deterring the North Vietnamese. We ourselves doubt that it would be helpful and have some fear that it would be harmful. But the separate message gives you what the President could say if this is his judgement.

4. One final point. Bunkerʼs cable has referred to Sihanoukʼs remarks to Bowles about not objecting to military action in hot pursuit in unpopulated areas. It is quite correct that Sihanouk told Bowles he would “shut his eyes” in this situation. This gives us some basis for believing that his reaction would be moderate at most. However—again thinking in terms of any message through the Australians—it would be my very strong judgement that it would be a great mistake for the Australians to refer in any way to this statement by Sihanouk. Again, we can act on it, but if we throw it back at him it would be a red flag to a bull. One can seldom have confident judgements about Sihanoukʼs reaction, but this one is as clear as anything can be in my mind.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 8:25 p.m. CST.

2 President Johnson, Prime Minister Gorton, General Westmoreland, Rostow, and others spent the day at the Johnson Ranch. There was a press conference, a lunch, and sightseeing. There were no apparent substantive discussions or meetings, although Gorton and Johnson would have had ample time to talk. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

3 See footnote 2, Document 235.

4 See footnote 3, Document 234.

5 See Document 237.

6 Apparent reference to Document 237.

237. Telegram From the White House to President Johnson in Texas 237. Telegram From the White House to President Johnson in Texas1

Washington, May 29, 1968.

CAP 81160. For Rostow for the President, from Katzenbach and Bundy.

1. We believe the President in his talk with Gorton tomorrow might do one or both of the following: A. If General Westmoreland has brought new evidence or reports that it is about to arrive from MACV, tell Gorton that we are preparing another package and would like the Australians to submit it just as soon as possible.

B. It would ask Gorton to instruct his Ambassador in Cambodia to tell the Cambodians that he, Gorton, has just reviewed the military situation in the highlands, during his visit, that this review indicated that major attacks by the North Vietnamese were imminent, and that there was every evidence that the North Vietnamese forces might again act as they did in November and as the Australians understand Ambassador Bowlesʼ party briefed Cambodians in early January. This developing situation caused Gorton serious concern, and he felt obliged in friendship to report his impressions of it to the Cambodians.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret. Received at the Johnson Ranch at 9 p.m. CST.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 1

Washington, July 8, 1968, 2342Z.

198217. For the Ambassador from Bundy. Ref: A. State 128989; B. State 135669; C. Bangkok 16574; D. Saigon 31032; E. Saigon 22864; F. State 135496.2 Subj: Cambodia.

1. I think there is some misunderstanding as to what we are proposing to do with respect to Cambodia. Let me review the bidding. In March (ref A) we set forth advantages and disadvantages of moving toward possible resumption of relations with Cambodia, concluding that we need to explore certain aspects in New Delhi to help us in coming to a decision. The matter was put entirely in terms of where the balance of US interest lies. The crux of the matter was, and continues to be, how we can most effectively move Cambodia back toward position of true neutrality.

2. Later in March, after receiving comments from all interested posts, we concluded (ref B) that we should go ahead with exploration in New Delhi. We once more made it very clear at that time that we were in no way proposing to “reward” Cambodia for good behavior and that if any forward movement toward resumption of relations should result, one of its objectives would be to improve relations between Cambodia and its neighbors. We would have gone ahead with exploration then, in view of no objections voiced by Thai and GVN Foreign Ministers, if the P–3 incident of April 1 had not supervened. As you know, this was followed by other major unpleasantness such as Bavet incident and tugboat episode.3

3. Realize of course that many things have happened in the meantime including talks in Paris about which GVN is understandably nervous. At same time, as we approach some kind of settlement in SVN it is becoming more and more clear that this will have to take into consideration the problems along SVN-Cambodian border and that Cambodia at some point will have to be brought into the talks. This will necessitate the possibility also of informal talks with Cambodia and will mean that the desirability of informal contacts, and perhaps later of more formal ones, has if anything increased.

4. We feel that basically our reasoning of March is still applicable in July and that only procedural problems that remain are to secure general understanding by Thanh of what we are about to do and to give Bangkok 24-hour interval to touch base again with Thanat (ref C).

5. While not strictly relevant to discussion of pros and cons of the New Delhi exploration, I would like to set your mind at rest with respect to the point you make in paragraph 3 ref D about Sihanoukʼs unresponsiveness to evidence of VC/NVA use of Cambodia, which you had also made in ref E. As we pointed out paragraph 2 ref B, Sihanouk did respond to a substantial extent. Not all this information is documented in State cables since it is based on reporting of Australian Embassy Phnom Penh and other sources, some of them very sensitive. Most recent evidence of such responsiveness that we disseminated was in ref F. There is much more going on in this respect than one would think on the basis of Cambodian propaganda; and we should be guided more by actual behavior than by propaganda.

6. It is for you of course to determine the most propitious moment when matter should be raised with GVN and level at which this is most appropriate. However, we have found that with respect to moving re Cambodia there never is a “right” moment. The present seems better from some points of view than it has been for some time. If our Vietnamese friends were to think we are planning a “rapprochement” with Cambodia they would totally misunderstand what we have in mind. Indeed, the initial exploration would be private, through Nong Kimny, and, while we cannot ever exclude the Princeʼs making something public, we would suppose he would have considerable reasons not to do so at the present time.

7. If these points still leave you with reservations, let us talk quietly about it when we see each other very shortly. But I did want you to understand what we have in mind.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Secret;Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Herz and Bundy, cleared by J.R. Burke of EA/VN, and approved by Bundy.

2 Reference A, March 13; Reference B, March 25; Reference C, June 26; Reference D, June 26; and Reference E, March 23, are ibid.; Reference F, March 23, is ibid., POL 27 VIET S.

3 On April 1 a U.S. Navy P–3 Orion patrol aircraft was shot down by two Cambodian patrol boats in the Gulf of Siam. All crew members of the U.S. aircraft were killed. On May 25 the Cambodian Navy captured a Philippine tugboat 1 mile inside Cambodian territory on the Mekong River and detained eight Filipino and two U.S. Army crew members. The Filipinos were released on June 8; the Americans on June 10. Bavet is apparently a border village attacked mistakenly by U.S. helicopter gunships.

239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 239. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 1

Washington, July 26, 1968, 0005Z.

209406/UNSEC 19. For Under Secretary Katzenbach from the Secretary. Subject: Cambodian Detention of US LCU.

1. Background. On July 17 a US Army utility landing craft (LCU 1577) with 11 Americans and one RVN policeman on board inadvertently strayed into Cambodian waters on Mekong River and was seized by Cambodian Navy. We immediately expressed regrets and asked for return of vessel and personnel on board. Meanwhile Sihanouk, speaking for domestic consumption, threatened to try the men under Cambodian law and hold them for ransom of tractors.

2. We have now received Cambodian reply rejecting our request. RKG characterizes penetration as deliberate act of provocation, connects it to other border incidents, and states men on board will be dealt with in accordance with Cambodian law. (Text repeated you septel.)2 On July 25, Sihanouk, speaking in Cambodian to National Congress, dropped mention of trying men or demanding ransom, and instead indicated they would be interned till end of hostilities and LCU confiscated. Text in FBIS 32 of July 25. Australian Emb Phnom Penh has not yet been accorded consular access to crew.

3. Further Action To Be Taken. We are preparing further evidence showing inadvertent nature of intrusion, to be conveyed to RKG through Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh. FYI. The Secretary is personally asking Hasluck to undertake mission to Phnom Penh to intercede with Sihanouk. (See septel.)3 We will keep you informed of Australian plans in this regard, but wish you to go ahead with your approach to Nong Kimny in any event. End FYI. We are also studying other means of communication with or pressure on RKG with a view to bringing about release.

4. Action: Please arrange meeting with Cambodian Ambassador Nong Kimny and express to him our urgent interest in release of crew. You should present following facts and US views. A. Incident was entirely inadvertent, with no hostile intent.

B. LCU 1577 is utility landing craft designed for handling heavy and bulky cargoes. With length 120 feet, beam 32 feet, max speed 8 knots, craft is obviously not one which we would contemplate employing for deliberate or provocative penetration of Cambodian territory. Royal Cambodian Navy possesses several LCUʼs and can confirm details of performance. Craft was armed with two .50-caliber machine guns and one M–60 7.62 mm. light machine gun, plus individual weapons of crew members and passengers (M–16ʼs, carbines, pistols, and one M–79 grenade launcher). This armament exclusively for defense against hostile fire along waterways within RVN. Cargo included 200 drums of solvent, two commercial forklift trucks, 34 drums JP–4 fuel (kerosene), and 6 containers miscellaneous supplies. As make-up of cargo suggests, craft was on routine resupply run to US installations in Mekong Delta. Route was from base at Vung Tau via Mekong River and cut-off to Bassac River, then down Bassac to Can Tho. Apparently craft missed first turning, about seven miles from border, and proceeded up river into Cambodian territory. Navigational error was same as that of Philippine tugboat Bream, which RKG has now returned, following release of Filipino crew and two US military policemen who were on board.

C. We are conducting further investigation to determine how error was made and whether any individual responsibility can be assigned. In addition, we are taking measures to avoid such incidents in future. These include but are not limited to more thorough crew indoctrination and briefing, embarcation of personnel familiar with area near border, establishment of prominent aids to navigation and control points, and provision of positive method to warn shipping of approach to Cambodian border.

D. From his service in US, Nong Kimny must understand sensitivity of US public to prolonged detention of US soldiers whose only transgression was that one of them was apparently inexperienced or inadequately trained as a navigator. As RKG doubtless aware, our regret expressed over inadvertent violation above Kurile Islands was quickly followed by Soviet release of our plane with its crew and passengers. Similarly, when Soviet vessel violated US regulations in Alaska, ship and crew were released after Soviet captain paid a modest fine.

E. The American people will be especially puzzled if severe treatment is meted out to US servicemen guilty only of inadvertence, when the public is becoming increasingly aware of the use made by VC/NVA forces of Cambodian border areas for attacks against US forces in SVN. Cambodian publications have recently referred to at least three such violations with no record of RKG detention or punishment of any VC/NVA. Our own intelligence shows rapidly expanding use of Cambodia by VC/NVA. We expect to present evidence to RKG soon, in line with our policy of providing such information as it becomes available. VC/NVA use of Cambodia is a large-scale, planned and deliberate violation of RKG neutrality, as contrasted with small-scale, inadvertent LCU intrusion. Contrast in RKG policies toward two situations is hard to understand and will raise question of what we are doing wrong that the VC/NVA are doing right.

F. We urge Nong Kimny to impress on his government nature of our position, our desire to settle matter satisfactorily with utmost urgency, and seriousness with which US would respond to continued detention of personnel on board LCU. We would welcome any suggestion he or his government may have as to how best we can achieve release of personnel in shortest possible time. We want the boat back too but return of personnel is urgent and should be addressed immediately.

G. In event Nong Kimny refers to other border incidents in which Cambodian lives were lost, you may wish to draw on following: We understand Cambodian sensitivity in such matters and are doing what we can to avert all such incidents. However, it is difficult when VC/NVA increasingly use Cambodian territory from which to attack our forces. In some cases, for instance, VC have dug in on Cambodian territory and then opened fire across frontier. This was case in incident May 4 at Bavet, which ICC has investigated, and on which our offer to make witnesses available to testify before ICC is still standing. We have presented full details this incident to RKG, and we continue use our best efforts to investigate and respond to RKG complaints on border violations. On most serious recent incident (Svey A Ngong, June 29) we have presented to RKG and ICC all facts we have been able to elicit, and again offered witnesses. On later incident (Prasat, July 10) we are urgently investigating. We wish to continue these efforts to avoid border incidents, and would welcome any constructive suggestions RKG might have in this connection, or any suggestions for improvement in investigation procedures.

5. Should Nong Kimny decline to see you, you should discuss with Ambassador Bowles his seeing Nong Kimny in your place.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret; Priority; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Bennett, cleared by Leonhart, Corcoran, Richard H. Moorsteen of U, and Murray J. Bellman, the Deputy Legal Adviser, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Canberra and Saigon.

2 Telegram 209405/UNSEC 18, July 26, 0004Z. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 209404/UNSEC 17, July 26, 0001Z. (Ibid.)

240. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 240. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 29, 1968.

SUBJECT

Problem of Release of LCU 1577 and Personnel Detained in Cambodia

While press reaction has been notably scarce in quantity and mild in tone so far on the LCU detention, we are aware that this could change at almost any moment and that continued detention of the men may rouse Congressional and public sentiment, particularly because of the apparent similarity to the Pueblo case. We are therefore proceeding as quickly and quietly as possible to obtain the release of the 11 detained Americans.

Actions Taken

Immediately following the receipt of information through COMUSMACV that the LCU 1577 had been seen by the RVN outpost to have entered Cambodian territory, we dispatched via the Australians an urgent message to the RKG regretting this inadvertent intrusion into Cambodian territory and saying that we would be grateful to the RKG for the return of the vessel and the personnel on board. We also said that we were making every effort to prevent the recurrence of such an intrusion.2 Our message has so far had no positive result. On July 22 the Cambodians rejected our explanation and indicated an intention to try the men and confiscate the vessel.3 (In a message of July 20 through the French Embassy they had officially informed us of the entry.)4 Although their propaganda has been offensive in language, it has been low keyed (delivered for the most part in the Cambodian language by Sihanouk) and the RKGʼs formal communication rejecting our explanation was correct in tone. While the Cambodians have now (July 26) granted access by the Australians to visit the detained personnel (who have been found in satisfactory condition and are being provided by the Australians with sundry supplies), we doubt that further representations in a standard framework would be effective.

We have prepared a further note to the RKG confirming the innocent mission of the LCU and, by citing operational and loading data, stressing the inadvertent nature of the intrusion and the navigational error which caused it. We have cabled an advance text to the Australian Ambassador in Phnom Penh and as soon as we have confirmation from Saigon that the GVN concurs, at least informally, we shall add a paragraph inviting FARK officers to visit Viet-Nam and inspect operational and loading data we have cited. We shall then authorize Deschamps to pass this note to the RKG.4

We have considered a number of courses of action which we might take in view of the apparent unwillingness so far of the Cambodians to release the men. The rationale of these recommendations is that we should move fast and hard diplomatically at first and that the tone of our representations should combine “politesse” and firmness. If and when Sihanouk wishes to release them he will be able to find an acceptable channel in one or the other of our recommendations, although he may of course come up with one of his own which we can accept. It is our intention to have him understand the seriousness with which we view this matter. We would hope to come out of this affair not only with the men (and the LCU) but also with Sihanouk reappraising his involvement with the VC/NVA and their flagrant (in contrast to our mistaken) violations of his neutrality.

On July 25, you sent a message to Canberra asking Mr. Hasluck to go to Phnom Penh to make clear to the RKG our concern over this incident in the light of increasing VC/NVA activities in Cambodia and our hope for a prompt and amicable solution. Hasluck replied with a counter suggestion that his Ambassador sound out “elder statesman” Penn Nouth in Phnom Penh.

We explored the possibility of the Under Secretary approaching Ambassador Nong Kimny in New Delhi on the matter, but the absence of the latter from his post has closed this channel.

We considered asking the French to think about how they might influence Sihanouk to release the men but suspended consideration for the time being. We felt that if we involved the French and subsequently found ourselves obliged to take some action they would not approve, the reaction would be adverse to our interests. We feel the possibility of French intervention should continue to be held in abeyance.

We have considered the wisdom of intercession by a prominent American public figure acceptable to Sihanouk. Mr. Macomber has discussed this matter with Senator Mansfield. Senator Brooke might be another possible candidate.

We might also consider requesting informal intervention with RKG by former Secretary Acheson who has a special position of favor in Phnom Penh due to his successful representation of Cambodian interests in the Preah Vihear temple case at the ICJ. An approach by him could be informal, as private as possible, and along the line that releasing the men immediately would be in the best interest of Cambodia, and that this could be done without prejudice to negotiations for the release of the LCU which could be pursued subsequently in a less tense atmosphere.

We might also consider allowing Sihanouk to save face by agreeing to a controlled submission of the matter to a Cambodian court.

The RKG has told us that it intends to submit the vessel and crew to “treatment provided by Cambodian law.” (RKG note, July 22, 1968.) During the Tugboat Bream episode the French lawyer for the Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh provided some information on relevant Cambodian law. He posited three conceivable charges: 1) illegal entry—maximum sentence 12 months imprisonment and/or fine of 4000 riels ($114); 2) carrying of arms—maximum punishment, one monthʼs imprisonment and/or fine of 1200 riels ($34); 3) espionage—maximum sentence, death (lesser sentences in extenuating circumstances at judgeʼs discretion). While the gamut of punishments is wide, the Cambodian prosecutor, of course, can charge or decline to charge crimes as he thinks appropriate. If the RKG wishes, as is possible that it does, to dispose of the problem of captured Americans expeditiously, yet without compromising on its own sovereignty, it might be amenable to trial of the officer-in-charge of the vessel on (say) illegal entry and to persuade the judge to set the punishment at a fine which the United States could pay on behalf of the officer. Although we would prefer that only the officer-in-charge be made to stand trial, we might consent to trial of the full complement of men if the trial were expeditious. We might also accept a prison sentence for the officer or men which would be suspended or completely off-set by a short period of detention while awaiting trial. Under the circumstances, we should consider accepting as a practical matter, RKG retention of the LCU, although this might be the subject of a later USG claim against the RKG.

In practice, the USG has paid fines on behalf of captains of American fishing boats seized on the high seas by Ecuador, which claims a territorial sea of 200 miles; and we have accepted fines paid by the GUSSR on behalf of captains of Soviet intelligence collecting trawlers which have been seized in Alaskan waters.

Contingency Actions

If we determine that we need to move into a stiffer position, it would be essential for us to have a full and frank discussion on the matter with the Australians before any action is taken. The Australians as our representatives in Cambodia are deeply involved in the whole affair, and we must guard against any move on our part which might take them unawares and put them in an impossible position.

We should avoid any public threats of stiff action against Cambodians. If we find it necessary to take such actions, we should do so without verbal threats and let the actions speak for themselves. Such actions might include: 1. Tourists. We might discourage Americans against tourist travel to Cambodia on the grounds that it is dangerous and we could neither protect them against detention nor intervene for them. We estimate if this warning were effective, it would cost the Cambodians, initially, about one-fourth their tourist trade or about $1 million annually. And other tourists might be deterred by our action. (Cambodiaʼs budget is equivalent to about $200 million per year.)

2. Mekong Traffic. Tighten supervision of river traffic by GVN agencies, with American advice and discreet supervision ostensibly to enforce GVN customs, sanitation and navigation rules and regulations but incidentally to slow down traffic to Phnom Penh. This could be done progressively or abruptly, concentrating on POL and other key cargoes in ways that would virtually suspend river traffic.

3. Naval Reciprocity. Exploit Market Time operations in the Gulf of Siam to apprehend any Cambodian naval craft suspected of violating Vietnamese territorial waters with a view of negotiating an exchange for LCU 1577.

4. Reconnaissance. Increase Dorsal Fin, Daniel Boone, and related air and ground operations.

5. Attacks on VC/NVA facilities in Cambodia.

All of these means except the first (warning to tourists) would be likely to inspire Sihanouk to characterize them as examples of a great powerʼs attempt to crush a small power, and as proof that the US is indeed Cambodiaʼs enemy as he has alleged, and is cooperating with Cambodiaʼs enemy, SVN, to strangle Cambodiaʼs economy. They are at least as likely to lead Sihanouk to punish the crew as to release them.

We therefore do not recommend serious consideration of any of these measures as yet, but see merit in some contingency planning so that we can be sure as to exactly what pressure measures could be employed, should we later decide to use them.

Recommendations: 5

1. That we ask Mr. Acheson whether, if requested, he would be willing to make an informal approach to the RKG.

2. That we sound out Deschamps on the feasibility of application of the “Russian Fishing Boat” approach.

3. That we prepare a draft instruction discouraging tourist travel to Cambodia for eventual release at an appropriate time.

4. That we request DOD to draft contingency plans for: A. Tightened supervision of Mekong traffic.

B. Exploitation of Market Time to apprehend Cambodian Naval craft with a view to negotiating an exchange for LCU 1577.

C. Increased air and ground reconnaissance operations.

D. Attacks on VC/NVA facilities in Cambodia.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret. Drafted by Trent, Corcoran, and Charles A. Schmitz of L/EA.

2 Text in telegram 204114 to Saigon, July 17. (Ibid.)

3 As reported in telegram 208274 to Saigon, July 24. (Ibid.) Regarding the Cambodian reply, see footnote 2, Document 239.

4 Text in telegram 208274 to Saigon; see footnote 3 above.

5 There is no indication on the source text whether Rusk approved or disapproved these recommendations.

241. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 241. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 29, 1968.

SUBJECT

General Cambodian Posture

Over the past six months, following the Bowles Mission, events have been working gradual changes in the attitude of the Cambodian Government on issues that affect its basic posture toward the US and therefore, by extension, the outlook for a post-war settlement in Southeast Asia. Distrust has developed over Vietnamese and Chinese involvement in a domestic insurgency which the RKG, despite rather extraordinary efforts, has not been able to bring under control.

Sihanoukʼs awareness of the Communistsʼ use of his territory and their exploitation of his people has been signaled in various ways. His own words make clear his feeling of the gravity of the situation and his assessment that internal Communist subversion, externally supported, is his number one problem. His recent special broadcast to the nation on July 8 was notably vigorous in its warning of the dangers of deceitful friendship on the part of the Chinese Communists.

The recent shift in the Cambodian cabinet with the elevation of Lon Nol to the position of First Deputy Prime Minister hints a stiffening of the Government in its anti-Left posture. It also suggests, through the departure of Son Sann, some disputes within Sihanoukʼs official family over the current state of affairs.

The Paris talks, at which the RKG, despite certain disclaimers, will most likely wish to have the ear of the Free World for Cambodian views on any general settlement of the Southeast Asian conflict, has important relevance to Cambodian developments. Sihanouk, in other words, is acting, or reacting, with a canny eye both on the war and on the peace talks. His peculiar position makes it essential that he be able to come to terms with whatever pattern develops out of the present complexities for the future of Southeast Asia and that he be able to live within it and maintain the identity of his nation. This of course helps to explain his almost paranoid and continuing insistence on the importance of otherwise rather meaningless governmental statements respecting and recognizing Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity “within its present frontiers.”

Despite a notable undercurrent of changing attitudes, Cambodian propaganda (which means Sihanoukʼs official statements) continues to be aligned against the US and our allies in Southeast Asia. In a curious contradiction, Sihanouk can revel in the luxury and perhaps temporary comfort obtained from his denunciations of the US, since he in fact is not fundamentally apprehensive of US intentions with respect to his country, while he is afraid of the Chinese and is the heir of a long tradition of Cambodian/Vietnamese hostility. His deep and abiding fear is of a Vietnamese-Thai squeeze that would in effect liquidate his kingdom.

There seems to be no doubt that Sihanouk has become increasingly concerned over the past six months at VC/NVA violation of his neutrality. While we have no official word from him as to his reaction to the information we have forwarded him in pursuance of the Bowles-Son Sann communiqué, we do know that he has in fact taken some steps against the VC on the basis of information we have furnished. For the first time of which we are aware, Cambodian publications have reported within the past month the expulsion of Viet Cong forces, by name, from Cambodia. However, the Cambodian Government continues to charge us with border violations and on occasion has called on the International Control Commission to confirm such violations, while saying nothing of VC/NVA use of their territory.

In this complex situation, we are confronted with a problem which involves on the one hand the good faith before the world of our respect for a small nationʼs territorial integrity, and on the other hand grave threats to the security of our forces in Viet-Nam.

The whole form and fabric of Southeast Asia in the post-war world is involved. Cambodia is seeking accommodation with the powers concerned, maintaining room to maneuver, and always working to pick the winner and hence guarantee its own existence.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB. Secret. Drafted by Trent and approved by Corcoran.

242. Memorandum of Meeting With President Johnson 242. Memorandum of Meeting With President Johnson1

Washington, July 30, 1968, 1 p.m.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Cambodia.]

5. Cambodia

Secretary Rusk said we are getting hints that Cambodia may free the U.S. personnel now being held captive.

Secretary Clifford displayed maps and enlarged photographs showing the North Vietnamese buildup in Cambodian sanctuaries.

The President asked Secretary Rusk to take copies of the pictures and talk to Senator Mansfield.

General Wheeler said that more detailed pictures would be available at the end of this week.2 The disposition of North Vietnamese forces in Cambodia gives them a free shot at Saigon. Attacking from the west, they are no more than 25 miles from the outskirts of Saigon.

Secretary Clifford said that if our diplomatic efforts to free American prisoners fail, we should have a plan ready to implement. Such a plan would include: a. The stopping of visits to Cambodia by U.S. tourists.3

b. Halting or restricting traffic on the Mekong going into Cambodia.

c. Using Market Time ships to seize a Cambodian ship near shore and use it for negotiating purposes.

d. Increasing aerial surveillance of Cambodian frontier areas.

e. Attacking the Cambodian frontier.

The President asked that a memorandum on Cambodia be prepared for discussion at the Friday meeting.4 He suggested that Senator Mansfield or Australian representatives show our aerial pictures of North Vietnamese use of Cambodian territory to Prince Sihanouk.5 Then, if the Cambodians did not try to prevent North Vietnamese use of their territory, we could make one final strong statement and then destroy the North Vietnamese forces now inside Cambodia.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Cambodia.]

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Bromley Smith, [Luncheon with the President, 7/30/68]. Secret. This was a regular weekly Tuesday lunch meeting with Rusk, Clifford, Wheeler, Taylor, Helms, George Christian, Bromley Smith (acting for Rostow), and Tom Johnson. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted until 2:05 p.m. (Ibid.) Tom Johnson also prepared a memorandum of this meeting. (Ibid., Tom Johnsonʼs Notes of Meetings, July 30, 1968) Additional information from Tom Johnsonʼs account is noted in footnotes below.

2 According to Tom Johnsonʼs record, Wheeler noted that “two years ago there were only 200 people there. Now there are 2,000 people there. The 9th Viet Cong Division goes back there to rehabilitate and rest. There may be prisoner of war camps there.”

3 According to Tom Johnsonʼs account, Rusk observed that U.S. tourists amounted to one-fourth of Cambodiaʼs $1 million tourist trade.

4 The President met with the same group for an “off the record” breakfast meeting on Friday, August 2, at 8:30 a.m. (Johnson Library, Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No record of the meeting or the memorandum has been found.

5 President Johnson, according to Tom Johnsonʼs account, said: “Senator Mansfield says Sihanouk is a great statesman. I would show him these maps and photos of enemy positions.” The President later remarked that he would “look with favor on showing these pictures to Sihanouk. Give them a strong statement.”

243. Letter From Senator Mike Mansfield to Secretary of State Rusk 243. Letter From Senator Mike Mansfield to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 1, 1968.

Dear Dean:

I have given further thought to our conversation this morning. It seems doubtful that a letter from me to Prince Sihanouk on the subject would be useful at this time. There may be a chance, however, that in certain circumstances, it might be constructive for me to write him in connection with the setting up of an I.C.C. border patrol.

The circumstances, as I see them, would be the following: 1. If we were to seek a satisfactory settlement of the recent naval incident. I should think that the amicable return of the ship might involve willingness to give assurances that future violations of the border by our forces, except in hot pursuit, would properly be a subject for disciplinary action as well as for apology and prompt compensation for damage. It may also involve a readiness to face up to the border question and go as far as Australia and other Western countries have gone in this connection.

2. If we were to call to Sihanoukʼs attention, through Australian or other diplomatic channels, our concern over the tangible evidence of the Viet buildup in Cambodia. We might request that the Prince ask for an I.C.C. investigation of the locations which our intelligence has pinpointed. Sihanouk has said, I believe, that he is prepared for investigations of specific allegations. If the buildup is as extensive as the intelligence suggests, I doubt that it could be hidden from an I.C.C. group.

3. If a tactful request for an investigation is refused by Sihanouk and we were prepared to bring the matter to the U.N. or, alternatively, the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union were prepared to call for a convening of the Geneva Conference of 1962. In this fashion, it ought to be possible to press for an immediate and impartial investigation.

In the above fashion, I believe we could establish a firm basis for pressing for a permanent I.C.C. patrol on the border. To call for the patrol, however, without these preliminaries, is not likely to be productive. On the contrary, the call is likely to embarrass Sihanouk and, therefore, to intensify his hostility without any benefit to us. After all, he has already had a very cold reaction from Viet sources when he cautiously let it be known after the Bowles mission that he was weighing the proposition for an I.C.C. patrol. To press again may well be seen by him as an effort to compel Cambodia to side with us.

If circumstances permit you to move along the lines of the three points listed above, there could emerge a situation which would be conducive to my making the kind of proposal which you suggested. In any event, I should be happy to hear from you further, if I can be of any assistance.

With best personal wishes, I am

Sincerely yours,

Mike Mansfield

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. No classification marking.

244. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 244. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 4, 1968.

SUBJECT

Eugene Blackʼs visit to Cambodia

The Cambodians have now informed us, through the Australians, that Prince Sihanouk said Black “would be welcome” in Cambodia between the 10th and the 14th of September. According to the Cambodian message, Black will be received as a guest of the government, will be met by the Prime Minister, and will be honored by a dinner hosted by the Acting Foreign Minister. Although the Cambodian message does not mention a meeting with Prince Sihanouk that, I believe, can be assumed.

Black will be leaving Washington at noon on Friday, September 6. He will be in Cambodia September 11 through 13.

Black will bring home to the Cambodians our grave concern over Communist military use of Cambodian territory. His instructions are now being drafted by the State Department. Marshall Wright will participate in this process and the instructions will, of course, be cleared with you prior to Blackʼs departure.

One specific point: in the scenario approved earlier by you for the Black visit, it was planned that Black would not raise the question of the 11 American prisoners held by the Cambodians. As it now stands, there is a good chance that the Cambodians will release the prisoners prior to Blackʼs arrival. However, if that does not happen, I suspect it is impractical and undesirable to have Black ignore the prisoner issue. First, the Cambodians will expect him to raise it, and could easily misinterpret his silence on the subject as an indication of high-level disinterest.

Second, should Black totally ignore this issue and that fact became public knowledge I really cannot conceive of a good public relations defense against the bitter criticism which would ensue. Finally, it would be quite like Sihanouk to plan now to release the prisoners to Black as a gesture of princely generosity. We would certainly not wish to queer any such plans by our disinterest. I do not think the prisoner issue need take much of Blackʼs time, but I do question the wisdom of his ignoring it altogether.

When Black raises the question of Communist use of Cambodian territory, Sihanouk is almost certain to counter with a request for an American guarantee of Cambodiaʼs borders. State has worked out a statement for Mr. Blackʼs contingency use with Sihanouk. The statement has the approval of our legal authorities and the Department of Defense, and should not cause much trouble with our Vietnamese and Thai allies. Black would indicate to Sihanouk our willingness to issue this statement in connection with a general improvement of US-Cambodian relations.

I think it is important that Black have with him a political advisor with broad knowledge of our Asian policies and problems. You might wish at the luncheon today to raise this point with Secretary Rusk and satisfy yourself with the adequacy of the staff being provided Black.

There will, of course, be great press interest in the Black trip. The public announcement of the visit to Cambodia will stress Mr. Blackʼs development of the Mekong Valley. However, the primary purpose of his visit will become known and it would probably be wise to background with some candor on that aspect of Blackʼs mission. We have under preparation both on-the-record and background guidance for use with the press and will submit these to you for approval before their use.

Finally, Black will be in town Friday morning prior to his departure. Now that his visit to Cambodia is a reality. I recommend you see Black again for a last-minute exchange of views and to arm his mission with a public demonstration of your personal interest.

W.W. Rostow 2

1. I will see Black on Friday morning.3

Have Secretary Rusk brief him.

2. Black should request the release of the American prisoners.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, SEA Development Program, Vol. III (Black Comm) ADB. No classification marking. Drafted by Wright.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

3 None of the following options is checked. Regarding the Presidentʼs decision to see Black, see Document 245.

245. Editorial Note 245. Editorial Note

President Johnson attended a luncheon meeting of his foreign policy advisers on September 4, 1968, in the White House. Present were Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Defense Clifford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs General Wheeler, General Taylor, Special Assistants Rostow and Christian. Discussion at the meeting was on a variety of topics, with the issue of a possible visit of Special Adviser on Asian Economic and Social Development, Eugene Black, to Cambodia interspersed throughout the conversation. After lunch, Rusk stated: “Prince Sihanouk has agreed to see Eugene Black. Does the President want to see him [Black].” Rusk later added: “The Black visit may bring about the release of our men theyʼre holding.” Still later in the meeting, President Johnson stated: “Iʼll be happy to see Gene Black. Who will you send with him?” Rusk answered: “Thomas Corcoran, the country man for Laos and Cambodia.” (Notes drafted by Christian, September 4; Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File) According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, this luncheon meeting lasted from 1:23 to 2:23 p.m. (Ibid.)

246. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 246. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

Mr. Eugene Blackʼs Mission to Cambodia

For your meeting with Mr. Black this afternoon at 5:30,2 I attach summary instructions on which I recommend your approval, and your use as a talking paper with Mr. Black. (Tab A.)

These instructions cover only the Cambodian portion of Mr. Blackʼs trip. As you know, he will also be making a major speech in Japan, and will be calling in Laos, Thailand, South Vietnam, and in Manila to touch base with the Asian Development Bank people. You may wish to discuss with him a personal message to the Japanese on the need for them to do more in Asia—a theme he will be hitting hard in his speech in any event—and you may also wish to discuss with him just how he should handle our continuing intentions toward regional assistance in Southeast Asia, together with the unfortunate failure of the Senate to act on the authorization of special funds for the ADB.

Dean Rusk

Tab A

PRINCIPAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR MR. EUGENE BLACKʼS VISIT TO CAMBODIA

September 11–14, 1968

The major reason for including Cambodia in your itinerary is to bring home to Prince Sihanouk our grave concern over VC/NVA use of his territory, including the question of a more effective International Commission for Supervision and Control. It would be unrealistic to expect a significant reorientation of Cambodian policy as a result of your visit. We should keep our expectations within the limits of Cambodian capabilities rather than anticipate any sweeping or decisive Cambodian action against the VC/NVA. Our interest will be served to the extent we can persuade Sihanouk to increase Cambodiaʼs own efforts to harass the VC/NVA and to press for a more effective ICC operation.

In stressing our deep concern over the abuse of Cambodian neutrality, you should make emphatically clear that neither the President nor the American people entertain the slightest hostility toward Cambodia, or wish for Cambodia anything but the preservation of its independence and neutrality. You should be prepared to stress that the President has exercised every restraint possible, and that the United States continues to act in accordance with the spirit and letter of the Bowles communiqué in January. Stressing that the United States has no desire to see the Viet-Nam war extended into Cambodia, you should nevertheless underline the fact that as long as the war continues there will be a danger of border incidents despite our best efforts to prevent them.

It is almost certain that the Cambodians will raise the question of an American statement expressing respect and recognition for Cambodiaʼs sovereignty within its present frontiers. Having made clear our concern with the problem of VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory, you may inform Sihanouk that the United States Government would consider making such a statement whenever this move could significantly enhance the prospects for a lasting improvement in U.S./Cambodian relations. You should explore whether in fact Sihanouk is prepared for resumption of diplomatic relations on a serious and responsible basis. And you should make clear that our willingness to make such a declaration and to resume relations would of course be greatly influenced by the Cambodian attitude on border problems and VC/NVA activities.

On the question of a declaration, you may pursue the discussion to the point of making clear the precise form of declaration we would be prepared to make, but you should avoid a final commitment unless further instructed.

Your visit should not involve a discussion of the captured LCU and its crew, an issue which it is hoped will be disposed of before your arrival in Phnom Penh.

Your own special background as the Presidentʼs Special Representative for Southeast Asian Economic Matters will signal to the Cambodians your interest in discussing the future development of the Mekong basin. You may affirm United States support for regional programs such as that of the Mekong Committee.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/Black. Secret. Drafted by William Bundy.

2 According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the President met with Black from 6:11 to 6:31 p.m. No other record of that meeting has been found. (Johnson Library)

247. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 247. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

Your meeting with Eugene Black, 5:30 p.m. Today

Attached is a memorandum from Secretary Rusk 2 which constitutes both summary instructions for Blackʼs Cambodia mission and talking points for your meeting with Black this afternoon.

I have one serious reservation to the instructions, which state (page 3) “Your visit should not involve a discussion of the captured LCU and its crew.” If the Cambodians are still holding the crew at the time of the visit, I think it will be impossible for Black to ignore that issue completely. To do so would give a false signal to Sihanouk that the issue is of no real interest to you. It would also be extremely difficult to defend publicly a complete failure to use this opportunity to obtain the release of the prisoners. Finally, there is a good chance that Sihanouk will choose to release the prisoners to Black.

I suggest, therefore, that the instructions be revised to call for Black to express your concern at the continued detention of the LCU crew and your hope that Prince Sihanouk will be able quickly to remove this prickly issue by releasing the crew. The instructions should also authorize Black to accept the prisoners from the Cambodian Government should the offer be made.

Otherwise, the instructions are probably adequate. (Black will have detailed background papers which put flesh on these rather minimal instructions.) In your conversation with Mr. Black I suggest you make the following points: —we know that Sihanouk cannot entirely stop Communist use of his territory.

—we hope, however, that he can be persuaded to increase Cambodiaʼs harassment of Communist misuse of Cambodian territory.

—we hope that Sihanouk can actively press for a more effective International Control Commission role in identifying violations of Cambodian neutrality.

—neither you nor the American people have the slightest hostility toward Cambodia and will continue to act with the greatest possible restraint.

—however, the increasing Communist use of Cambodian territory constitutes a serious problem which cannot be ignored and which endangers both the Cambodian and U.S. Governments desire that Cambodia be insulated from the Vietnam fighting.

—that is the reason why you attach great importance to the hope that Prince Sihanouk will be able to take effective steps to inhibit significant Communist military activities on Cambodian soil.

One special problem which you might wish to mention to Black is our Daniel Boone operation in Cambodia. In a diplomatic note this week3 Sihanouk equated Communist military activities in Cambodia with the occasional “special forces type” incursions by U.S. forces. He will probably make the same point to Black and I do not think you would want Black to hear of these operations first from Sihanouk. I suggest you mention them briefly and point out that their sole purpose and reason are to develop intelligence on Communist military activities in Cambodia. As to the rest of the trip, I concur in Secretary Ruskʼs suggestion that you discuss with Black an oral personal message to the Japanese on the need for them to do more in Asia. You might also mention to Black that both the Thai and the Vietnamese will be rather prickly about the Cambodian conversations but that we will provide guidance for him on this matter after we have the report of his conversations in Cambodia.

I recommend that you approve the attachment to Secretary Ruskʼs memorandum as Mr. Blackʼs instructions, with a revision to provide for Blackʼs raising the problem of the LCU prisoners and accepting their release if Sihanouk makes the offer.4

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia Development Program (Black Committee) (ADB), Vol. III. Secret.

2 See Document 246.

3 Not further identified.

4 Johnson approved and a note on the source text indicates that Rostow was notified on September 5.

248. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 248. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 16, 1968.

SUBJECT

Gene Blackʼs trip to Cambodia2

Results were nil. Sihanouk did not receive Black. Otherwise, Black received VIP treatment, met with the Prime Minister and the Acting Foreign Minister, and had a thorough review of the problems. Cambodian positions are:

VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory—The Cambodian Government does not intend to do substantially more than it is now doing on the problem.

Cambodians are more concerned over it than U.S. They do not sanction any VC/NVA presence. U.S. claims notwithstanding, there are no permanent Communist installations in Cambodia, and Communist groups which enter from time to time are pushed out quickly. Cambodians are grateful for and use the information we give them on Communist presence, but it would be an infringement of their sovereignty to report to us on results. The International Control Commission functions satisfactorily from the Cambodian point of view.

LCU 1577—This violation of Cambodian waters will be handled according to Cambodian law. Payment of an indemnity for some border incident could lead to a release of the American soldiers without loss of face by either side.

Border Declaration—Cambodians very much want it, and it could be followed immediately by restoration of diplomatic relations. Cambodians assume that our giving border declaration would solve the problem of U.S. violations of Cambodiaʼs border, for we would follow border guarantee by exercising effective control of our forces in the area. Sihanouk could not receive Black for that would be inconsistent with his policy of receiving only representatives of countries which have satisfactorily guaranteed Cambodiaʼs borders.

Black set forth our positions with equal firmness, but no apparent results.

Despite the unyielding position expressed by the Cambodians in regard to Communist use of their soil, Blackʼs trip probably served to underline the gravity with which we view this issue. However, it is not clear that they will—or can—do much about it.

State is examining a couple of new approaches to the problem of getting the eleven American soldiers released. We will come back to you on this if it appears to have any promise. A State advisor accompanying Black managed to visit the prisoners. They are in excellent shape and good spirits, are well-treated and complain only about boredom with their routine of athletics and reading.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. No classification marking.

2  Black visited Cambodia from September 11 to 14. Blackʼs account of his visit, also sent to the President by Rostow, is in telegram 12064 from Tokyo, September 16. Rostow noted in his covering memorandum that the Black mission was “frustrating,” and stated, “Clearly they [the Cambodians] will not do the job with the North Vietnamese-Viet Cong bases. Itʼs up to us.” (Ibid., Vietnam, 5E (2)b, 1/68–10/68, Cambodia)

249. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 249. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Helms to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, September 24, 1968.

Here is a memorandum plus a study on Cambodiaʼs boundary problems.2 The memorandum was written as a result of my request for information on this subject. You may be far more knowledgeable than I, but I thought you might be interested to glance over this material.

Dick

Attachment

Washington, September 24, 1968.

Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT

The Cambodian Border Problem

1. Cambodiaʼs continuing effort to secure international recognition of its frontiers is essentially an attempt to get as many major powers as possible at least morally committed to the continued existence of Cambodia as a nation. To Prince Sihanouk (and many other Cambodians) the central theme of modern Cambodian history has been that of unrelenting pressure on Cambodian territory by the neighboring Thai and Vietnamese. To virtually all Cambodians this is an emotionally charged and very real issue. Militarily weak and so far unable to secure boundary treaties or agreements with Thailand and South Vietnam, Sihanouk has come to rely on diplomacy among the major powers as the best means to safeguard Cambodian territory against the Thai and Vietnamese encroachments he believes will inevitably follow the end of the war in Vietnam, whoever wins.

2. Sihanoukʼs genuine concern for Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity is overlaid and complicated by other facets of the mercurial Princeʼs complex personality. He almost certainly believes that Ho Chi Minh is eventually going to win the Vietnam war and unify Vietnam under Hanoiʼs rule. Though Sihanouk is apparently convinced that the leaders of any unified Vietnam, once free of pressing internal concerns, will probably try to establish suzerainty over (or dismember) Cambodia, Sihanouk seems anxious to build as much good will capital as possible with Hanoi. He also has a strong personal dislike for the Saigon government which dates back to the Diem era. Sihanoukʼs sensitivity on the border question is constantly irritated by the inevitable border incidents—real or imaginary—between allied forces and Communist units using Cambodian territory for refuge, sanctuary, or staging purposes. Anxious to build his capital with Hanoi, acutely aware of Cambodiaʼs military weaknesses and personally piqued at the US and Saigon, Sihanouk turns a blind eye to the full extent of Communist use of Cambodian territory and consistently employs a double standard under which he holds the Government of Vietnam and its allies (i.e. the US) primarily responsible for any border incidents or violations which allegedly occur.

3. To a dispassionate observer (which Sihanouk is not), settlement of the existing border conflicts between Cambodia and its neighbors, South Vietnam and Thailand, would appear to be a relatively easy legal and cartographic task (though actual demarcation on the ground would be difficult so long as hostilities persist in South Vietnam). The areas in dispute are small, sparsely populated, and of little intrinsic value. The dispute with Thailand centers on the ownership of a politically sensitive temple site known as Preah Vihear, which is in Cambodian hands as a result of a 1961 World Court decision. The Thai want at least a share in its administration. Sihanoukʼs border problems with South Vietnam are more numerous and result from differing interpretations of French maps and documents demarcating the boundary.

4. In Cambodian eyes, there are at least eight areas in dispute with South Vietnam, including certain small islands in the Gulf of Siam, but Cambodia is constantly adding to the number, apparently in response to the course of military operations by allied forces. (Several of the disputed areas have been the scene of heavy fighting in recent years.) The areas in dispute include a few square miles in Cambodiaʼs northeastern salient, a few square miles west of Duc Co along Route 19, a few square miles west of the Chu Pong Mountains in the upper Ia Drang region, a 21-square-mile area southwest of Duc Lap, a small area northeast of Bu Dop, and another northwest of Loc Ninh. There is also a recent Cambodian claim to a fairly broad area along the northern frontier of South Vietnamʼs Tay Ninh Province; a sensitive region and the site of major Viet Cong bases. Farther south in the Mekong Delta, the Cambodians have a few minor claims along the courses of the Mekong and its numerous distributaries. In the Gulf of Siam, Cambodia is concerned lest it lose control of certain disputed islands which screen its ports of Kep and Ream.3

5. Even in aggregate total, Cambodiaʼs disputed border areas are of little or no intrinsic value to either party. Attempts at settlement are greatly complicated, however, by the deep-seated animosities among the nations and personalities primarily involved, which show few signs of abating in the near future. Any US move to meet Sihanoukʼs demands on the border question, therefore, would almost certainly produce unfavorable repercussions in Bangkok and Saigon.

6. Another problem for the US is Sihanoukʼs inflexibility with regard to the wording of the statements he is seeking on the border question. He demands respect for and recognition of the sovereignty of Cambodia “within the limits of its present frontiers.” He rejects as inadequate any formulation which merely recognizes the “inviolability” of Cambodiaʼs present frontiers. In essence, Sihanouk considers unacceptable any third country endorsement of Cambodiaʼs frontiers which does not at least by implication favor Cambodia. The US, United Kingdom, and Japan are the only major powers that have not already satisfied him on this score and there are signs that the Japanese are on the verge of making the kind of statement Sihanouk is seeking.

7. For Sihanouk, in short, the border issue is at least as much one of emotion as one of substance. Even if the US should make a statement conforming to Sihanoukʼs wishes—and, for that matter, even if Thailand and South Vietnam actually settled the legal and cartographic issues involved—border incidents and alleged violations would be certain to occur so long as Cambodiaʼs relations with its Thai and Vietnamese neighbors remain marked by reciprocal hostility and, particularly, so long as the war continues in South Vietnam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Secret.

2  CIA/BGI GM 68–2, Intelligence Memorandum: “Cambodiaʼs Boundary Problems,” February 27, 1968. (Ibid.)

3 Details of the border disputes and maps showing the contested areas are contained in a February 27, 1968 CIA Memorandum entitled “Cambodiaʼs Boundary Problems.” [Footnote in the source text.]

250. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 250. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, October 1, 1968.

Dear Nick:

Your letter of May 9, 1967 transmitting the Initial Report of the Joint State-Defense-CIA Study Group for Cambodia2 envisaged reconvening the Group “as necessary on an ad hoc basis whenever approval is being sought for specific actions not recommended in the Initial Report”. The Group met on an ad hoc basis several times after approval of the Initial Report to address specific proposals.

As reflected in the attached memorandum, the JCS now propose additional political and military actions designed to cope with the problem of increased use of Cambodia by VC/NVA forces as a sanctuary and source of supply. The JCS concept for pursuit of VC/NVA force into certain Communist base areas in Cambodia is the most sensitive of these proposals.

I recommend that the Joint State-Defense-CIA Study Group for Cambodia be convened to consider the JCS proposals.

I would appreciate your views.

Sincerely,

Paul H. Nitze 3

Attachment

Washington, September 30, 1968.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Nitze)4

SUBJECT

Cambodia

In a 19 September 1968 memorandum to the Secretary of Defense,5 the JCS reviewed the current threat posed by VC/NVA uses of Cambodian territory as a sanctuary and source of supply and recommended the following political and military measures to cope with this threat or to induce the Cambodian Government to take more effective counter- measures against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia: a. Controls on the Mekong and Bassac Rivers to slow vessels to and from Cambodia.

b. Ban on U.S. tourist travel to Cambodia.

c. Expedite delivery of package of evidence of VC/NVA activities in Cambodia to the Cambodian Government (Vesuvius Program).

d. Keep the Cambodian Government apprised of continuing U.S. concern about this problem.

e. Approve a concept for pursuit of VC/NVA forces into certain base areas, contingent upon launching of major offensive by the enemy followed by withdrawals of his forces into these base areas. Authority to execute pursuit operations would be held in Washington.

f. Authorize U.S. Market Time forces in the Gulf of Thailand to apprehend Cambodian naval craft which enter the territorial waters of SVN.

Because of major policy implications of the JCS proposals, I believe you should request Nick Katzenbach to reconvene the Joint State-Defense-CIA Study Group for Cambodia to address the JCS proposals. Under similar circumstances in the past, we have been successful in securing joint agreement on specific courses of U.S. action with regard to the Cambodian problem. Accordingly, I recommend you sign the attached letter to Nick Katzenbach and the attached memorandum to the Chairman, JCS.6

Paul C. Warnke 7

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1499, Cambodia 000.1, 1968 (092 Cambodia). Top Secret. Drafted by J.H. Mobley of ISA on September 26.

2 For a summary of the report of the Study Group, see Document 205.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Nitze signed the original.

4 Drafted by Mobley on September 26.

5 Attached, but not printed.

6 Both attached, but neither printed.

7 Printed from a copy that indicates that Warnke signed the original.

251. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense Clifford 251. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense Clifford 1

Washington, October 10, 1968.

Dear Clark:

Thank you for your letter transmitting a JCS memorandum on contingency measures which might exert pressure on the Cambodian Government to release LCU 1577 and its personnel.2

I fully share your view that it would be premature to resort now to military or other direct pressures, and that we are more likely to recover the men and the landing craft through diplomatic efforts supplemented by unofficial approaches. For example, our staffs are currently exploring the feasibility of a proposal by the Australian Embassy in Phnom Penh for an approach through the Cambodian Red Cross.

I am sure you share my relief at the reports from the Australians, and from a State Department officer who visited the men during Eugene Blackʼs trip to Phnom Penh, that the men are being well treated and are undergoing no serious hardships. Should their situation change, or should it appear that direct forms of pressure are likely to be successful, I shall be in touch with you about possible implementation of the JCS contingency plans.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Top Secret. Drafted by Bennett and cleared by Corcoran and Porter.

2 Both attached, neither printed. In the September 2 letter Clifford noted that the JCS had proposed in JCSM–536–68, September 6, “conceptual plans for harassment of commercial traffic to and from Cambodia on the Mekong and Bassac Rivers.” The JCS also suggested using Market Time ships to capture Cambodian naval craft that were violating South Vietnamese territorial waters in the Gulf of Siam. Clifford suggested that Eugene Blackʼs visit to Cambodia suggested to him that the 11 U.S. soldiers held captive by Cambodia were being used as pawns by Sihanouk to obtain a U.S. declaration on Cambodiaʼs frontiers. Clifford thought military moves would be counter-productive at this time.

252. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 252. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, October 15, 1968.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

Bill Bundyʼs Monday meeting with the Vietnam Group was devoted exclusively to Cambodia yesterday.2 The purpose of the meeting was to establish a factual base for any decisions which might be necessary in connection with Communist use of Cambodian territory.

It quickly became evident that there is no consensus on the extent, the significance to the Communist cause, or the physical routes used in channeling Communist supplies through Cambodia. Bill Bundy was visibly upset at the disarray, and what he viewed as a failure of the intelligence community to pursue this problem with sufficient vigor and purpose.

Bill is reconvening the intelligence working group on Cambodia for the precise purpose for coming up with a sound intelligence base against which to consider decisions on military action.

For your information, Bill Depuy described Gen. Abramsʼ point of view as follows: There has been a basic shift in the Communist logistics system from Laos to Cambodia. Because of bombings, floods, etc., only about 15 trucks a day are getting through the Laotian route. Thus there has been some withdrawal from the north and a low level of activity on the B–3 front and a shift to the internal Cambodian route for supplies.

According to Depuy, DIA has no new substantiating evidence but will target photo reconnaissance flights in an attempt to develop proof.

CIAʼs position is diametrically opposed to that of Abrams. The Agency says that the fall-off in truck movement is seasonal, and is a smaller decline than in past years. The enemy this year is moving about 2–1/2 times the tonnage moved last year. The Agency believes that it can document truck travel over the Ho Chi Minh Trail all the way to the Parrots Peak. Thus, the Laotian route is supplying all Communist forces in South Vietnam except those in the southern part of the IV Corps area, in other words, all but a negligible part of the logistics flow into South Vietnam.

The Agency was very unconvincing in arguing for its point of view. Bundy told them he could not see the basis for their view and tasked CIA to write up the evidence for its conclusion.

The kernel of the argument revolves around where the supplies for III Corps troops come from. As of now there is no answer which one can defend with confidence.

I will keep you posted as this thing develops.

Marshall

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. Top Secret.

2 Monday, October 14. No other record of the meeting has been found.

253. Information Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 253. Information Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 28, 1968, 5:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Cambodia

This morning we had an interesting—and possibly significant—development in our relations with Cambodia. A young officer of the Cambodian Foreign Ministry officially informed the Australian Embassy which represents our interests in Phnom Penh that Prince Sihanouk has appointed him as “custodian” of the Cambodian Embassy building here in Washington. The young officer gave to the Australian Embassy a note from the Cambodian Foreign Ministry requesting that the American Embassy in Tokyo issue visas for the Cambodian diplomat, his wife, and one servant.

For the several years since the break in our relations with Cambodia the protection of the official Cambodian real estate in Washington has been left to the French, who represent the Cambodians here. We are not aware of any reason why the Cambodians should become dissatisfied with this arrangement. It is possible, therefore, that Sihanouk is taking a hesitant and tentative step toward establishing communications with us.

The young officer being assigned to Washington is named Thay Sok. He has not, in the past, been known as a person of any particular influence or significance. It is worth noting, however, that he is married to a princess of the royal line and is a relative of Prince Sihanouk.

Thay Sok is expected to arrive in the United States at the end of the first week in November.

There have been no new developments on the crew of our LCU, who continue to be held prisoners by the Cambodians.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Cambodia, Miscellaneous Cables and Memos, 1/67–12/68. No classification marking. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw this memorandum.

254. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) 254. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain)1

Washington, November 7, 1968, 2223Z.

12931. Subject: Actions Against Cambodia (S).

1. (TS) Based on CINCPAC/MACV recommendations on actions in or against Cambodia, we have had some preliminary meeting with the Department of State. Those proposals having to do with reconnaissance both air and ground, are being actively addressed and some have already been approved. However, those proposals involving overt offensive action against Cambodia carry important policy implications. In order to provide a basis for judgment and recognizing some difference between the CINCPAC/MACV assessment and that of the intelligence community in Washington, a special review of the intelligence was undertaken by Mr. James Graham from the Board of National Estimates. A copy of his findings is being forwarded separately by this channel by DIA.

2. (TS) You will notice that there is general agreement on the extent of VC use of Cambodia for base areas, sanctuary, training, supply, command and control, etc. There is a difference of opinion on the extent to which arms and ammunition are imported through Cambodian ports and distributed with Cambodian complicity. The Washington intelligence community believes that the north-south route through Laos and Cambodia is still the principle and most reliable route for arms shipments. Owing to these differences, State and CIA wish to send Mr. Graham with CIA, State and DIA representatives to discuss the matter at CINCPAC and MACV. We think it would be useful to conduct such a review out there where all the intelligence is available. Proposals for the visit will be forthcoming subject to your agreement on timing and approach.

3. (TS) It seems to me that we should be careful to put this review in its proper context as it relates to the policy questions involving actions against Cambodia. Most of the proposals which have been made by CINCPAC and MACV have to do with offensive action against base areas along the border. Decisions for or against these operations do not really depend on the outcome of the review proposed because there is already general agreement on the existence and importance of those base areas.

4. (TS) The operations thus far proposed probably would not materially affect Cambodian traffic in arms, ammunition, food, clothing, medical supplies or other logistic support except at the delivery end into the base areas themselves. Therefore, the rationale for attacking the base areas is not directly dependent on the extent of Cambodian logistic support. Proposals to cut off that support would involve a range of actions well beyond any that have been proposed thus far with the exception of earlier proposals to close the port of Sihanoukville and other Gulf of Thailand ports.

5. (TS) Therefore, it seems to us that there are two kinds of offensive action against Cambodia: A. Direct attack against base areas and enemy forces located in Cambodia.

B. Political and military operations to neutralize the logistic system within Cambodia supporting those enemy forces.

6. (TS) We are drawing this distinction in order to put the Graham visit and the findings which may flow from it in their proper context. In short, most of the proposals you have made will not be affected by the findings of the Graham group. On the other hand, any proposals which may be made for action against the logistic system, particularly that part involving arms and ammunition, would greatly depend upon the findings of the Graham group. In this connection we would have to ask ourselves whether or not the enemy could continue the war if the Cambodian logistic system could be effectively neutralized. This question deserves more attention both out there and back here.

7. (U) I would appreciate your comments on this subject. Warm regards.

1 Source: Center for Military History, Abrams Papers, Messages, 1754. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Repeated to Abrams.

255. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 255. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 1

Paris, November 26, 1968, 1908Z.

24529. Dept pass for info to Bangkok, Canberra and Vientiane. Ref: Paris 24243.2 Subject: French Ambassadorʼs Conversation with Sihanouk re US-Khmer Relations.

1. During lunch with Vance, Habib, and EmbOff on November 26, Manacʼh raised with us that French Ambassador in Phnom Penh (Dauge) had meeting with Sihanouk on November 24 in which Prince reiterated what Cambodian Foreign Minister had told French Ambassador November 19 that Cambodians would release US detainees if Sihanouk received personal message addressed to him from President Johnson and asked French to convey to Washington Sihanoukʼs sincere desire to improve relations with US.

2. Reading from Ambassador Daugeʼs telegram, Manacʼh said that Sihanouk—during November 24 meeting with French Ambassador—explained Cambodian position toward US and complained that he does not understand Washingtonʼs attitude. Sihanouk said that in his recent actions he went as far as he could, “without impairing his dignity”, of showing Cambodiaʼs willingness to improve relations with the US. Sihanouk then mentioned to French Ambassador increase in border incidents which he called “deliberate” and then said he planned send message to U Thant protesting latest (November 16) incident.

3. Sihanouk then told Ambassador Dauge that he was waiting for message from President Johnson on release of US detainees including reference to US efforts to institute restraints on military operations and on its military personnel near Cambodian border. Sihanouk complained that November 8 message by Secretary Rusk 3 was not addressed to him personally but to Australian Ambassador. He said that President Johnson “takes no great risk” by writing to him directly and he told French Ambassador that he would answer Presidential message by releasing American prisoners. Sihanouk said that American detainees are burden for Cambodia and they take up space in building needed by Cambodian Navy. Sihanouk further said that he had instructed Prime Minister Penn Nouth to take line that American prisoners would be dealt with firmly but as French Ambassador aware, treating Americans in that manner would be contrary to Cambodian tradition.

4. Sihanouk then said that if President Johnson does not wish to write him directly, message from President-elect Nixon would also do. If President wants to write him, Sihanouk suggested that President may wish to use Sihanoukʼs public statements as hook on which to hang his message: In reply Sihanouk would order “forthwith” release of prisoners. Sihanouk stressed that “counter-part” he is asking for in exchange for release of American prisoners (i.e., Presidential message addressed to him personally) is “modest” indeed.

5. Sihanouk continued that release of American prisoners would free way for other questions such as recognition by US of Cambodian borders which could come later. It was at this point that Sihanouk asked French to help in convincing Washington of Sihanoukʼs sincere desire to improve Cambodiaʼs relations with US.

6. In commenting on his meeting with Prince, French Ambassador notes that Sihanouk makes some harsh statements about US to please Communist camp but on overall Ambassador Dauge impressed with pressing manner in which Sihanouk wants “to make overture to US”. Dauge thinks that Sihanoukʼs present policy is dictated partially by domestic political considerations because he hopes release of prisoners will only be first step leading to US recognition of Cambodian borders. He thinks Sihanouk needs US as counterbalance to DRV, NLF, and other Communist pressures because as Manacʼh himself put it, “France alone does not carry sufficient weight to provide that equilibrium.” Ambassador Dauge concludes his reports stressing again that important feature of any US message—and this also applies to message from Secretary if Presidential message not sent—that it be personal, addressed directly to Prince because any other kind of US message “could be considered offensive” by Sihanouk.

7. In discussing above telegram with us, Manacʼh said that French merely acting as channel of transmission. He added however that he personally thinks that at this juncture in political situation in Southeast Asia, it is in US interest to improve relations with Cambodia so that US can be instrumental in bringing about improvement in South Vietnamese-Cambodian relations especially if a solution in Vietnam requires closer ties between Laos, Cambodia and South Vietnam.4

Shriver

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, but not passed to Bangkok, Vientiane, and Canberra by the Department as requested by the Embassy.

2 In telegram 24243 from Paris, November 21, the Embassy summarized more fully the conversation between French Ambassador Dauge and Cambodian Foreign Minister Norodom Phurissia. (Ibid.)

3 Transmitted in telegram 26727 to Saigon, November 7. (Ibid.)

4 In telegram 24891 from Paris, December 5, Manacʼh told an Embassy official that French Ambassador to Cambodia Dauge had met Cambodian Foreign Minister Norodom Phurissara on November 28. The Cambodian stated “if Sihanouk received personal message from US President, US prisoners would be released within following half-hour.” (Ibid.)

256. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Nitze) 256. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Nitze)1

Washington, December 3, 1968.

CM–3802–68

SUBJECT

Daniel Boone Operations (U)

1. (U) Reference is made to: a. JCSM 689–68, dated 22 November 1968, subject: “Daniel Boone Zone Charlie (S).”2

b. JCSM 588–68, dated 4 October 1968, subject: “Daniel Boone Operations Authorities (S).”3

2. (TS) Daniel Boone operations currently constitute COMUSMACVʼs primary on-the-ground means of determining location and size of enemy organizations in sanctuary in Cambodia. As such, these operations are extremely important to the security of US/ARVN forces, particularly in prime threat areas such as northern Tay Ninh and Binh Long Provinces, and in areas in which COMUSMACV has undertaken economy of force measures such as western Kontum and Pleiku Provinces. Reference 1a was recently forwarded, recommending that a Daniel Boone Zone Charlie be designated, the effect of which would be to give COMUSMACV greater authority in the scheduling of Daniel Boone operations opposite northern Tay Ninh and Binh Long Provinces.

3. (TS) As experience has been gained in the Daniel Boone Program, COMUSMACV has been able to employ the reconnaissance teams into areas of increased risk without a corresponding increase in losses. As indicated in reference 1b, however, teams have made contact with the enemy in over 80 percent of the missions undertaken, and emergency extraction has been required in over half of the operations. Furthermore, VC/NVA forces in Cambodia are adapting their defenses to these reconnaissance operations. Thus, despite precautions taken and experience gained by Daniel Boone teams, there is a growing probability that a team may be confronted by a major enemy force without the capability to defend itself by its own means.

4. (TS) Procedures have been developed and used many times for supporting emergency extractions of Daniel Boone teams under fire by the use of helicopter gunships. It is probable, however, that situations will arise in which gunship support will be inadequate to suppress enemy pressure on reconnaissance teams sufficiently to permit successful extraction. In many locations, US artillery is in position in SVN to fire immediately on VC/NVA forces firing on reconnaissance teams in Cambodia; however, artillery units are not at present permitted to furnish such assistance. Likewise, use of tactical air could spell the difference to Daniel Boone team extractions in an emergency. The greater possibility of compromise of tactical aircraft employment in Cambodia is recognized, due to its visibility from the ground; however, its employment in an emergency in the sparsely populated northeast part of Cambodia appears feasible without undue risk of compromise.

5. (TS) Present authorities permit use of tactical air and artillery fire to strike hostile artillery firing from Cambodia on friendly forces in SVN. The use of the same measures to protect our teams in Cambodia, who are taking added risks, seems appropriate. I consider that to avoid loss of life, all available support should be provided to assist in emergency extractions of reconnaissance teams from Cambodia.

6. (TS) Accordingly, it is requested that authority be granted to employ artillery and tactical air in Zone Alpha to support emergency extractions of Daniel Boone teams from Cambodia.

Earle G. Wheeler 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5E (3), 11/68–1/69, Cambodia. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 D 1499, Cambodia 000.1, 1968 (381 Cambodia)) According to a covering memorandum from Warnke to Wheeler, December 18, the Department of State concurred in the authority requested in JCSM–689–68.

3 Not printed. (Ibid.)

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Wheeler signed the original.

257. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 257. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, December 5, 1968, 1325Z.

6734. Subj: Cambodian Ambassador Raises Reestablishment of Relations.

1. Cambodian Ambassador approached me at Cambodian Embassy dinner and said he thought it was high time U.S. and Cambodia reestablished relations. He said only obstacle was our failure to find formula for statement recognizing their frontiers. He cited number of other governments that he found way to do this. He asked whether I thought advent of new President would provide opportunity for reexamination of our policy on this issue.

2. I told him I thought new administration would naturally review all our foreign policies. However I understand problem for us was that we did not wish to take position one way or other on frontier question as to do so would cause difficulties for us with Thais with whom we had friendly relations.

3. Ambassador said that although there was some abuse of Cambodian territory by North Vietnamese this was minor in extent and against wishes of Cambodian Government which not strong enough to prevent these incidents. When I said I had observed that Cambodian Government usually made loud outcry at every alleged U.S. or South Vietnamese violation of their territory but said little about North Vietnamese violations he said any other course would be dangerous for Cambodia and that he hoped we understood this.

4. Ambassador was most cordial. He related (please protect) with obvious amusement the following incident to illustrate Prince Sihanoukʼs frankness and impetuosity. When Khrushchev was dismissed press attributed this to his ill health. The Prince immediately sent a long telegram direct to Khrushchev, expressing his high regard and wishing him a quick recovery of health and return to power. Ambassador also said he was still holding large number of presents the Prince had intended to give Soviet leaders at time of his abortive visit here. He said Soviets had repeatedly tried to rearrange visit from Prince but he would not agree.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAMB–US. Confidential; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok.

258. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 258. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, December 12, 1968.

SUBJECT

Defense Department Request for New Daniel Boone Operational Authority

Discussion:

Daniel Boone is an intelligence collection program, carried on since May 1967, in a strip 20 kilometers wide within the Cambodian border. Reconnaissance teams of two or three Americans and six to nine Vietnamese and/or Montagnards are inserted in this area by helicopter for observation of VC/NVA presence or activities. Assistant Secretary of Defense Warnke has written you (Tab A) proposing the establishment of a new Daniel Boone operational area to be known as Zone Charlie.2

This area constitutes the northern part of the existing Zone Bravo (Map, Tab B).3 You have approved extending the width of Zone Alpha to 30 kilometers. The only other difference between Zones Bravo and Alpha is that targets in the former require specific advance approval from State and Joint Chiefs of Staff. Once a target is approved, however, missions against it may be run at any time subject only to a 48-hour notice of intent to do so. The new DOD proposal would eliminate the requirement of approval, and would in effect extend Zone Alpha as far as Lo Go (subject to a numerical limitation on the number of missions in the new area).

Six of the seven missions conducted in the proposed new zone took place in the first half of October (the seventh was run in late 1967). On one of these, a gunship was shot down, crashing on the Vietnamese side of the border. All but one involved insertions by helicopter, on which there are now no limitations once a target has been approved.

Nevertheless, we agree to forego the authority to approve targets in advance, for 48 hours is normally time enough for us to raise objections to a mission.

We have also incorporated in the letter to Mr. Warnke 4 a concession on DODʼs earlier request for authority to take prisoners on Daniel Boone missions. You concurred in our earlier recommendation to refuse this authority. We have now been given further explanations, and have learned that General Wheeler has asked Secretary Clifford to approach the Secretary on this point. In view of the importance which DOD attaches to the matter, we believe this authority can be conceded. So long as prisoners are taken in a manner not likely to lead to contact with other enemy forces, their capture is consistent with the intelligence-gathering objective of the Daniel Boone program.

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached letter to Assistant Secretary Warnke (Tab C).

1 Source: Department of State, EA/VN Files: Lot 74 D 51, Cross Border. Top Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Bennett and cleared by Godley and Corcoran.

2 Dated December 4, I–36029/68, not attached. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1499, Cambodia 000.1, 1968 (381 Cambodia))

3 Not attached.

4 The letter was not attached, but a note on the source text indicates that it was sent on December 13.

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 1

Washington, December 17, 1968, 1818Z.

288251. Eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary.

1. The action reported in your 23889,2 I regret to say, cuts across the channel and the action which we have had in mind vis-à-vis Cambodia, and leaves out of account the difficult military situation which has caused us to hold up on that action. Under the circumstances, I believe it would be best if you let your initiative lie and said nothing further to Nong Kimny for the moment.

2. The background is that we have received a series of reports from the French and Australians, including a number of direct quotations of senior RKG officials—all in the direction of indicating that the LCU prisoners (and, we hope, the more recent helicopter crewman as well) would be released if we were to send a message from the President about doing our best to avoid action in Cambodia. Responsive to these reports, we have in fact been holding a draft message of the type apparently indicated.

3. However, military indicators in South Vietnam, in the last ten days, have given us grave concern. It has been clearly evident for some time that an exceptionally large number of NVA/VC forces are located in the Cambodian border areas, and the more recent evidence suggests strongly that these areas may become the principal launching bases for very sharp attacks in the area west of Saigon and conceivably into Saigon itself. If this should occur, we would plainly face the most difficult action decisions concerning Cambodia, and the coincidence of a Presidential message and subsequent essential military actions might be the reverse of helpful in terms of working toward a better relationship with Sihanouk.

4. This is the situation at the present time, of which—for obvious reasons of sensitivity—we have not believed it wise to keep you informed. We are continuing to keep the situation under the closest possible scrutiny and will now wish to consider whether something should be said quietly to Nong Kimny if and when we decide to act. However, I repeat that you should not seek further contact with Nong Kimny; if he should run into Spivack or yourself and ask, you should say simply that we are following the situation closely, that our basic policies remain unchanged, and that we hope to be able to move in a direction that will further an improvement in our relations with Cambodia. You should not mention any of the plans or considerations covered in paras 2 and 3 above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–7 CAMB. Secret; Immediate, Nodis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared with Godley and Corcoran, and approved by Rusk.

2 In telegram 23889 from New Delhi, December 18, Bowles reported that he had contacted Cambodian Ambassador to India Nong Kimny and raised the idea of Bowles mediating U.S.-Cambodian differences. If President Johnson and Sihanouk both agreed, Bowles offered to fly secretly to Phnom Penh to arrange for release of the LCU prisoners in exchange for the promise of a U.S. declaration on Cambodiaʼs borders. Bowles reported that Nong Kimny seemed interested. (Ibid.)

260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 1

Washington, December 17, 1968, 2206Z.

288487. Paris for TODEL also. Ref: Paris 25065.2 Sub: Presidential Message to Prince Sihanouk.

1. There follows text of a message from the President to Prince Norodom Sihanouk requesting the release of U.S. detainees in Cambodia. Please ask Quai to have it delivered to Sihanouk by French Charge in Phnom Penh.

2. Begin text.

Your Royal Highness,

I have long hoped that we might make some progress towards resolving the problems which have troubled United States-Cambodian relations. It was with this purpose in mind that I asked my Special Advisor on Asian Economic and Social Development, Mr. Eugene Black, to visit Cambodia during his recent Asian tour. Mr. Black has reported to me fully on his visit, and I was gratified by the frankness and cordiality of the discussions which he had with members of Your Royal Highnessʼ Government.

I should like to address Your Royal Highness on a matter which affects relations between our two countries. This matter involves the men on board the LCU 1577 which, because of an error in navigation, entered Cambodian waters on the Mekong River and was detained by the Royal Khmer Navy. It also involves the wounded helicopter crewman who is, I understand, being well cared for in Cambodian hospitals. The release of these men would be welcomed in this country and would, I believe, contribute significantly to an improvement in the atmosphere of relations between Cambodia and the United States.3

I also wish to assure Your Royal Highness of the continuing friendship of the American people for Cambodia and its people. Differences which may exist from time to time in our outlooks on the problems of Southeast Asia and the world will not, I hope, prevent the continued development and strengthening of this friendship.

Lyndon B. Johnson End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Bennett and Corcoran, cleared with Bromley Smith and Bundy, and approved by Rusk. Repeated to Bangkok, Saigon, and CINCPAC.

2 In telegram 25065 from Paris, December 9, the Embassy reported that French Ambassador to Cambodia Dauge recommended that the United States renew ties with Cambodia and suggested Sihanouk would be receptive. (Ibid., POL 17 US–CAMB)

3 At 11. a.m. Cambodia time, December 23, Sihanouk announced the release of 11 U.S. servicemen and 1 South Vietnamese detained since July 17 when their landing craft entered Cambodia waters and was captured by the Cambodian Navy. The release took place before Sihanouk received this message. Sihanouk announced that he was releasing the detainees as a Christmas gesture. Two hours later, Sihanouk received the Presidentʼs message and subsequently released a U.S. helicopter crewman shot down and captured by Cambodia forces. (Telegram 289828 to Bangkok, December 19; ibid.)

261. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 261. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, December 18, 1968, 0415Z.

180415Z. Co-relation among South Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos (U).

1. I am increasingly convinced of the fundamental importance of viewing Laos and Cambodia as integral parts of the overall problem of containing Communist aggression in Southeast Asia. Although each is related in its own way to the Vietnam war, the countries of the former French Indochina area are co-related, and need to be treated as a strategic entity. This is certainly how the enemy has always viewed the region.

2. The North Vietnamese design for eventual domination of the Indochina area has been set back by our actions. But the design remains. Our enemy essentially is the old Indochinese Communist Party which is Asian and international—not single-state nationalist—in character. North Vietnamʼs leaders are nationalistic Communists seeking to extend control over all Vietnam. They are also Asian Communists with an ideological stake in Pekingʼs political expansionism. North Vietnam militarily, politically, economically and socially has overshadowed the other Indochinese countries, and is a nationalistic model. Hanoiʼs evident ultimate aim is to bring about and to dominate a viable Indochinese socialist system on its own terms, a sphere of Vietnamese Communist control existing in the shadow of, but relatively independent of, militant Chinese communism. A Communist takeover in South Vietnam, the “test-case”, is a vital step.

3. For Hanoi, the main strategic value of Laos has been as a corridor area. However, the latest enemy offensive actions at Ban Tha Teng and pressures at Saravane and Attopeu highlight the North Vietnamese design on all of Indochina, along with Chinese Communist intentions regarding Thailand. The enemyʼs new aggressiveness in southern Laos further emphasizes that Laos represents two geographic fingers, one reaching south to Cambodia flanking northern South Vietnam, and the other pressing against northern Thailand. Since 1965, the enemy has significantly improved the road network through the Lao Panhandle to meet the mounting logistic requirements of forces in SVN. ChiCom road construction in the northwestern area is continuing, tying together the enemy logistic system in this region. As allied air efforts increase the pressure on the enemyʼs LOC in the Lao Panhandle, more reliance has been placed on Cambodia for transit and storage of supplies in addition to its troop sanctuary utility.

4. The problem of VC/NVA use of Cambodia as a virtual COMZ between Laos and SVN is of constant concern. Sihanouk has been of more value to the Communists as a “neutralist” than as a declared ally; the Communists have been getting all the support they can use plus the bonuses of sanctuary and a secure, natural extension of the Lao LOC. At various times, Sihanouk has both admitted and denied that Cambodia is a VC/NVA sanctuary. He has never admitted, or perhaps has failed to recognize, Cambodiaʼs ultimate role in the Communist design for Indochinese hegemony. Sihanoukʼs tactics and postures swing widely from left to right, as he strives to prevent the war from hurting Cambodia, and to ensure Cambodiaʼs existence as a neutralist nationalist state whatever the future political organization of Southeast Asia.

5. Since the beginning of the insurgency in SVN, the enemy has used the Lao corridor, and subsequently Cambodia, for the movement and storage of supplies, and for force movement and buildup. The Communists have never regarded borders in the area as militarily restrictive. They have crossed them at will in covert movements to and from the battlefield. The highest enemy military and political authority in SVN, COSVN, was located by design in Tay Ninh Province, close to the Cambodian border, permitting quick withdrawals to sanctuary. The B–3 front and elements in the Ashau Valley are similar cases. Enemy forces in their offensive operations usually plan for withdrawal into Laos and Cambodia. Such movements often make the difference between a heavy loss to or the salvation of the enemy force. There are numerous confirmed intelligence reports that main force units were staged from Cambodia for the attacks against Saigon during the 1968 Tet offensive. In recent weeks, large formations of enemy forces have withdrawn from SVN into Cambodia and Laos, to await further developments, replenish their losses and prepare for further action when necessary.

6. Actions to close off this Cambodian supply source, if successful, would bring about increasing and possibly unbearable pressures on the enemyʼs existing Lao LOC and in fact his entire logistic support system. The “Geneva Line” de facto boundary in Laos probably would be violated to a larger extent than it is now by the North Vietnamese in an attempt to provide alternate infiltration routes. Offensive operations by free world military forces on a hot pursuit basis against enemy border-area strongholds which violated Cambodiaʼs border could be executed to cause some adverse international repercussions. But in light of the present favorable political/military situation obtaining in SVN, and if such operations were executed in pursuit, such repercussions might in fact be minimal. There could be some deterioration of the U.S.-Lao and U.S.-Thai relations and loss of covert operational arrangements, if the Pathet Lao/NVN breached the so-called “Geneva Line” thus causing apprehension in Vietnam and Bangkok. Increased Chinese and Soviet political pressures upon the RLG could be expected also. NVA military reaction in the form of “safety- valve” diversionary efforts in Laos would most probably occur. In Cambodia itself, Sihanouk could be expected to fulminate oratorically. But it is questionable he would assess the situation as a widening of the war to Cambodian territory to an extent that would jeopardize his own fundamental policy objectives. There are indications that he might in fact be relieved to see the NVA/VC ejected from his territory and a strong U.S. presence remain in SEA.

7. In sum, events in any of the Indochina countries have an impact or bearing on what transpires in any of the others. All actions, be they military or political, toward resolution of the Vietnam conflict have regional implications. In extension of the single entity concept, and to enhance our current military successes in South Vietnam—I believe we should apply maximum military pressure against the enemy wherever and whenever tactically feasible, including Cambodian border areas, with a view towards causing the greatest impact possible on the Communist overall strategic plans for the Indo-Chinese area. This of course is subject to political considerations.

8. Very respectfully and warm regards.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 (D) 1, Allies Troop Commitments, 3/67–1/69. Top Secret; Eyes Only. On December 19, Wheeler repeated this telegram to Rostow, Rusk, and Helms.

262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 262. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 1

Washington, December 21, 1968, 0135Z.

290922. Ref: State 288754.2 Joint State/Defense message—Operations in SVN Near Cambodian Border.

1. Reftel indicated need to avoid incidents which might compromise Presidential message to Prince Sihanouk and possible release of Americans detained in Cambodia.

2. Message has now been delivered. All detainees have been released and all but one have left Cambodia. One detainee remains hospitalized in Phnom Penh and cannot be moved for about three weeks.

3. In view this successful outcome, restrictions on operations imposed by reftel are lifted.

4. We have told Sihanouk both publicly and privately that release of detainees will contribute to improvement in atmosphere of U.S.-Cambodian relations. We hope now to be able to respond to Sihanoukʼs signals that he wants such improvement in ways which will eventually allow some progress on important issues such as action to discourage VC/NVA use of Cambodian territory. Actions along border which risk inflicting casualties among Cambodians will jeopardize any such progress.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–4 CAMB. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Bennett; cleared by Corcoran, Flowerree, Rear Admiral Shepard of OASD/ISA, and B.G. Glick of the Joint Staff/J–3; and approved by Godley. Also sent to JCS and repeated to Bangkok, CINCPAC, and COMUSMACV.

2 Dated December 18. (Ibid.)

263. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 263. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (McCain) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, December 29, 1968, 0649Z.

MAC 17667. Effects of Neutralization of Cambodia (S). A. JCS 12931/072223Z Nov 68 (EO).2

1. In reference (A) you posed the very pertinent question of whether the enemy could continue the war if the Cambodian logistic system could be effectively neutralized. Our reply has been withheld until the Graham group completed its trip and exchanged information with my people and those at MACV.

2. If the Cambodian logistic system could be effectively neutralized, it would be extremely difficult for the enemy to compensate for the loss of this source of materiel. Thus, it is unlikely he would be able to conduct and sustain major combat operations in the southern part of the country. I do not believe he could continue the war in III and IV CTZ at a level of intensity higher than sporadic mainforce attacks and guerrilla operations if the system were neutralized.

3. It is estimated that about 60 percent of the enemyʼs external logistic requirements in SVN transit Cambodia. Of the approximate 105 STPD total external requirements, about 65 STPD are supplied from Cambodia. Food constitutes almost 60 STPD and is produced in Cambodia. It is doubtful if the enemyʼs alternate LOCs—overland via Laos and SVN or by SEA infiltration—could make up this loss in view of our current air interdiction program in Laos and present Market Time operations. Our records indicate that since the first of the year enemy truck traffic in Laos has provided only minimal quantities of supplies as far south as the tri-border area.

4. The enemy has planned to store in various base and other storage areas in Cambodia as much as six monthsʼ reserve, or about 7,000 tons of various classes of supplies. If he were denied these secure storage areas, he would be forced to attempt to cache his materiel requirements in SVN and Laos. They would then be susceptible to loss by destruction or capture.

5. Since last year Cambodia has been playing an ever increasing role in the enemy logistic system for support of its forces in SVN. A considerable expansion of storage and support facilities has been noted particularly in the Nam Lyr and “Parrot Beak” area. In addition, new road construction activity has been detected in areas of probable enemy control including numerous new motorable border crossings into SVN. I believe that the enemy was forced to place greater reliance on Cambodia because of our interdiction efforts which prevented the movement of sufficient quantities of materiel to the tri-border area. Denial of the Cambodian logistic base would have significant adverse effects on his military capability in the southern part of SVN.

6. Very respectfully and warm regards.

1 Source: Center for Military History, Abrams Papers, Messages, 2104. Top Secret. Repeated to Abrams, CINCPACFLT Admiral Hyland, CINCPACAF General Nazzaro, and Lieutenant General Hutchin of CINCPAC Admin.

2  Document 254.

ThailandThailand

Contents

February 1964–October 1966: Consideration of Reintroduction of U.S. Troops Into Thailand; U.S.-Thai Bilateral Military Planning; Concern Over the Insurgency in the Northeast; Deliberations Over the Level of Military AssistanceFebruary 1964–October 1966: Consideration of Reintroduction of U.S. Troops Into Thailand; U.S.-Thai Bilateral Military Planning; Concern Over the Insurgency in the Northeast; Deliberations Over the Level of Military Assistance

264. Editorial Note

265. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64. Secret.

266. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin)

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 THAI. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Pickering on February 28.

267. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Bangkok, March 19, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 THAI. Secret; Official-Informal.

268. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 4, 1964, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Vientiane and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

269. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff

Washington, May 16, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 320.2 Thailand. Top Secret. Drafted by P.R. Knaur of DOD/ISA. Copies sent to Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, and William Bundy.

270. Paper Prepared by Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 23, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Special Papers, April/June 1964. Secret. Bundy prepared this paper for an Executive Committee meeting of the National Security Council to be held on May 24. For a record of the discussion at the EXCOM meeting, during which the issue of troops to Thailand was not raised, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Document 172.

271. Memorandum From the Deputy Director, Far East Region (Loftus) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaugton)

Washington, May 30, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306, Thailand 000.1—091.3. Secret.

272. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State

Bangkok, May 31, 1964, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to Vientiane, Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, London, Paris, and New Delhi. Passed to the White House. Rusk was in Bangkok for less than a day on May 30 en route from New Delhi and Saigon to the Honolulu Conference.

273. Memorandum for the Record

Honolulu, June 1, 1964.

Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9510 (1 June 64). Top Secret. The meeting in Honolulu, June 1–2, was primarily to discuss Vietnam and was attended by 55 people including the top civilian and military advisers. This is a record of the Opening Plenary Session of the Honolulu meetings. Certain portions of the plenary session on Vietnam are printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Document 187.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, June 10, 1964, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret; Exdis.

275. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)

Washington, June 17, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos A, 6/14–8/14. Top Secret. Drafted by Colonel H.H. Reichner of JCS (J–5) and released by D.C. Flickinger, Deputy Director, Implementation Division, JCS.

276. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 18, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Thailand 000.1—(092 Thailand), 1964. Top Secret.

277. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn

Washington, June 18, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret. This letter was transmitted to Bangkok in telegram 2315, June 19, and was drafted by Pickering, cleared by Trueheart, William Bundy, McGeorge Bundy, and Rusk. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US)

278. Memorandum From Director of the Joint Staff (Burchinal) to the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (LeMay)

Washington, June 22, 1964.

Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Files, 9155.2 (8 May 1964) Top Secret. Prepared by Captain H.S. Jackson, USN, Pacific Division, Joint Staff.

279. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 24, 1964, 6:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Pickering. The meeting took place at the White House. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, July 24, this meeting began at 6:25 and lasted until 6:40. (Ibid.) In a July 24 briefing memorandum to the President Thomson and Komer informed Johnson that his meeting with Prapass (Praphat) “is basically to butter up Thailandʼs probable next Prime Minister.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64) Rusk and Harriman also sent Johnson a briefing memorandum, July 23. (Ibid.)

280. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, July 29, 1964, 2116Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos A, 6/64–8/64. Top Secret. Drafted by Colonel H.H. Reichner of J–5 and released by Major General P.S. Emrick, Director for Plans and Policy.

281. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it.

282. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green)

Washington, August 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. Green wrote “Helpful, Thanks, MG” on the source text.

283. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 8, 1964, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate, Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, Saigon for Westmoreland, and Vientiane. Pierce Arrow was a series indicator relating to the North Vietnamese attack/attacks on the U.S. Destroyer Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin and the U.S. response to it. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA.

284. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 23, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Thailand 381. Secret.

285. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, December 11, 1964, 12:13–12:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. II, Memos, 8/64–3/65. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by William Bundy. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs Daily Dairy. (Ibid.) The meeting was held at the White House. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was approved by the White House on December 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Komer and McGeorge Bundy sent the President a briefing memorandum for this visit in which they stated that “the main thing is to add your strong assurance to him of our determination to check the spread of communism in Southeast Asia and to stand firmly behind our commitment to Thailand.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. II, Memos, 8/64–3/65) Rusk sent the President a December 9 briefing memorandum that also made this point. (Ibid.)

286. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, January 29, 1965, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Special Group (Counter Insurgency) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Minutes of Meetings, Jan.–Dec. 1965. Secret. Drafted on February 2.

287. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 23, 1965, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–3 US–THAI. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to the White House, DOD, JCS, and CINCPAC.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 31, 1965, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

289. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 15, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Under Secretary of Defense Vance saw it

290. Memorandum From the Special Assistant (Moore) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 23, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. No classification marking.

291. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, April 24, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Misc. Chron. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Pickering and Moore. A note on the source text indicates that the original was hand delivered to McNaughton.

292. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, 10th SEATO Meeting, CF 2498. Top Secret.

293. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 18, 1965, 11:30–12:15 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Thailand. Secret. Drafted by Drachnik and approved by McNaughton on May 24. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office at the Pentagon.

294. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, May 18, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Confidential.

295. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, May 25, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

296. Letter From the Assistance Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 4, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Secret.

297. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, June 29, 1965, 3:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret; Priority; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Pickering, cleared by Dexter, and approved by Bundy.

298. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 5, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. III, Memos, 4/65–12/65. Secret. Also sent to Rusk and McNamara.

299. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 1, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. The date is handwritten on the source text.

300. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, August 2, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 1266, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Secret.

301. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 6, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Miscellaneous Chron. Secret.

302. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, August 9, 1965, 3:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Solbert, cleared with McNaughton and Trueheart, and approved by Berger.

303. Special Memorandum Prepared by the Board of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, September 10, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. III, Memos, 4/65–12/65. Secret.

304. Memorandum From Richard K. Stuart of the Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes)

Washington, September 10, 1965.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, 1965. Secret. Also sent to Deputy Director of INR Denney and Deputy Director for Research Evans. Sent through Albert E. Carter of INR/DDC.

305. Memorandum Prepared for the 303 Committee

Washington, September 28, 1965.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, 303 Committee, 10/7/65. Secret; Eyes Alone. For background information on the role of the 303 Committee and its predecessors in approving U.S. covert actions, see U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs, pp. XXXV–XLI.

306. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, October 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, 303 Committee, 10/14/65. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Peter Jessup.

307. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Helms) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 14, 1966.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/Executive Registry Files: Job 80–BO1676R, Box 4, Defense, Jan.–Dec., 1966. Secret.

308. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, February 15, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. There was no time of dispatch on the source copy, which was received in the Department of State at 4:39 p.m. on February 14. The DTG used here is from telegram 1618 from Karachi, Document 309. Vice President Humphrey was in Thailand February 12–15—with a brief trip to Vientiane, Laos, on February 14. Humphrey was on a trip of East and South Asia and he visited in addition to Thailand and Laos, South Vietnam, Pakistan, India, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, and South Korea. Memoranda of Humphreyʼs conversations with Foreign Minister Thanat en route between Udorn and Bangkok on February 13, and with Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn at 7 p.m. on Sunday, February 12, prepared in Bangkok by Deputy Chief of Mission James M. Wilson, Jr., are ibid., POL THAI–US.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, February 16, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Exdis. There was no time of transmission on the source text, which was received in the Department of State at 3:44 a.m. on February 16. A memorandum of this conversation between Humphrey and the King, 3 p.m., February 12, prepared by Deputy Chief of Mission Wilson in Bangkok, is ibid., POL THAI–US.

310. Report From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Group (Counter Insurgency)

Washington, February 28, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Top Secret. Komer sent this report to Harriman, Vance, Bell, Wheeler, Raborn, and Leonard Marks of the Special Group, CI. In an attached covering note, Komer noted that McGeorge Bundy sent Cooper and him to Bangkok “to have a close look.” Komer stated that Cooper was “an old hand at this game and his report is first class.”

311. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Raborn to the Executive Chairman of the Senior Interdepartmental Group (Ball)

Washington, March 11, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Memos & Misc. [IV]. Confidential. The Senior Review Group (SIG) was created in early March 1966 and chaired by Under Secretary of State Ball. Under the SIG were Interdepartmental Regional Groups chaired by the appropriate Assistant Secretary of State. The idea was to return to the Department of State primary responsibility for foreign policy and the supervision of interdepartmental activities abroad. Copies also sent to the other members of the SIG.

312. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)

Bangkok, May 7, 1966, 1230Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. [text not declassified]

313. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 16, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret;Nodis. Drafted by Trueheart on May 16. The memorandum is hand dated May 16.

314. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI. Secret. No drafting officer is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on July 19. Rusk was in Canberra, Australia, for meetings of SEATO and ANZUS. The meeting was held at the U.S. Ambassadorʼs residence in Canberra. This memorandum is part VII of VII that comprised the Rusk-Thanat conversation. Part V is printed as Document 315. A complete series of Ruskʼs memoranda of conversation at Canberra, including the other parts of this conversation with Thanat, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 47 and 57.

315. Memorandum of Conversation

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret. No drafting officer is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on July 19. This memorandum is Part V of VII. For further information on these memoranda, see footnote 1, Document 314.

316. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 1, 1966.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 52–66. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A covering note on the source text indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, and the NSA prepared this estimate. It was approved on July 1 by all the members of the USIB except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map of Thailand indicating areas of “Communist Activities and Major U.S. Military Bases” are not printed. In a June 29 memorandum to Hughes, Allen S. Whiting of INR/RFE stated that CIA/ONE initiated this estimate primarily “to put the intelligence communityʼs seal of approval on conclusions that have already become the basis for policy decisions.” Whiting described those agreed conclusions as, “that there is an insurgent threat in Thailand, that it is likely to expand somewhat in the next year or so but not to the point of menacing government stability or control, but that, notwithstanding its present and potential limits, insurgency will be quite an expensive nuisance.” Whiting stated that the DIA was most worried about Thailand becoming “another Vietnam,” but it backed down when challenged by the rest of the intelligence community. (Ibid.)

317. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, July 7, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; No Distribution Outside Department. No time of transmission appears on the source text, which was received at the Department of State at 9:06 a.m. on July 7.

318. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, July 21, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

319. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, August 6, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret. An attached covering memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Rusk, indicated that Johnson drafted this letter after discussion with Rusk. Johnson stated: “I deliberately avoided tying you to any figure but I believe $60 million would be satisfactory.”

320. Report by the Chief of the Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby)

Washington, August 16, 1966.

Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, Far East General. Secret.

321. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 11, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Country File, Thailand, Vol. IV, Memos, 1/66–10/66. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A note on the source text reads: “Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates.”

322. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 17, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Secret; Exdis. Ruskʼs initials are on the source text.

323. Memorandum of Conversation

New York, September 22, 1966, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Nodis. No drafter is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on November 10.

324. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin)

Washington, September 23, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text indicates that the original was pouched to Bangkok.

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, September 27, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

326. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, October 6, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. IV, Memos, 1/66–10/66. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, October 10, 1966, 8:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Pickering and approved by Bundy. Bundy prepared a briefing memorandum for Rusk for this meeting with Pote Sarasin, October 10. (Ibid., POL THAI–US)

328. Intelligence Memorandum

Washington, October 12, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, Memos 10/66–2/67. Secret. A note at the bottom of the first page reads: “This is one of a series of memoranda produced by the CIA on those countries to be visited by President Johnson. It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates and the Office of Research and Reports.”

329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, October 13, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret; Exdis.

330. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to William Jorden of the National Security Council Staff

Bangkok, October 14, 1966, 1303Z.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, Cables, 10/66–2/67. Secret. [text not declassified]

331. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, October 15, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret.

332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 17, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Thailand 092, 1966. Top Secret.

333. Memorandum of Conversation

Manila, October 23, 1966, 8:15–8:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, 7-Nation, POTUS, II, A. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting began at 8:12 and Johnsonʼs next meeting with Vietnamese leaders was at 9:05 p.m. (Ibid.) President Johnson left Washington on October 17 to visit six countries in East Asia and the Pacific and to attend the Conference in Manila on Vietnam October 24–25. Johnson stopped at Honolulu, Hawaii, October 17–19; visited New Zealand October 19–20; Australia October 20–23; arrived in Manila on October 23 and remained in the Philippines until October 27 when he traveled to Thailand where he stayed until October 30. The President then traveled to Malaysia, October 30–31, South Korea, October 31–November 2, returning to Washington via Alaska on November 2.

334. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State

Manila, October 26, 1966, 0440Z.

Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 96. Secret; Exdis. Rusk was with the President at the Manila Conference to discuss Vietnam. Passed to the White House.

335. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, October 29, 1966, noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Asian Trip, Copies of Memos. No classification marking. The source text states that this was a partial draft prepared on November 2. No drafting information appears on the source text. Johnson traveled to Thailand on October 27, after the Manila conference, and stayed in Bang Saen and then Bangkok October 28–30. This meeting lasted until 12:58 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

264. Editorial Note 264. Editorial Note

On February 15, 1964, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Roger Hilsman began a campaign to win support for sending U.S. Marine forces to Thailand. Hilsman suggested such a move as a signal to North Vietnam and China of U.S. willingness to defend its positions in Southeast Asia in light of Pathet Lao/North Vietnamese advances in Laos and the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam. Secretary of State Dean Rusk approved interagency discussion of possible courses of action. See memorandum from Hilsman to Rusk, February 15, printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXVIII, Document 3. For accounts of the interagency discussion, in which Department of Defense officials stated that “there was no credibility left in the idea of deploying military forces to Thailand,” see memorandum for the record, February 24, and memorandum from Hilsman to Rusk, February 25, ibid., Documents 4 and 6. Attached to Hilsmanʼs February 25 memorandum is a draft memorandum to the President, which recommended deferring for further deliberation the idea of sending U.S. forces to Thailand except for 6 U.S. F–100 jets, their pilots, and crews. On February 26 Johnson administration officials met without the President to discuss Southeast Asia and Laos. The general consensus, according to Hilsman, was that although U.S. military posture in Thailand needed to be strengthened, the situation in Laos did not make the decision one of urgency. See editorial note, ibid., Document 8. On February 28 Hilsman suggested to Rusk that recent Pathet Lao-North Vietnamese military successes in Laos made the sending of U.S. forces to Laos a matter of urgency. Hilsman recommended that a full battle group need not be sent, a force half that size would be adequate. See memorandum from Hilsman to Rusk, February 28, ibid., Document 9.

265. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 265. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 2, 1964.

The attached telegram2 discloses part of the difficulty with the deployment of troops to Thailand. The difficulties of the JCS are exactly the same as those they had two years ago when we put the Marines in Thailand. As a general principle, they do not favor the deployment of troops anywhere in Asia unless they are assured that it is part of a larger plan to win a war. In short, it is not the political objectives of the move that they question, but the military usefulness. There is an underlying fear that they may be asked to move across the Mekong with insufficient force in the event that things hot up. I will try to talk to Bill Bundy further before he leaves.

MF

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64. Secret.

2 Attached was JCS telegram 5107 to CINCPAC, February 29, in which the Joint Chiefs instructed CINCPAC to prepare recommendations on sending troops to Thailand. The JCS noted that they had recommended “against introduction of ground troops at this time without specific military or political objectives to be served,” but they stated that the issue was being discussed at the highest level and the U.S. military might be directed to act on very short notice.

266. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) 266. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin)1

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Dear Graham:

As you can readily imagine, the coup rumors emanating from Thailand recently have us all feeling a bit uneasy. Given the situation in the rest of Southeast Asia, a coup dʼetat in Thailand at this time “is all we need”. Quite seriously, we are concerned about the impact on American public opinion of such an event, which would undermine the present faith in Thailand as the only stable country in the area, thus adding to the growing feeling of pessimism about the future of Southeast Asia and our ability to influence favorably the course of events there. Thai stock is exceptionally high here at present as a result of their role in the Malaysian dispute, the relative restraint they have shown in the Cambodian dispute, and the smooth transfer of power to Thanom and Thanomʼs good beginning.

I know that the Mission is doing everything it can to keep us informed of the situation and to counsel moderation on the various key figures at every appropriate opportunity. I hope that the JUSMAG officers in particular are providing all possible information on the attitudes and activities of key individuals in the military services. The Department of Defense through the Defense Intelligence Agency has levied on the Attaches a requirement for continuous and thorough reporting on the coup situation. Although their reports on this subject have been frequent, it was considered desirable that this requirement be levied formally because making it formal enables the Attaches to request JUSMAG assistance in accordance with JCS memorandum 947–592 (subject to the primary mission of JUSMAG). This will enable the Attaches to draw on the excellent existing contacts that the JUSMAG officers have with their counterparts in the Thai Military Services. Naturally this should be done in close cooperation [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] most importantly of all, under your guidance.

Do you have any suggestions as to things which we might appropriately do to introduce greater stability into the situation? We are restrained from making proposals along this line for obvious reasons. We are most reluctant to see the United States become identified with any faction in Thailand, much preferring the present happy state in which all serious contenders for power are quite friendly to us. Secondly, we are not at all confident that we could exercise effective influence on the situation. This latter feeling is strengthened by persistent doubts as to Thanomʼs ability to maintain himself atop this heap regardless of anything we might do. If he lacks the acumen necessary to political survival in Thailand, we most certainly do not wish to put our prestige behind an effort to maintain him in office. On the other hand, if he has it, presumably our intervention is not required.

I know you will give us any suggestions you may have. Meanwhile, we will watch for every opportunity to express support for the Government of Thailand.

Sincerely yours,

Roger Hilsman 3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 THAI. Secret; Official-Informal. Drafted by Pickering on February 28.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

267. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 267. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Bangkok, March 19, 1964.

Dear Bill:

I received Roger Hilsmanʼs letter of March 2 too late to reply to before he left the Department.2 In that letter he voiced concern over the possibility that there might take place in Thailand a coup dʼetat, and over the impact which such an action would have on American public opinion.

Our analysis of coup possibilities is so well on the record that there is no need to analyze it here. I would only say in summary that shifting allegiances may, of course, trigger a coup at any time. But as we see the situation now, there appears to be none in the offing.

It is a very delicate matter for us, as Roger recognizes in his third paragraph. From the moment it became apparent that it was unlikely Sarit would survive, we took every opportunity to indirectly indicate our desire for a quiet and orderly transition. In the three-week interval between the death of President Kennedy and Sarit, we quietly drove home the lesson of our own smooth transition and our expectation that theirs would be equally so. All of this was done without stress and always with the concern that it not minimize our influence with any potential successor group. I think we have evidence that the message was clearly understood.

Now in regard to Rogerʼs second paragraph, you are far more familiar than am I with the jurisdictional cross-currents within DOD. In addition, certain inter-departmental differences are inevitable. I am sure that in the discharge of your current responsibilities you will exert effort to keep these arguments from being exported. For example, this Washington action, putting great pressure on the Attaches and JUSMAG not to be scooped, had the potential of encouraging what we wished to avoid. Going around every hour on the hour asking “Whatʼs new on the coup” inevitably conveyed the impression that we expected one and might welcome one. It certainly conveyed no impression of confidence on our part in the stability of the Thanom regime.

I had instituted a rather tight coordinating control so that we might present a balanced and accurate evaluation of the endemic rumors. It is still in effect.

In summary, I completely and totally reject the idea that I needed any Washington action to permit two elements of my mission to work together. This was a matter wholly political in context and one of extreme delicacy and sensitivity. As long as I hold this position, I intend to continue to discharge my responsibilities as the Presidentʼs representative in Thailand. As such, the Attaches, the JUSMAG and CAS all belong to me and if a particular emphasis is desired, a brief message from you to me is all that is needed to achieve it.

It was good seeing you here. All the best,

Sincerely,

Graham

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 26 THAI. Secret; Official-Informal.

2  Roger Hilsman resigned as Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs on March 15. William P. Bundy was appointed to replace him on March 16. For Hilsmanʼs March 2 letter, see Document 266.

268. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 268. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, May 4, 1964, 2 p.m.

1864. Deptel 1947.2

1. In intermittent dialogue with Thai over past eight months dealing with recurrent crises in Laos, Thai leaders have consistently expressed strong reservations on value redeploying US troops to Thailand merely as isolated deterrent measure. (Embʼs A–285, Sep 25, 1963 and Embtel 1366.)3 In March Dawee explicitly turned down proposal increase F–100 unit as lacking any practical effect (Embtel 1462).4 Moreover when on that occasion I sought to draw Dawee out on general subject of troop deployment, he reiterated attitude displayed earlier by Sarit to Dep Under Secretary Johnson, namely objection to deployment in absence other firm measures against Communists.

2. I have no reason to believe Thai have changed their minds. They do not consider deployment US combat troops to Thailand per se represents effective deterrent to Pathet Lao/Viet Minh nibbling tactics Laos. They harbor deep suspicion that in absence such clear effect US either could be using Thailand for strategic purposes to which Thai not privy or, even worse, that we have not made up our minds on degree of involvement required and that this is merely stop-gap thrashing around until we have reached decision.

3. This leads to belief Thai remain skeptical over significance of troop deployment as committing US. They are impressed by fact that in providing facilities for such deployment Thailand equally committed and more permanently. In end analysis US could always revoke its commitment by pulling out, whereas Thailand would be left in place holding the bag with much less freedom to shift gears.

4. On other hand, I am convinced Thai ready and willing cooperate fully with us in measures which they believe have firm purpose, and which would in fact [stand] good chance of stopping Communist advance in Southeast Asia. From comments made to me over past two months by Thai leaders including Dawee and Thanat, it clear Thai prepared welcome, and possibly even participate in, retaliatory actions against Communists in North Vietnam and Communist-held parts of Laos. Moreover, Thai clearly recognize that decision take such step requires concomitant decision deal with any likely Communist reaction. In such event, I believe Thai would welcome, if not urge, combat deployment to Thailand as deterrent to massive Communist reaction and as signal we mean business or for purpose of supporting direct intervention in Laos. Thai would however insist on clarity of our objectives, and would be opposed if it appeared that only effect of deployment would be to restrict neutralist/right wing reaction to PL/VM violations of Geneva Agreement.

5. Troop deployment here would have ready Thai concurrence only if RTG convinced it part of larger effective operation to stop Communists. Deep-seated Thai doubt US really prepared grasp nettle and undertake such operation probably strengthened by absence so far for direct retaliation for continuing flagrant violations Geneva Agreement by PL/VM, for growing loss US lives South Vietnam and for such specific attacks on US as blasting of card in Saigon.

6. In summary, my estimate is that Thai reaction to proposal for deployment merely as isolated deterrent measure would be negative and that they could be forced to cooperate only with application of enormous pressure. However, if it clear to them deployment result of firm US decision halt Communists now and part of operation convincingly designed achieve this objective, Thai would cooperate willingly.

7. Wish invite Dept attention to Embtel 1366 which attempts flag numerous important aspects of troop deployment requiring advance consideration.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Vientiane and CINCPAC for POLAD. Passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 1947, May 4, the Department asked for the Embassyʼs best estimate, without consulting the Thai Government, of Thai reaction to the introduction of U.S. ground and/or air forces during the next week to 10 days. The Department stated that there was “no present intention to do this” but it was “conceivable that developments in Laos would make such action desirable as deterrent to Communist effort take advantage of military situation.” The Department suggested it might consider introduction on the scale of 1962, or perhaps only half that size, or even just tactical air units. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1366, dated February 22. (Ibid., POL 27 LAOS) Airgram A–285 is ibid., POL 1–2 THAI.

4 Dated March 5. (Ibid. POL 1 THAI)

269. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff 269. Letter From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff1

Washington, May 16, 1964.

I–35, 889/64

Dear Mike:

I had the attached paper prepared on receipt of my copy of your memorandum of May 1 to Bill Bundy on Laos and the possibility of moving some forces into Thailand as a signal to the Pathet Lao and to Hanoi.2

As our review indicates, a mere “show of force” in Thailand without a specific objective would not appear to have the proper effect on the Communists, but would reduce reaction time if those forces were to be employed.

Sincerely,

Peter Solbert 3

Attachment

Washington, May 13, 1964.

Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region (Blouin) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) 4

I–35889/64

SUBJECT

Alternatives for Movement of U.S. Forces to Thailand

In response to your note concerning Mr. Forrestalʼs memorandum of May 1, alternatives for the possible movement of some forces into Thailand have been reviewed.

U.S. plans provide for detailed actions for such contingencies. These plans, on which you have been briefed, provide for phased actions by U.S. forces. Actions range from deployment from forward areas into the most important strategic areas of Laos, Thailand and Vietnam, to the deployment of major units from the Pacific and CONUS to defeat external aggression by North Vietnam or by Communist China.

As in the past, actions can be taken to signal the Pathet Lao and Hanoi against resorting to military aggression. The actions planned in the event of insurgency in Laos would satisfy the maximum requirement for stabilization. The forces listed in this phase of the plans could equally well be positioned at locations on the Thai side (Ubon and Udorn), as in their planned positions.

An outline of the forces readily available is provided in the enclosure. If more detailed proposals are desired, we should prepare a memorandum for the Chairman, seeking additional JCS views.

A review of fairly recent actions of a “signal” nature may assist in visualizing an outline of possible moves. In 1962, an Infantry Battle Group (minus) (now referred to as a “Brigade Task Force”) of some 2,000 men was engaged in training exercises in Thailand following exercise “Air Cobra.” On the fall of Nam Tha, Laos, these units were left in Thailand and additional forces were moved in. The additional forces included a Tactical Fighter Squadron of four F–100ʼs for an operational visit, a Marine Air Wing, the offloading of the Amphibious Ready Group in Bangkok and airlifting them to Odorn, and elements of the Ninth Logistic Command. About 6,400 personnel were involved. These forces remained in Thailand until the Laos situation had been normalized sufficiently to warrant their withdrawal. It should be particularly noted that a delay of about one full week was experienced in obtaining Thai agreement for these forces to go in.

In 1963, consideration was given to an early movement into Thailand of those forces earmarked for SEATO exercise “DHANARAJATA”. The forces under consideration were an Infantry Battle Group, an Airborne Battle Group, one Tactical Fighter Squadron, a reconnaissance squadron and supporting logistic elements, totalling about 5,000 men. Although reluctant to agree, Dawee conceded to their coming in about ten days early and remaining for two or three weeks after the exercise, provided a big show was not made of it. His reluctance was attributed to the known resistance of Thanom and Thanat to U.S. forces there. Movement of the forces commenced two weeks early and major units were in place by the starting date of the exercise.

Upon the conclusion of the exercise, 1700 troops including an Infantry Battle Group with artillery and engineer units remained for three weeks as a show of force, participating in three route reconnaissance marches in the vicinity of the Laos border. There were no incidents.

In early 1963 a joint US/Thai amphibious exercise “Jungle Drum” was conducted in the Sattahip area.

As a matter of interest and possible use in planning, time and cost estimates for the movement of a Battle Group from Hawaii to Thailand, worked up in 1963 were as follows: Air (MATS), 23 sorties by C–135 aircraft—6 days. Using 12 C–135 aircraft, the move could be made in three days at a cost of $622,135.

Sea (MSTS), 13 to 15 days from availability of shipping in Hawaii—$448,000. The latter figure includes an estimate of costs for diversion of other cargo.

In light of the history of prior actions of a similar nature, it would appear that this tactic has been used too many times in the past to be of further effectiveness. In this regard, we are inclined to agree with the Ambassador that a deployment into Thailand merely as a show of force without an operation convincingly designed to halt the Communists would be of doubtful effect. Informal liaison indicates that the JCS may also consider such movement to be of little value without a specific further objective. There is no question but that deployment of forces into Thailand would shorten reaction times.

F.J. Blouin 5
Rear Admiral, USN

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 320.2 Thailand. Top Secret. Drafted by P.R. Knaur of DOD/ISA. Copies sent to Harriman, McGeorge Bundy, and William Bundy.

2 In this memorandum, which was attached, Forrestal recalled that, “Roger [Hilsman] tried to reactivate plans for moving some forces into Thailand on the west bank of the Mekong just before he left.” Forrestal suggested that, “in view of the extreme difficulty of getting a consensus in this town on any response to flare-ups in Laos, it would be prudent to start organizing now.”

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Solbert signed the original.

4 Drafted by Captain J.B. Drachnik of OASD/ISA/FER on May 13. Enclosed but not printed was a list of “Forces Readily Available.”

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Blouin signed the original.

270. Paper Prepared by Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 270. Paper Prepared by Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 23, 1964.

INTRODUCTION OF FORCES INTO THAILAND

Present Situation

We have not formally approached any government on this subject, but have indicated that we might consider such action to the Thai, British, Australians, and New Zealanders. This subject was raised by the Thai themselves, in conversations between Prime Minister Thanom and Ambassador Martin, reported in Bangkok 1971 and 1976.2 This conversation took place on Wednesday, May 20. The gist of the Thai position was that they did not feel deployment at this time was required as an additional deterrent to further Communist moves in Laos and indeed felt that it might actually “act as a magnet” for some ChiCom counter-move and in any case lead to increased pressures on Thailand.

As Ambassador Martin puts it: “Thai obviously have no appetite for inviting this by agreeing to casual attempts at deterrents until they can see clearly that we have made decision not just continue on present scale assistance to others to resist Communist aggression in Southeast Asia but also to use directly and overtly such small precise elements of force available to us to insure reversal Communist advances. Thai are not convinced we are really so engaged now and until they are they do not want to risk being left exposed if we decide to withdraw.”

On the other hand, the Thai have cooperated in digging up Thai pilots for the T–28ʼs and have agreed that if it became necessary Udorn could be used for the direct basing of T–28 operations. In essence, the Thai applaud what we have done to this point but clearly do not think it is enough to form a pattern into which deployment to Thailand would make sense.

None of the other governments with which we have explored the matter has expressed a strong view. However, the British did indicate some sympathy with additional military actions to stabilize the situation in Laos, and referred in this connection to the introduction of forces into Thailand. The New Zealanders have also made somewhat forthcoming noises.

Possible Objectives and Conditions of Such Action

In the light of the above Thai reaction, we would clearly have a considerable job of persuasion in any event to get them to go along, much less to make the affirmative request that would be a much better framework of action.

However, if we decide on overflights of North Vietnam and if we actually start to use US civilian pilots in Laos (for which we have given Unger authority) our case with the Thai that we are in fact acting seriously in other respects would be improved, even though we might not have decided to go still further against North Vietnam.

As to our objectives in introducing forces into Thailand, we have hitherto thought of such action primarily in terms of deterring further Communist moves in Laos. At the present time, there is no strong indication that such moves are imminent, although there is enough general military activity so that the possibility cannot be excluded. The Thai themselves do not believe the Communists are going to drive further, but have indicated that if additional actions were to take place, they would be prepared to go along with us on virtually anything.

However, even though this basis of action may not appear, there may be a second important objective that would in itself make the deployment of forces into Thailand important from a political standpoint. This is the fact that we are trying to forestall a Geneva Conference on Laos by making maximum use of Article 4 consultations in Vientiane. Souvannaʼs weak military position is one element making it difficult to conduct these consultations effectively. Visible military back-up on the Thai side of the border could be a major factor in stiffening Souvanna and enabling him to carry out these consultations in a worthwhile fashion. This would be particularly true when he and we come to the gut issue of whether the Pathet Lao/VM will accept any withdrawal from former neutralist positions in the Plaine des Jarres. The presence of US forces in Thailand would at least carry a threat of military action within Laos that might considerably improve the bargaining position in Laos.

In addition, US (and, of course SEATO) forces in Thailand are an essential military move preceding or accompanying any stronger actions against the north.

Recommendation

That we not make a firm proposal to the Thai but direct Ambassador Martin to discuss the matter further with them, pointing out: a. Additional actions (e.g., reconnaissance over North Vietnam) that we may then be taking.

b. Discussing the necessity for steadying Souvanna during the consultation period and particularly the importance of visible force when it comes to the issue of some Communist withdrawal.

This proposition may have considerable appeal to the Thai, because they above all would not take kindly to the idea of any Geneva Conference on Laos, and it is clear that some success in the consultations will help enormously to cut down the pressures for such a conference.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Special Papers, April/June 1964. Secret. Bundy prepared this paper for an Executive Committee meeting of the National Security Council to be held on May 24. For a record of the discussion at the EXCOM meeting, during which the issue of troops to Thailand was not raised, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Document 172.

2 Both dated May 21. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

271. Memorandum From the Deputy Director, Far East Region (Loftus) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaugton) 271. Memorandum From the Deputy Director, Far East Region (Loftus) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaugton)1

Washington, May 30, 1964.

I–24764/64

SUBJECT

Thailand

In view of the seriousness of the situation in Vietnam and recent Communist gains in Laos which have combined to heighten apprehension among our Asian allies regarding our willingness to take effective countermeasures, I believe that some urgent thought should be given to improving Thai capabilities and bolstering their resolve to stick with us in the days ahead. I do not suggest that a few million dollars added to the MAP will do the trick. On the other hand, when the Thais learn that the FYʼ64 level is some $30 million less than the last two years, they are bound to react rather strongly. This would be most unfortunate at this juncture, and I think we should be prepared to advance a series of proposals designed to reassure the Thais of our continued interest in their security.

The attached paper was prepared with these thoughts in mind. I believe that you will find it useful in discussions in Hawaii regarding Thailandʼs role in the present crisis.2

S.A. Loftus, Jr. 3

Enclosure4

INCREASED ASSISTANCE TO THAILAND

Recent reports from our Embassy in Bangkok warn of growing Thai apprehension over their vulnerability to attack by regular Viet Minh or ChiCom units and their close alignment with the U.S.5 An irresolute or weakened Thailand would add unreasonably to our problems in South-east Asia. Moreover, recent developments in Laos and Vietnam clearly call for bringing Thai conventional forces up to combat strength and for other measures needed to give key Thai leaders cause to value rather than doubt their commitment to the West.

Irrespective of whether we deploy troops to Thailand again, the Thai Army of some 80,000 men is an important element in the balance of power equation in the area. By Asian standards it is well armed, led, and trained. Many of its officers and non-coms experienced combat in Korea. Thai forces could provide an effective counterweight to Viet Minh cadres or regulars operating in Laos or possibly even Vietnam, if brought up to strength and properly supported.

In the past, the Thai Army has concentrated on conventional ground defense tactics, although recently some attention has been given to counterinsurgency. The chief weaknesses of the Thai forces are insufficient combined arms and field training of units larger than battalion and lack of an effective logistics system to support sustained combat operations of a conventional type. However, at present, they are given the capability of conducting regimental and battalion sized delaying actions along the Mekong and in the north against ChiCom or Viet Minh attacks, assuming appropriate U.S. logistical support.

The present Thai defense budget, of some $82 million, which is about 2.5% of GNP, supports a total of 120,000 men. However, it does not provide adequate allowances for field training, for civic action programs, or for recruits needed to bring regular units up to combat strength.

In order to enhance their military capabilities and to minimize chances of their deserting the Western camp—either from fear of being abandoned first or from a simple calculation of opposing military strength, urgent consideration should be given to the following specific actions: 1. Inform the Thais of our willingness to suspend all further MAP transfers, chiefly POL, for the duration of the crises in SEA—some $1.2 million is scheduled to be transferred in FY65. The Thai reaction to our deletion of these so-called commercial consumables from the MAP was extremely bitter and not yet dissipated.

2. Indicate willingness to negotiate a new MAP package covering the next several years—this should include equipment and training to cover those deficiencies most relevant to improving the capability of Thai forces to defend the border areas or to intervene in Laos, if required. It should also contain specific increments of force maintenance, such as construction or consumables, necessary to induce the Thais to train, man, and deploy their forces more effectively, e.g., agreeing to assume responsibility for providing POL and/or providing additional funds for construction in certain exposed areas, if the Thais provide sufficient funds to bring their regular units up to strength, for field exercises (per diem) and better maintenance of U.S. equipment. Such an agreement would go far to dispel Thai suspicion regarding the firmness of our commitments to their security and provide them with a more reliable basis for their own budgetary planning over the next several years.

3. We might also propose to deploy on a “permanent” basis one or more battalion combat teams plus stocking additional war materiel should the Thais insist that the situation calls for such additional commitments, an.

4. AID should accelerate and augment its plans for improving the Border Patrol and other paramilitary forces, such as the Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit (PARU) and the Provincial Police.

These steps in themselves may not be sufficient to induce the Thais to take whatever measures our mutual interests may require to save the rest of Southeast Asia from Communist domination, but they do represent certain minimum measures which might be taken now as evidence of our willingness to act in the face of clear and present danger to the vital interests of our allies.

Additional MAP funds required to fulfill these agreements could be obtained from either larger transfers from AID accounts in FY64–65 or deviations from other programs judged less urgent—as we have done for Vietnam and Laos over the past several years.

In any event, it is not too soon to prepare a “second line of defense” in Asia in the event of a complete collapse of the Neutralists and FAR in Laos and/or a Communist victory in South Vietnam. The Thais and Filipinos may be constrained to accommodate to a new balance-of-power in SEA, but, at a minimum, can be counted on to defend their own independence with whatever means are available.6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306, Thailand 000.1—091.3. Secret.

2 The discussions in Hawaii were held at the Honolulu meeting attended by 55 participants, including the Presidentʼs principal foreign policy advisers, June 1–2. Most of the discussion concerned Vietnam. Accounts are printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Documents 187-189. Some limited discussion on Thailand was in the context of Laos, see ibid., vol. XXVIII, Document 69. See also Document 273.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 Drafted by Loftus on May 28.

5 In telegram 2014 from Bangkok, May 25, the Embassy stated that “events propelling Thai toward massive reexamination value their commitment to West.” The Embassy believed that the Thai would still honor their undertaking, but minimal U.S. response to the threat from Laos was “almost visibly eroding confidence.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

6 Three tabs: A. Current MAP Situation and Deliveries, B. Commercial Consumables, and C. Basic Data—Thailand were not found attached.

272. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 272. Telegram From Secretary of State Rusk to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, May 31, 1964, 9 a.m.

Secto 27. 1. Major feature of Secretaryʼs call on Prime Minister Thanom May 30 was restrained, frequently indirect but persistent Thai probing for indication of future US course of action in Southeast Asia; Thai questions ranged for significance of Sino-Soviet rift to possibility of diversionary activities against ChiComs elsewhere in Asia.

2. Secretary explained that over past few weeks we have been seeking by various means get clear message to Peiping and Hanoi US takes very serious view of Communist military advances SEA and that issue of peace or war in balance. He noted that while Sino-Soviet rift bitter and deep, both still have same ultimate goal; said diversionary tactics elsewhere not likely be effective.

3. Thanomʼs first direct question dealt with US intentions if Communists continued advance toward Mekong and threatened such strategic points as Luang Prabang, Vang Vieng, Vientiane, Paksane, Thakhek and Savannakhet. Secretary said he could reply in generalities but that specific concrete answer, to which Thai entitled, could, under US constitutional system, come only from the President. He said purpose of Honolulu Conference was make recommendations on such questions to President and he expected there to be communication between President and Prime Minister very soon afterwards. Secretary added, however, there no limit on what US would do if necessary to defend Thailand and pointed to heavy casualties US had suffered since World War Two as earnest of our determination.

4. Later en route FonMinʼs residence Thanat again alluded to Secretaryʼs comments on necessity for communication at chief of government level and asked how this would be accomplished. Secretary said through Amb Martin, adding that communication facilities American Embassy enabled instantaneous contact with Washington.

5. Prime Minister alluded to military defense measures being planned and Thai made it clear several times they would feel compelled move across border if Communist advances threatened key points in Laos such as Vang Vieng, Paksane, etc. DepDefMin Dawee elaborated in sense Thai would strike first with artillery and air, following with such forces as necessary. He added that he expected of course if such steps necessary US and Thai would act together.

6. Secretary said he very encouraged to hear Thai laying plans for defense measures and suggested desirability of advance consultation. Secretary several times in course of discussion expressed approval of this line of planning by Thai.

7. In context Thai troop deployments already made to border and possible need for additional measures of this nature, Thanom asked Secretary to review decision to phase out US assistance on consumables. Secretary agreed take a look.

8. In discussion before and after FonMinʼs dinner, Secretary and Thanat discussed preconditions Geneva Conference on Laos. Secretary made clear we absolutely firm in not attending conference unless pre- conditions satisfied, and Thanat concurred completely. Thanat mentioned that Article Four consultations not likely to be very productive but concurred in our urging that most be made of them. We mentioned that we were giving serious consideration to Polish proposal as possible alternate or supplement, and that it had some advantages including absence of French. Thanat did not demur nor argue that acceptance Polish proposal would impair our basic position, which we made clear would be maintained as to preconditions at any such meeting.

Comment: Thai attitude in discussions, particularly on part Thanon, marked by keen and appraising interest in Secretaryʼs comments, especially replies to their questions, which apparently designed to elicit expression of US thinking on broader implications as well as immediate requirements of situation. Thai made no specific demands for action by US, but concurred strongly in desirability of closest advance consultations. Question of deploying US forces to Thailand was not explicitly discussed. Secretary will raise at Honolulu question of bilateral planning with Thai to indicate our capabilities and possible deployment, particularly of air units, in event of Communist push in Laos along lines paragraph three above.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to Vientiane, Saigon, CINCPAC for POLAD, London, Paris, and New Delhi. Passed to the White House. Rusk was in Bangkok for less than a day on May 30 en route from New Delhi and Saigon to the Honolulu Conference.

273. Memorandum for the Record 273. Memorandum for the Record1

Honolulu, June 1, 1964.

[Here follows discussion of South Vietnam and Laos.]

C. Thailand

1. Political situation and attitudes:

Ambassador Martin expressed the judgment that the Thanom regime in Thailand has smoothly consolidated its power and is operating well. It is operating more as a collegial institution than the personally authoritarian regime of Sarit2 ever did. There has been considerable decentralization, and delegations to the Ministeries have noticeably speeded up the decision making process.

Contrary to general expectations in December, Thanom seems to be clearly in charge and is publicly deferred to by General Praphat. The personal and family relationships between these two permit an intimate behind-the-scene which is obviously effective.

The cabinet is still basically unchanged since the original appointment of Pote Sarasin to the vital post of Minister of National Development. His public position, his integrity and his ability are a definite asset.

Ambassador Martin believes that Praphat has persuaded Thanom to make two changes in the Cabinet before Praphat departs for the U.S. in mid-June for an eye operation at Walter Reed. One will be the elevation of General Chitti to the post of Minister of Agriculture and the other will be the replacement of the present Minister of Industry. Praphat has concentrated the major portion of his time and energies on restoring his position and power in the Royal Thai Army from whose councils he had been systematically excluded by Sarit. In the Embassyʼs judgment, he has had a fair amount of success. Dawee, as Deputy Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff Supreme Command, is playing an increasingly important and useful role in over-all coordination of military affairs.

While coup rumors are endemic, the frequency of their circulation has been greatly reduced. Ambassador Martin does not expect this sort of trouble in the foreseeable future. The most significant substantiation of this estimate is the confidence displayed by Thanom and Praphat in permitting the latter to be absent 4 to 6 weeks in June and July. It is therefore expected that the present regime, with occasional changes in Cabinet portfolio, will continue in control. It is probable that Thanom will retire in the next two or three years, perhaps after the promulgation of a new constitution, and that he will be succeeded by Praphat.

The principal internal emphasis of this new regime is on the economic and social development of Thailand. Although it is concerned over the increasing amount of domestic resources being absorbed in these programs, it will continue this emphasis.

For the present, the principal ingredient of Thai foreign policy is its reliance on the Rusk-Thanat communiqué3 as constituting a virtual defense alliance with the U.S. Ambassador Martin has had recent occasion, as have his predecessors, to remind Washington that this policy—this degree of commitment—is a very great variant from the whole sweep of Thai history, of Thai traditions, and basic Thai instincts. In their relations with world powers they are quite conscious that they were almost the prototype of the non-aligned, non-committed nations. While they had to deliver large parts of modern Laos and Cambodia to the French and parts of modern Malaysia and Burma to the British, they nevertheless maintained their independence. They have a certain confidence that their old skills are still present and that if required, they would be able to repeat the process again.

They would vastly prefer to continue to maintain their reliance on the U.S. Yet it is now quite clear that certain questions are being posed concerning the effect on Thailandʼs vital interests on the totality of Thailandʼs open commitment to the U.S.

These questions do not involve qualms about our military capacity. Through many channels they are sure not only that our nuclear power is overwhelming, but also that our conventional military power has been greatly strengthened over the past three years. They know it is now a multi-faceted, flexible, pliant instrument of U.S. National Policy permitting the U.S. to use it if desired in a coldly pin-pointed way, in an almost surgically precise way, to achieve any specific objective within a vast spectrum.

They recognize that our conventional military power has only recently provided us with this new and flexible capacity. On the matter of our military capacity, they seem to have two basic questions: (1) whether we have yet developed an effective common doctrine on its use, and (2) whether the Communist Chinese believe we have the will to use it. Both of these questions depend on their analysis of our present basic attitudes towards Southeast Asia. This analysis is not yet completed. They are not yet certain whether we are really prepared to use force to achieve our policy aims in Southeast Asia. They are concerned whether we will merely threaten to do so, while our real intent is to seek only the best political solution we are able to negotiate. If they become convinced that we will use force if necessary as the underlying sanction of our policy, Ambassador Martin has no doubt of their complete cooperation and their willingness to go with us all the way. But until they are certain that we have the will to use such force as appears appropriate, they will wait to see how the situation unfolds. They will not this time be willing to use their real estate as an American base without a clear view of the end of the road. They will demand advanced consultation, and if this is not forthcoming, the very large degree of cooperation which now exists will be seriously jeopardized.

2. Military Appraisal:

Secretary Rusk asked whether the Thai Government was prepared to put forces into Laos to counter a PL advance. Ambassador Martin said that this subject was currently under serious consideration in Bangkok. Five companies had already been deployed to the northern border area and plans for their augmentation are being prepared. There appears to be a new philosophy growing within the Thai Armed Forces to the effect that they can and should deploy their own forces to meet their own security requirements without necessarily waiting for the deployment of American troops in advance.

Secretary Rusk asked Adm Felt what he thought of the capability of the Thai forces to offer material help to Souvanna Phouma. Adm Felt said that this report that the Thaiʼs were considering putting forces across the Mekong was new to him. Personally he doubted that they would be prepared to go this far unless U.S. forces accompanied them. Secretary McNamara asked Adm Felt how many ground forces he thought would be required to give any meaningful support to Souvannaʼs government. Adm Felt replied that within the context of the present situation somewhere between 2 and 3 divisions would be needed.

Ambassador Martin explained that the Thai military do not believe that the mere crossing of the Mekong will bring them into extensive contact with the Pathet Lao. Their current thinking seems to be that they could make such a military move without obtaining prior U.S. concurrence and still be able to count on the over-all protection of the U.S. nuclear umbrella should this action provoke a major Communist attack against Thailand. After discussing the time and space factor involved, the general conclusion was that while the Thai might occupy Lao towns on the Mekong, a major move of Thai forces deep into Laos was unlikely.

Adm Felt pointed out that it has always been Thai policy to hold a division in reserve to protect Bangkok. As far as Thailandʼs national interest in Laos goes, Adm Felt stated that his conversations with Thai military leaders indicated they were primarily concerned with re-occupying the former Thai territory lying in Laos to the west of the Mekong River. Ambassador Martin said both of these observations were undoubtedly true under Saritʼs regime, but that Thanom had different ideas.

Secretary McNamara suggested that we need closer joint U.S.-Thai planning for the movement of military forces into the key towns in the Mekong valley should such deployments become necessary. Ambassador Martin agreed and said he would take the matter up with Thanom when Washington indicated it was ready.

Secretary Rusk asked for an estimate of the fighting qualities of the Thai army. Adm Felt said that no one really knew how effective they would be in combat. Ambassador Martin drew attention to the fact that the Thai unit that fought in Korea under the UN flag acquitted itself very well in battle. Mr. Colby added that the Thai officers provided the leadership element for the Meo tribesmen fighting behind the Communist lines in Laos. In this capacity, they have shown high qualities of initiative and aggressive leadership. General Taylor indicated that the general estimate was that the Thais could handle the PL all right but there was some doubt as to whether they could face up to a trained North Vietnamese military force. Secretary McNamara stated that his impression was that the Thai have a very limited military capability to meet any major combined Communist attack. Adm Felt supported this conclusion. As to the combat air capability, he cited the low caliber of senior leadership in the Thai Air Force.

[Here follows discussion of North Vietnam.]

1 Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9510 (1 June 64). Top Secret. The meeting in Honolulu, June 1–2, was primarily to discuss Vietnam and was attended by 55 people including the top civilian and military advisers. This is a record of the Opening Plenary Session of the Honolulu meetings. Certain portions of the plenary session on Vietnam are printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, Document 187.

2 Sarit Thanarat, Prime Minister of Thailand until his death on December 8, 1963.

3 Joint statement issued in Washington on March 6, 1962. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, June 10, 1964, 5 p.m.

2124. For the Secretary. At dinner last night for Australian FonMin Hasluck, Pote Sarasin took me aside and said he had reviewed with Thanom the conversation you had with them May 30 (Secto 27).2 Pote said he wished be sure that Thanom, whose compression of English has some limitations, had fully absorbed your remarks. (We understand that Thanom subsequently made personal reports on his conversation with you to the cabinet and the King.)

Pote went on say Thanom placed greatest importance on advance US-Thai consultations and particularly valued your visit in that context. (This slant was given great emphasis in public statements by Thanom and Thanat after your visit. Embtels 2045, 2055 and 2065.)3 I reminded Pote you had instructed me see PriMin promptly upon return from Honolulu and I had done so.

Thanom is particularly anxious, Pote said, for assurance that we will keep up this practice and that he will not be faced, as was Sarit in 1962, with fait accompli and request for concurrence in action already announced by USG and in motion. I told Pote that before I left Washington last fall, I had received assurance from President Kennedy and you that the errors of 1962 would not be repeated. Pote seemed reassured but observed that his long experience with American scene led him to conclude that when decisions made by President, US military tended to act as if no further consultations with sovereign governments necessary. I assured him his concern needless and said that at Honolulu meeting I had made point of necessity of prior consultations with Thai, and that this completely understood by you, Secretary McNamara and General Taylor, Chairman JCS.

Point which Pote was at obvious pains to emphasize has been reiterated endless times in recent Embassy reporting. Yet on first emergency (see Embtel 2116),4 it was apparent that word had not trickled down to COMUSMACV and 2nd Air Division. I am completely confident I can secure Thai cooperation with extreme rapidity on any such emergency authorization required in situation as described ref Embtel: I am similarly confident of obtaining Thanomʼs approval for larger operations, provided always we can keep dialogue even a small step ahead of actions. Thai have in many ways conveyed their keen appreciation of current atmosphere of genuine mutual trust and consideration between US and Thailand. I am convinced that maintenance of this relationship is essential to continued Thai cooperation and is single most important feature of relations between two countries today. Allowance we have to make in US decision-making process to permit at least going through motions of advance consultation with Thai is relatively small price to pay for benefit gained.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret; Exdis.

2  Document 272.

3 Dated May 31, June 2, and June 3, respectively. (Department of State, Central Files, ORG 7 S, POL 27 LAOS, and POL 27 LAOS)

4 The emergency concerned a U.S. request for the use of Thai-based aircraft (F–100ʼs and T–28ʼs) as protective cover for rescue aircraft attempting to retrieve a downed U.S. pilot in Laos. Martin suggested that had he not anticipated the use of Thai-bases and obtained Thai permission beforehand, the U.S. military would have used them without consulting the Thais. (Ibid., POL 27 LAOS)

275. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) 275. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt)1

Washington, June 17, 1964.

6914. Subject: US-Thai Planning (U). Ref: a. JCS 6669, DTG 052029Z, Jun 64;2 b. CINCPAC DTG 091955Z, Jun 64.3

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have recommended to the Secretary of Defense that you be authorized to conduct, on a continuing basis within the framework set forth in paragraph 2 below, such US-Thai bilateral military planning as you consider necessary for contingencies of joint interest.

2. The following guidance applies. a. The purpose of bilateral US-Thai military planning is fourfold. (1) To improve US-Thai readiness to execute measures envisaged.

(2) To assure maximum exploitation of Thai military resources in support of common US/Thai objectives.

(3) To reassure the Thai and to ensure their continued cooperation.

(4) To demonstrate a firm US resolve in Southeast Asia.

b. CINCPAC is the US representative for the development of such bilateral US-Thai plans as may be agreed upon for contingencies of joint interest to include. (1) Defense of the Mekong. (In this regard, impress upon the Thais the need to move their forces rapidly to forestall enemy occupation of principal Mekong cities.)

(2) Punitive actions against Pathet Lao/Viet Minh forces in Laos.

(3) Reaction to continued or expanded DRV support of the Viet Cong in South Vietnam.

(4) Insurgency in Thailand.

(5) Border incursions from Laos or Burma.

c. Development of the above plans should include detailed treatment of concept, force commitments, command relations, requirements for use of Thai facilities and US logistic support commitments to the Thai. Submit promptly, as they develop, questions in these fields requiring JCS policy consideration.

d. The general applicability of current unilateral and SEATO MPO plans to the above contingencies is noted. The content of US unilateral plans will not be revealed; however, illustrations of possible US reaction may be drawn therefrom.

3. Planning by means of a small planning group as outlined in reference b is considered appropriate. The CINCPAC senior planner will keep Ambassador and Deputy COMUSMACTHAI informed. The JCS do not plan to send representation to any consultations at this time, but probably will do so later.

4. You will be advised earliest of the Secretary of Defense decision in this matter. Meanwhile, pending receipt of JCS guidance, limit initial discussions with Thai to that outlined in reference b.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos A, 6/14–8/14. Top Secret. Drafted by Colonel H.H. Reichner of JCS (J–5) and released by D.C. Flickinger, Deputy Director, Implementation Division, JCS.

2 Not found.

3 In this CINCPAC telegram, June 9, Felt suggested sending a “small select group” to Bangkok headed by his Deputy Chief of Staff for Plans and Operations to consult with the Thais on “concept forces and command relations in situation where the Communists are driving toward the Mekong.” Felt believed the U.S. Group should attempt to get Thai commitments and then proceed to discuss possible commitments of SEATO members. Felt recommended that these discussions begin at the working level. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 THAI–US)

276. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 276. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, June 18, 1964.

JCSM–529–64

SUBJECT

US-Thai Planning (U)

1. Reference is made to the Honolulu meeting of 1–2 June 19642 and to a Department of State message, State to Bangkok 2204, dated 4 June 1964, with respect to initiation of US-Thai bilateral military planning on contingencies of joint interest.3 Specifically, the message. a. Directed the US Ambassador to Thailand to inform the Thai Prime Minister that the United States desires to consult urgently with the RTG regarding measures to be taken in the event of a communist drive toward the Mekong.

b. Suggested that the Thais send military planners immediately to Honolulu for consultation with CINCPAC.

2. In response to the above cited message, the US Ambassador to Thailand has advised the Secretary of State that the Thais are prepared to begin consultations whenever the United States is ready, and that they prefer such consultations take place in Bangkok.4

3. Early stages of bilateral planning should be carefully controlled. This requirement as well as the Thai desire to consult in Bangkok can be accommodated through the use of a small CINCPAC planning group in Bangkok. The objective of this planning group will be to consult with the Thais on concept, forces, and command relations. Accordingly, pursuant to a joint State-Defense message of 13 June 1964,5 CINCPAC has dispatched a small planning group to Bangkok. The CINCPAC senior planner will keep the Ambassador and Deputy COMUSMACTHAI informed of developments.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the procedures, scope, and content of possible bilateral US-Thai military planning against the background of a series of contingencies of joint interest. These contingencies range from insurgency in Thailand through the defense of Southeast Asia. As a result, they have determined that. a. Current US unilateral and SEATO multilateral plans provide an adequate basis for bilateral planning with the Thais. The content of US unilateral plans will not be revealed; however, illustrations of possible US reaction may be drawn therefrom.

b. Planning on the US side should be accomplished by CINCPAC and appropriate subordinates in the manner of current unilateral and SEATO planning.

c. Scope and content of plans should include clear-cut provisions as to concept, force commitments, command relationships, US use of Thai facilities, and US logistic support of the Thais.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that. a. CINCPAC be authorized to conduct, on a continuing basis and within the framework of paragraphs 3 and 4 above, such bilateral US-Thai military planning as may be required; such planning to be finally reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

b. A memorandum substantially as contained in the Appendix be forwarded to the Secretary of State.6

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor 7
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Thailand 000.1—(092 Thailand), 1964. Top Secret.

2 See Document 273.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 THAI–US)

4 As reported in telegram 2106 from Bangkok, June 8. (Ibid.)

5 Telegram 2276 to Bangkok, June 13. (Ibid.)

6 Attached, but not printed.

7 Printed from a copy that indicates Taylor signed the original.

277. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn 277. Letter From President Johnson to Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn 1

Washington, June 18, 1964.

Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I thank you for your kind letter of May 25,2 which was received for me by Secretary Rusk at his meeting last week with Mr. Bunchana Atthakor, Deputy Minister of National Development in your cabinet.3

I know the concern that you must feel for your nation and its people at this time of crisis in Southeast Asia. I am closely aware of the problems presented to your country by this crisis, and particularly by events in Laos.

In your letter, Mr. Prime Minister, you referred to Americaʼs defense commitments in various parts of the world. Americaʼs defense commitment to Thailand is clear, and as I said when we met in Bangkok in 1961, “America keeps its commitments”.

We regard Communist advances in Laos as a threat to the security of the United States as well as that of Thailand. In accordance with this concept, I have authorized Ambassador Martin to open consultations with you looking toward joint Thai-US military planning of measures to be taken in the event of a Communist drive toward the borders of Thailand. I understand joint planning meetings will begin in Bangkok this week. We must be prepared to act promptly and effectively to check such a drive if necessary.

At same time, we must overlook no opportunity for a peaceful settlement which preserves the interests of our two nations. For this reason we are willing to undertake consultations such as those in which we are mutually engaged in Vientiane, and we would be willing to see convened consultations such as those recently proposed by the Poles.

We believe, however, that Communist acceptance of the preconditions laid down by Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma of Laos must precede any convention of a conference on Laos such as that held in Geneva in 1962.

Our willingness to keep the door open to negotiations must not be mistaken either by our friends or our enemies as reflecting any wavering of our resolve. It does reflect truly our purpose, which is peace. But the Americans who have died to check the spread of Communism in the Far East, those who even now are dying for that cause, provide the most eloquent testimony of our determination that peace shall not be bought at the cost of freedom.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret. This letter was transmitted to Bangkok in telegram 2315, June 19, and was drafted by Pickering, cleared by Trueheart, William Bundy, McGeorge Bundy, and Rusk. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US)

2 Not printed. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Head of State Correspondence, Prime Minister Thanom)

3 An account of the Rusk-Atthakor meeting of June 10 is in telegram 2247 to Bangkok, June 10. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–CHICOM) A summary of a memorandum left by Atthakor with Rusk, in which the Thai Government requested that the United States provide a pool of road building equipment and additional funds for assistance in the Northeast, is in telegram 2260 to Bangkok, June 11. (Ibid., Central Files, AID (US) THAI)

278. Memorandum From Director of the Joint Staff (Burchinal) to the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (LeMay) 278. Memorandum From Director of the Joint Staff (Burchinal) to the Acting Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (LeMay)1

Washington, June 22, 1964.

DJSM–1055–64

SUBJECT

Thai Volunteers

REFERENCES

a. State 2319 to Bangkok, 19 June2

b. JCSM 479–643

c. CINCPAC 200002Z June4

1. In reference a the Department of State reported that the Minister of the Thai Embassy in Washington indicated strong dissatisfaction with present US policy in Laos and considers US should build up Souvanna and rightists to be the dominant force in Laos. Recognizing the Lao lack of will to fight he concluded that Thai volunteers must be used, just as the communists use Viet Minh to bolster the PL. He indicated 10,000 Thai volunteers would be sufficient; the US role would be to supply equipment and similar support.

2. Comments on the above are as follows. a. In October 1961 discussions were held between CHJUSMAG Thailand, CHMAAG Laos and C/S, RTA to discuss Thai encadrement. The Thais, as previously, indicated that they could not furnish encadrement without excessive harm to their own units. As an alternative it was suggested that the Thais furnish interpreters to USMAAG units.

b. In October 1962 when military assistance was pulled out there were 116 Thai volunteer specialists in Laos (43 interpreters, 73 surgical specialists, x-ray technicians, code clerks, radio operators, T–6 pilots).

c. A year ago when the subject of Thai encadrement was again raised the following are applicable. (1) CINCPAC commented that large scale Thai encadrement would be surfaced; that he doubted if Thais would confront Viet Minh without American participation on a shoulder to shoulder basis.

(2) Both Phoumi and Souvanna were opposed to Thai encadrement; they welcomed training in Thailand but the traditional Lao mistrust and inferiority complex via-a-vis the Thais were displayed.

d. Recently, 8 June, Ambassador Unger has reconfirmed a negative Lao response to Thai help in Laos; he believed we should tread lightly for the moment and reopen the subject at an opportune time.

e. On 5 June, the Joint Chiefs of Staff in reference b informed the Secretary of Defense that use of Thai Special Forces as cadres and trainers in Laos would create major problems in coordination and control and that current training deficiencies of the Thai Special Forces would make it unlikely that their use would be effective at this time.

f. [3–1/2 lines of source text not declassified.

g. In reference c CINCPAC reports that at the planning conference in Bangkok which met on 18 June, Thai Minister of Defense Dawee indicated he was prepared to let the US make the decision on how to secure the Mekong River line and said “We will go along with you”. Dawee requested that Prime Minister Thanom be the CINC and that the Command pattern of SEATO Plan Five would be acceptable. Dawee further stated that he was prepared to commit the Second Thai Army (one division) and his tactical air forces.

3. These comments are submitted without the specific views on reference a of CINCPAC, or those of the American Ambassadors Bangkok and Vientiane, all of which have been requested. However, it is considered the comments in paragraphs 2c, d and e are still valid.

David A. Burchinal 5
Lt. General, USAF
Director, Joint Staff

1 Source: Department of Defense, JCS Official Files, 9155.2 (8 May 1964) Top Secret. Prepared by Captain H.S. Jackson, USN, Pacific Division, Joint Staff.

2 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

3 Dated June 5. (Department of Defense, JCS Official Files, 9155.2 (8 May 1964))

4 Not found, but summarized below.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Burchinal signed the original.

279. Memorandum of Conversation 279. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 24, 1964, 6:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Courtesy Call

PARTICIPANTS

The President

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Laurence G. Pickering, Officer-in-Charge, Thai Affairs

H.E. General Prapass Charusathiara, Deputy Prime Minister of Thailand

H.E. Sukich Nimmanheminda, Ambassador of Thailand

Dr. Malai Huvanandana, Deputy Under Secretary of the Ministry of Interior of Thailand

(Ambassador Sukich acted as interpreter)

Following an exchange of amenities and gifts, the President recalled with pleasure his earlier meeting with General Prapass in Bangkok in May of 1961. The President went on to express his deep appreciation for the support Thailand is providing to the Free World effort in Southeast Asia, mentioning specifically the T–28 pilots and the artillerymen now in Laos.

Mr. Bundy noted that the Deputy Prime Minister was to be congratulated for his excellent support of programs to further economic development in the critical Northeastern area, which borders on Laos. General Prapass said that these programs, and many others, were being carried out to give the people of Thailand a real incentive to fight against communism. He cited as an example of another such program the self-help land settlement program, under which undeveloped land is made available to landless farmers. The President agreed that if the people own their own land, their incentive for defending their country is greatly increased.

General Prapass expressed thanks for the economic assistance provided his country through USOM. The President acknowledged the Generalʼs thanks. He said that his Administration would fight for a good foreign aid bill for this year, and expressed confidence that a good one would be enacted.

General Prapass said that at the time he left Thailand he had noted considerable concern about US determination to take the necessary actions in Southeast Asia. He said this concern was created largely by statements in the Congress and in the press to the effect that the US effort and investment in Southeast Asia were mere waste, creating the impression that the US might be planning to abandon Southeast Asia. However, he added, the subsequent strong statements made by the President, plus the appointments of General Taylor and Ambassador Johnson, had completely removed this concern according to reports received from the Prime Minister since arriving here. The President expressed great pleas-ure at this news. He said he hoped that General Prapass would tell the newsmen of the US that some of the things we were doing had in fact helped the situation in an important Southeast Asian country.

The President concluded by saying that so long as Thailand continued its fight against communism, it could rely fully on the continued friendship and support of the US.

As he was preparing to leave, General Prapass expressed his heartfelt thanks to the President for making it possible for him to have the successful operation for cataracts at the Walter Reed Hospital.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Pickering. The meeting took place at the White House. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, July 24, this meeting began at 6:25 and lasted until 6:40. (Ibid.) In a July 24 briefing memorandum to the President Thomson and Komer informed Johnson that his meeting with Prapass (Praphat) “is basically to butter up Thailandʼs probable next Prime Minister.” (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. I, Memos, 11/63–11/64) Rusk and Harriman also sent Johnson a briefing memorandum, July 23. (Ibid.)

2 On July 11, just after his operation, Prapass and other Thai officials met with William Bundy and other Department of State officials at Walter Reed Hospital. Their conversation was similar to the conversation between Prapass and the President. (Memorandum of conversation, July 11; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) On July 30 Prapass met with Secretary of Defense McNamara and other U.S. officials at the Pentagon. They discussed the situation in Laos, Northeast Thailand—where McNamara encouraged Prapass to stress special forces over conventional military forces—South Vietnam, and specific Thai-U.S. bilateral military issues. (Memorandum of conversation, July 30; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files; FRC 68 A 306, 333 Thailand)

280. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 280. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, July 29, 1964, 2116Z.

7621. Subject: US-Thai Planning (U). References: a. CINCPAC DTG 100056Z Jul 64; b. JCS 2339/128–3; c. CINCPAC DTG 240300Z Jul 64; d. JCS 6914 DTG 172217Z Jun 64; e. JCS 7084 DTG 252242Z Jun 64.2

Part I 1. The proposed terms of reference forwarded by reference a have been reviewed and revised by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and will be referred to the Secretary of Defense for approval. The revised terms of reference are contained in reference b. They are quoted in Part II below for your advance information in accordance with your request in reference c.

Part II. Terms of Reference US-Thai Planning Section I—Preamble 1. Thailand and the United States have mutually agreed to the need for bilateral military planning for contingencies of joint interest. As an initial step Thailand and the US will develop a plan for the defense of Thailand as set forth in Section II below. Such defense of Thailand will include military operations to hold the Mekong River Valley and its principal cities and military facilities. The following terms of reference are established for guidance in associated military planning.

Section II—Plan for the Defense of Thailand Against Communist Forces in Laos 2. The Threat: The plan will be based on defense of Thailand against the communist threat in Laos. The situation envisaged will be beyond that of subversion but less than overt aggression by either Communist China, North Vietnam, or both.

3. The Concept: The concept of operations will provide for the defense of the general Mekong River line and its principal cities and military facilities by US, Thai, and possibly other friendly forces operating in Laos. It is envisioned that the necessary friendly forces will move into Laos, hopefully with the consent of the Royal Lao Government. The defense of Thailand may require any or a combination of the following actions. a. Defensive and punitive actions against communist forces in Laos.

b. Punitive actions against communist forces in Laos in the event of border incursions by communist forces from Laos into Thailand.

c. Counterinsurgency actions and punitive actions against communist forces in Laos in the event of communist insurgency in Thailand.

d. Military actions against North Vietnam to include interdiction of routes of supply and reinforcement from North Vietnam into Laos.

4. Forces: The plan will be based on the military capabilities of Thailand and the United States. Both nations will make available adequate force levels consistent with achieving the planned objectives. In addition, the United States will be prepared to employ under national command such additional air, ground, and naval forces as may be required to conduct military actions against North Vietnam. Further, the plan should be so prepared that other Allied forces can participate if they so desire and the situation permits. Insofar as possible, it should be generally compatible with SEATO plans so that comparable SEATO plans can more easily be implemented.

5. Command: The Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces of Thailand will be the Commander in Chief. He will exercise operational control of all combat and combat support forces committed to this plan through a Commander, Field Forces, who will have primary responsibility for the conduct of military operations. The Commander, Field Forces, will be appointed by the United States.

6. Implementation: Joint Thai-US consultations may be undertaken at the initiative of either party at any time to determine what specific portions of the plan should be implemented.

Section III—General Provisions Applicable to All Bilateral Planning 7. Logistic Support: Logistic support of committed forces will be furnished by the nation providing the forces to the best of that nationʼs ability. In the event major hostilities develop, the United States will furnish logistical assistance to Thai forces as required within available US resources and with priorities determined by the Senior US Operational Commander (Commander, Field Forces). Thailand will allocate air base, rail transportation, port, and highway capabilities sufficient to support the plan and grant over-flight clearances as required. In addition, Thailand will allocate channels in commercial and military communications systems to augment existing US communications-electronics base communication trunks as required to support this plan. Space for bases and operating areas in Thailand required by military forces in support of this plan will also be provided without cost by the Royal Thai Government.

8. Planning Method: Joint Thai-US planning will be conducted in Bangkok by a group to be established immediately. The plan for the defense of Thailand against communist forces in Laos will be forwarded for review through national channels by approximately 30 September 1964. Further planning for contingencies of joint interest will be undertaken as required. Such contingencies may include continued or expanded DRV support of the Viet Cong in South Vietnam.

Part III 1. Except as modified above, guidance contained in references d and e remains applicable.

2. Establishment of planning group Bangkok as outlined in Part II is not intended to preclude active participation by CINCPAC in detailed planning or participation by JCS representatives when appropriate.

3. You will be advised earliest of the action of the Secretary of Defense with respect to the recommended terms of reference cited above.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Country File, Vietnam, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos A, 6/64–8/64. Top Secret. Drafted by Colonel H.H. Reichner of J–5 and released by Major General P.S. Emrick, Director for Plans and Policy.

2 References a. and b. have not been found. Reference c. is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 THAI–US. Reference d. is Document 275. Reference e., authorizing U.S.-Thai joint planning is in Department of Defense, JCS Official Records, 9150 (15 Jun 64) Sec 1.

281. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk 281. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

Reports of Abortive Coup Plot in Bangkok

On July 28, Prime Minister Thanom ordered a military and police alert, initially scheduled to be lifted at midnight, July 31 but subsequently extended “indefinitely.” On July 31, the Government asked Deputy Prime Minister Praphat Charusathien (then in Bonn) to return to Bangkok immediately. He arrived there August 3 (having originally planned to return August 9).

Events Resulting in the Alert

The alert seems to have been triggered by reports received July 27 from several junior officers that they had been approached by a young lieutenant colonel (reported now to be under arrest) and asked to join a coup against the Government. The indefinite extension of the alert and the decision to ask Deputy Prime Minister Praphat to return to Bangkok followed a report of an abortive plot to kidnap the Prime Minister as he left the American Ambassadorʼs residence after dinner on July 31.

Persons and Groups Reported to be Behind the Coup

1) Those Closely Tied With Sarit. Several reports indicate that the funds being passed and offered to junior officers come from the late Prime Ministerʼs wife, Thanpuying Vichitra Thanarat. There have also been reports that all commercial banks in Bangkok have been ordered to submit to the civil courts all records of the accounts of Sarit and his immediate relatives, which would have exposed many in high places as recipients of Saritʼs largess. This threat of exposure was said to have led those so threatened to support an attempted coup. (The names of Thanom and Praphat were not involved in the bank records, according to the reports.)

2) Disaffected Junior Officers. While a coup probably could not be mounted by these elements acting on their own, they could be used by other groups hostile to the Government.

3) Phibunites. Rites for the late Prime Minister Phibun Songkhram were held on July 30, and this fact was cited by some as a reason for the alert. Also two retired military officers prominent under Phibun have been named by various persons as being behind the plot. This may be a mere smokescreen for the first group listed, or there may have been at least an attempt to join forces against the Government.

Present Situation

Since his return to Bangkok General Praphat has conferred with Prime Minister Thanom. Praphat was reported to be relaxed and completely confident of the Governmentʼs ability to cope with the situation. Coup activity seems to have lost its momentum at least for the time being.

Significance

Assuming that the situation does stabilize now, the result will be a further great increase in General Praphatʼs already strong position in the Thai Government. The abortive plot may provide Praphat with a clear opportunity to remove potential rivals for power (Generals Krit Siwara, Chitti Nawisathien, possibly even Air Marshal Thawi Chulasap), although the degree of their involvement is far from clear at the moment. Or he might choose to curb further investigations into his rivalsʼ involvement with Sarit but use the threat of exposure to keep them in line.

We do not anticipate that Praphat will seek to unseat Thanom at this time. However, Thanom may be moved to step down more quickly than he had earlier planned because of this experience.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw it.

282. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) 282. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs (Trueheart) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green)1

Washington, August 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Status of Proposed Joint Military Planning with Thai

1) During Secretary Ruskʼs visit to Thailand in May, the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister mentioned several times military defense measures which they were planning in the event of a Communist advance toward the Mekong. The Secretary said he was very encouraged to hear that the Thai were laying such plans and suggested the desirability of advance consultation in connection with them (Secto 27 from Bangkok, May 30 [31]).2

2) It was subsequently agreed at Honolulu that we would undertake consultations with the Thai on measures to be taken in the event of such a Communist advance, and Ambassador Martin was instructed to take this up with Prime Minister Thanom (Deptel 2204 to Bangkok).3 The Thai approved the idea of beginning such consultations, but asked that they take place in Bangkok (Embtel 2106, June 8).4 We concurred in this.

3) Meanwhile, the President stated in a personal letter to Prime Minister Thanom (dated June 18) that “We regard Communist advances in Laos as a threat to the security of the US as well as that of Thailand. In accordance with this concept, I have authorized Ambassador Martin to open consultations with you, looking toward joint Thai-US military planning of measures to be taken in the event of a Communist drive toward the borders of Thailand. I understand joint planning meetings will begin in Bangkok this week.” (Deptel 2315 to Bangkok, June 18.)5

4) The consultations took place on June 18. General Milton of CINCPACʼs staff led the US team, Air Chief Marshal Thawi Chulasap the Thai team. The discussions were fairly general, with Thawi taking the position that in order to secure the Mekong River line it is necessary to go across the Mekong and defend in Laos, and at the same time to take actions against North Viet-Nam, such as raids and air strikes. Thawi said the Thai would prefer that further planning be continued in Bangkok, and that it should begin as soon as possible. It was agreed that both sides would draw up suitable terms of reference which would be used for guidance by the planners who would draw up the detailed plan (Embtel 2203, June 23; CINCPACʼs DTG 200002Z).6

5) CINCPAC transmitted proposed terms of reference in his message DTG 1000560Z to JCS.7 These had been prepared by COMUSMACTHAI, based on working level discussions with the Thai and with the concurrence of Ambassador Martin. JCS made some modifications in these proposed terms of reference, and the revised version was sent to CINCPAC for his further comments in JCS message DTG 292116Z.7

6) The Department of Defense has sought and been given our informal, working level concurrence in the terms of reference as approved by JCS. We may be asked for more formal approval later. In any case, the Secretary of Defense must approve these terms of reference before the actual planning based upon them can begin.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. Green wrote “Helpful, Thanks, MG” on the source text.

2  Document 272.

3 See footnote 3, Document 276.

4 See footnote 4, Document 276.

5 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 ASIA SE–US) This telegram contained the text of Document 277.

6 Telegram 2203 from Bangkok, June 23, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF/1 THAI–US; regarding CINCPAC telegram 200002Z, June 20, see footnote 4, Document 278.

7 Not found.

283. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, August 8, 1964, 2 p.m.

162. Pierce Arrow. Deptels 178,2 141.3

1. I have delayed answering inquiry relating Thai attitude in event we request deployment of ground forces until I could get the results of special Thai Cabinet meeting that was held on 5 August after I had presented Presidentʼs letter to PriMin. In course of my meeting with Thanom, I decided to take advantage of his obvious pleasure with US actions and Presidentʼs message. I said I had not been instructed to bring up question of ground troop deployment, but it obviously matter we should keep under close review as situation developed. Thanom stated that in principle he had no objection to deployment of ground troops but would wish to have further advance consultation as to the timing of any deployments considered necessary. I did not pursue matter further. As I had thought, the Cabinet reaction indicates a divided opinion (see FTG 8110).4 I think Thanom would be inclined to agree without much argument over detail but he would be under considerable pressure from Gen Chitti, Marshal Dawee and FonMin Thanat to refrain from doing so until and unless there was a clear indication of the necessity for their use across the Mekong. Motivations are not wholly clear. I am inclined to feel Chitti and Dawee opportunistic in terms personal effect on individual positions. Thanat quite simply would wish to use such consultation to influence US policy in protecting Thai vital interests.

2. There are several basic factors on which there is general Thai agreement. These are. A. Extreme Thai sensitivity about assuming a stance of open belligerency. [4 lines of source text not declassified.

B. As I have reported several times, the Thai simply do not believe that the presence of American troops as such would provide additional deterrence. They believe the wide publicity given to recent logistic buildup plus demonstrated ability to deploy rapidly by air makes actual physical presence in Thailand unnecessary before there is reason for their use and a decision to so use them.

C. The Thai are quite frankly extremely loath to increase the American military presence. At present moment we are over the 5,000 mark and rapidly climbing. Until we intend to use combat troops across the Mekong they would hope to limit US military presence here, particularly that growing portion which is primarily intended for US strategic interests.

D. Thai sensitivity over imputation they totally dependent on US. Latest Thai public comments carry pointed emphasis on absence present need for US troop deployment and refrain from public comment on US air deployment. RTG obviously attempting make it clear to its own citizens it not abdicating its authority and responsibility to US; and that US assistance will be invoked only when job clearly beyond Thai capabilities.

E. US slowness in responding to Thai concern over US Command arrangements.

3. In summary, I have agreement (in principle) for deployment of ground troops subject to consultation on timing. Such consultation will inevitably involve some searching questions as to our plans for their use. Nevertheless, I can secure agreement any time we really determine this essential enough to warrant real pressure and I am given reasonable rationale.

In my opinion, it would be serious error to press such request at present time.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate, Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, Saigon for Westmoreland, and Vientiane. Pierce Arrow was a series indicator relating to the North Vietnamese attack/attacks on the U.S. Destroyer Maddox in the Gulf of Tonkin and the U.S. response to it. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA.

2 In telegram 178 to Bangkok, August 5, the Department instructed the Embassy to state in response to press inquiries that the United States contemplated no deployment of U.S. troops to Thailand except for precautionary air movements. The Embassy was also requested to obtain Thai Government advance approval for possible deployment of U.S. ground troops already on alert, unless it would involve wide-ranging discussions with the Thais on the use to which U.S. troops might be put. (Ibid.)

3 Dated July 30. (Ibid., POL 27 ASIA SE)

4 Not found.

284. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 284. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, September 23, 1964.

JCSM–821–64

SUBJECT

Coups dʼEtat in Thailand (C)

1. Recent reports from Bangkok indicate that we cannot rule out the possibility that a coup dʼetat might be directed against the Thanom government in Thailand. While coups have been a means of political change in Thailand since 1932, such an occurrence, in light of the present Southeast Asia situation, could create serious political problems and be most damaging to the US military posture in that area.

2. In view of the above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have examined the military implications for the United States of a coup in Thailand, together with alternative US courses of action with respect thereto.

3. A principal US objective for Thailand is to insure that it remains a stable nation, allied to the United States, and available as a forward base for the projection of US power into Southeast Asia. Militarily, Thailand is the only secure mainland base for US operations in that area at this time. We have extensive operating rights and base facilities available for our use in Thailand; these operating rights are for the most part informal and without the basis of a signed agreement. Their value is underlined by our operations in Laos and the recent deployments subsequent to Pierce Arrow.

4. The character of a Thai Government which might come into being as a result of a coup will probably be pro-United States unless the US position in Southeast Asia erodes seriously. In the latter event, we can expect the Thais to accommodate themselves to whatever new power situation exists in the area. Regardless of what the nature of the coup may be, the United States should take steps to insure continuance of the status quo ante insofar as US military forces and operations are concerned.

5. From their examination, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that. a. An anticommunist, pro-United States, cooperative, and stable Thailand is critical to maintenance of the US military posture in Southeast Asia.

b. The United States should strengthen and maintain the Thai Government to the above end.

c. If warned in advance, the United States should seek to avert an impending coup by appropriate actions.

d. If a pro-Western coup does take place, immediate steps should be taken by the United States to insure reaffirmation of US military operating rights in Thailand and continued Thai military cooperation and support.

e. If a neutralist or procommunist coup takes place, the United States should attempt to reinstate the Government or an acceptable substitute by supporting it or any prospective counter-coup group which would lead to that end. Where such measures fail against a procommunist coup, the United States should be prepared to take appropriate military action to protect specific US security interests in the area and/or to restore a pro-US Thai Government to power.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that:2 a. The above stated conclusions be used in formulating US policy with respect to any coup contingencies in Thailand.

b. The memorandum contained in the Appendix hereto be forwarded to the Secretary of State.3

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Thailand 381. Secret.

2 Assistant Secretary of Defense McNaughton sent this memorandum to McNamara, October 3, recommending that he forward the views of the JCS to the Secretary of State. McNamara wrote the following note on the McNaughton memorandum: “Not necessary. RM.”

3 The memorandum for Rusk, which was substantially the same as the memorandum to McNamara, is attached, but not printed.

285. Memorandum of Conversation 285. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, December 11, 1964, 12:13–12:40 p.m.

SUBJECT

General Discussion

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Foreign Minister of Thailand Thanat Khoman

Ambassador of Thailand Sukich Nimmanheminda

Mr. William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs

1. South Viet-Nam Situation.

The President said that we were deeply concerned about the ineffectiveness and disunity in Saigon, and that this necessarily affected what we ourselves could plan to do. (Mr. Bundy noted that he had briefed the Foreign Minister fully on our immediate plans and views.2 ) The President said that the problem of getting the various groups to put the national unity ahead of their parochial welfare was a terribly trying one, and that we needed ideas from any quarter that would help us solve it.

Thanat responded that he had three specific thoughts: a. He thought that the “so-called Buddhist movement” was in fact heavily political and was indeed infiltrated by the Communists to some degree.

b. Nonetheless, he thought it must be remembered that the Buddhists in general had had legitimate grievances under previous governments (obviously meaning Diem) and that there should be utility in trying to reason with them to see if greater understanding could not be reached. The President raised the question whether leading Buddhist groups or individuals in Thailand could play a part in reaching the Vietnamese Buddhists, and Thanat showed much interest in this proposition and implied that he would look into it.

c. That the situation in South Viet-Nam was being painted in the blackest possible tones by “friendly groups”—by which it became clear he meant the French in particular. (He did not indicate whether he was referring solely or predominantly to the official French, or rather to the private French community.) Mr. Bundy noted that Ambassador Taylor had reported there were no indications of truly hostile French political action, but that it was certainly true that the French consistently took the worst possible view at any given time, and that this had a bad effect on morale. The President said that Secretary Rusk should take this up with the French when he saw them at the NATO meeting. (Mr. Bundy later carried out this instruction.)

Thanat then referred to the value of some demonstrable military successes. Mr. Bundy commented that the Vietnamese armed forces had in fact given a very good account of themselves in several recent actions and the President urged that this be publicized more than was being done and asked that he himself be given such reports more than was now the case.

The President asked whether Thanat had further suggestions that might help the situation, and Thanat suggested that visits by South Vietnamese leaders to Thailand might be useful and could probably be arranged in the near future.

2. Southeast Asia Generally.

The President several times reaffirmed our appreciation of the firm Thai position and over Thai cooperation, referring specifically to such matters as military personnel in Laos.3 He expressed gratification that our two nations were seeing the basic problem so closely in the same terms, and Thanat returned this sentiment strongly. Thanat also referred to the indivisibility of the area and to the fact that any loss of South Viet-Nam would constitute an immediate threat to Thailand, beyond Thailand to Malaysia, and to the rest of the adjacent areas. He thought that Laos and Cambodia would be the first to be threatened, and could hardly hold out, and his implication was that Thailand would do its utmost, but that the issue would be in some doubt.

3. Thanat referred briefly to the desirability of certain additional assistance for highway development in the northeast, and Mr. Bundy noted that this had already been discussed between himself and Thanat and that we were prepared to go ahead with a feasibility study by AID. The President asked that he be given a report on the progress of this project when it matured.

4. In closing, following the presentation of a gift from Prime Minister Thanom—a letter from the Prime Minister was also delivered at the outset of the meeting, conveying general sentiments of support and appreciation—the President referred to our Peace Corps activity in Thailand and noted that the numbers have now reached 300. Thanat responded that this seemed to be going very well and that the Thai appreciated it.

5. During the course of the conversation Mr. Bundy mentioned that Thanat had made a most helpful statement to the press about the need for patience on the Viet-Nam problem, and the President expressed the hope that Thanat could hit this note when he saw the press following the meeting.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. II, Memos, 8/64–3/65. Secret; Limdis. Drafted by William Bundy. The time of the meeting is from the Presidentʼs Daily Dairy. (Ibid.) The meeting was held at the White House. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was approved by the White House on December 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Komer and McGeorge Bundy sent the President a briefing memorandum for this visit in which they stated that “the main thing is to add your strong assurance to him of our determination to check the spread of communism in Southeast Asia and to stand firmly behind our commitment to Thailand.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. II, Memos, 8/64–3/65) Rusk sent the President a December 9 briefing memorandum that also made this point. (Ibid.)

2  Thanat Khoman met with William Bundy in Bundyʼs office at 10:15 a.m., December 11. An account of that meeting is in a memorandum of conversation of that date. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 This sensitive information is the reason for the Limdis caption. [Footnote in the source text.]

286. Memorandum for the Record 286. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, January 29, 1965, 2 p.m.

SUBJECT

Minutes of the Meeting of the Special Group (CI), 2:00 p.m., Friday, January 29, 19652

PRESENT

Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Mr. McCone, General Wheeler, Mr. Rowan, Mr. Komer, Ambassador Thompson vice Governor Harriman, Mr. Solbert vice Mr. Vance, Mr. Gaud vice Mr. Bell

General Carter, Ambassador Martin, Mr. Trueheart, Mr. Pickering, Mr. Maechling, Mr. Colby, [name deleted] and Mr. Lair were present for the meeting

At Mr. Bundyʼs suggestion, Mr. McCone explained to the Group his concern over ominous signs of trouble in Thailand, a country which has long been under surveillance by the Special Group. He suggested that the Group discuss the problems with the Ambassador, particularly in view of signs that Thailand is becoming a prime target for ChiCom infiltration and subversion.

At Ambassador Martinʼs request, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reviewed the indicators pointing toward the dangers of Thailand becoming a target of increased Communist activity in 1965. Among these, he mentioned increasing terrorism and assassination of Thai officials in the Northeast, establishment of a “Thai National Front” group, Chen Yiʼs statement to the French Ambassador in Peking that insurgency may break out in Thailand in 1965, and an increase in Communist radio propaganda and distribution of leaflets. Nevertheless, he said, the situation still remains in Phase I of insurgency. In reply to Mr. Gaud, he said that the Thai Government is capable of handling the situation at its present level and is planning a series of internal security measures throughout the area, at the same time conducting civic action.

Ambassador Martin then briefed the Group on how he interprets these signs, saying that he is of the opinion that this is preliminary preparation for an all-out subversive movement in Thailand. He then reviewed the principal counterinsurgency programs, stating that the success of the Mobile Development Units (MDUʼs) has had a catalytic effect on other programs of the Thai Government. He pointed out that in all these programs the Thai attitude is one of intense cooperation, and the climate is favorable for permanent improvements. He said that one of the most significant developments is President Johnsonʼs recent letter to the Prime Minister of Thailand approving joint planning between Thailand and the United States for the defense of the Mekong lowlands, adding that this joint planning is evidence of partnership to the Government of Thailand.3

Mr. McCone asked if Thailandʼs long history of independent, rather than colonial domination, has prepared her better to cope with insurgency or is there the same lack of interest or discontent on the part of the people with the central government as evidenced in South Vietnam. The Ambassador said that a negative feeling toward the central government is similar in the underdeveloped areas, particularly the Northeast, but for different reasons: these areas of Thailand have always been considered economically unimportant, and the central government has paid them little attention.

Mr. McCone mentioned several of the programs in Thailand, including the police programs, with which the Group had been previously involved, and asked the Ambassador what we need—an intensification of these programs, more money, more people, or more training? Ambassador Martin explained that the Border Patrol Police is an effective unit, [1 line of source text not declassified].

Mr. Bundy asked about intelligence collection in these areas, whether it is continuous or on an in-and-out basis. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] answered that his representatives are in and out of the area, remaining in the background.

Ambassador Martin continued that he is in the midst of talks on the Military Assistance Program and that his recommendations are under consideration. With respect to other programs he cited the following as examples of what is needed: (a) The Government of Thailand is having difficulty in meeting payment of per diem to the police for field duty in the Northeast connected with the current emergency; he requested an additional $36,000 for this purpose; (b) Additional funds are needed for petroleum requirements for the MDUʼs ($346,000); (c) Additional road equipment is required for the MDUʼs ($300,000); (d) $42,000 is needed for Special Operation Center radios; and (e) Ambassador Martin requested that AID consider increasing the $50,000 annual contingency fund. Mr. Gaud replied that if that amount is spent wisely, additional contingency funds would be available.

Mr. Rowan requested information on the proposal to locate a million-watt transmitter in Thailand to beam broadcasts to the whole of Southeast Asia. The Group discussed the reasons why it had not been wanted in Vietnam. Ambassador Martin said that the previous attitudes of the Thai Government had been negative on the proposal, and that he preferred not to reopen the subject unless it is firm that we want to locate it in Thailand rather than in Vietnam. It was agreed that USIA would query Ambassador Taylor on his wishes in this matter.

C.G. Moody, Jr.
Executive Secretary
Special Group (CI)

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Special Group (Counter Insurgency) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Minutes of Meetings, Jan.–Dec. 1965. Secret. Drafted on February 2.

2 See U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs on pp. XXXV–XLI for general information on the evolution of the Special Group for Counter-Insurgency.

3 Apparent reference to Johnsonʼs approval of Joint U.S.-Thai military planning on June 22, 1964.

287. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 287. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, March 23, 1965, 4 p.m.

1409. In reflecting on our recently concluded Baguio discussions2 it has seemed increasingly plain to me that our Thai MAP policy needs some very careful rethinking and a fundamental reorientation in Washington if we are to have any real chance of doing for ourselves here the many essential things we now so clearly need to do in our own interests. I start from a basic premise, which has become I believe, crystal clear to perceptive and discerning minds over the past months: That is the fact that Thailand is now increasingly an integral and vital part of our current operational military complex in SE Asia. Yet, despite the complete comprehension of the members of the Special Group, working level attention to Thai MAP problems seems still to assume Thailand is not involved. Quite the contrary is true.

The Thai contribution is one on which we have had to rely more and more for the conduct of our operations in Laos and South Vietnam. Quite aside from the long list of extraordinarily sensitive activities which the Thai permit us to carry on here and also quite aside from the indirect contributions in artillery, T–28 pilots and “hardnose” operations in Laos, the virtually unrestricted use of Thai bases for US aircraft in Barrel Roll and Rolling Thunder operations has become a pivotal factor in the success of our stepped-up military efforts in SEA. I note, for example, that over half the US aircraft flying in the recent Rolling Thunder missions were from Thai bases.

Our dependence on Thailand, moreover, will clearly increase markedly over the next few months, as witnessed by an ever-growing list of new US requirements for forces and facilities here. In addition to known requirements for reconnaissance aircraft and three additional fighter squadrons spread over four bases, we now have word of an intensive building in logistics support facilities for all three US services and further communications requirements, all of which are immediate in their urgency and all directed not at Thai requirements or desires, but specifically at improving our unilateral security posture and the prosecution of our operations in Laos and South Vietnam.

At same time Thailand itself is increasingly becoming a target for Communist penetration which is in turn related in no small way to what is going on across its borders to the east. While the immediate internal situation is controllable, a major element in determining the success of our joint programs designed to effect that control is the wholehearted support of key elements and personnel in the Thai Government. This is true for both our military and civilian programs. As we said many times before, the key to our ability to persuade the Thai to grant our many re- quests and to maintain their ready cooperation is our willingness to bring them into the picture, to deal with them as full and equal partners and to make them feel an integral part of what is going on. This has worked well and, for the moment, it would be difficult to conceive of a more cooperative government. Effective diplomacy and a persuasive American mission can continue on present momentum for the immediate future. But in order to continue this effective Thai cooperation we must also be willing to provide necessary and continuing support in the form of US assistance appropriate to current circumstances and clearly in our own interests to provide.

Despite the foregoing, we seem for some reason to insist upon treating Thailand in many ways, so far as MAP policy is concerned, as totally divorced from the SE Asia operational problem. I note in this connection that our old friend Tim Hoopes in his forthcoming trip (DEF 07233),3 which we welcome, will look at Thailand along with all other FE countries except Laos and SVN. In Baguio I was informed that South Vietnam and Laos MAPs are treated separately from other FE country MAPs and afforded absolute priority in funding. But as was brought out vividly and effectively during our discussions, any increased requirements for Laos and SVN under current DOD policy must come out of CINCPACʼs over-all MAP allocations, meaning an inevitable compression of other FE country programs, in which Thailand presumably must share under current ground rules.

This “business as usual” approach to Thai MAP is also reflected in other ways, nowhere perhaps more strikingly than in the handling of our urgent requests for Washington consideration of increases in the FY 1965 and 66 MAP applications for Thailand. (Embtel 1274 and CHJUSMAGʼs 050645Z Mar 65 to CINCPAC.)4 By the time I left Baguio not even our preliminary requests (now refined as indicated in the cited messages and supported by CINCPAC) had reached responsible levels for consideration in the JCS and ISA. Nor do we know where we stand on higher level consideration of Project 22 and the JUSMAG force objectives study of last November on which these recommendations are based. While I hope Hoopes will look at the latter study carefully before he comes out, I nevertheless feel we cannot afford to treat it in a routine manner at home when so much is at stake here.

It seems to me, accordingly, that immediate and serious consideration should be given to doing two things. First, and most urgent from our point of view, is to put the Thai MAP in the same special category as Laos and SVN in simple recognition of the basic fact that our activities here are an integral and inseparable part of the war going on in SE Asia. Secondly, if funds are not otherwise available, immediate favorable consideration must be given to the need for a supplementary MAP appropriations during this fiscal year and appropriate increases in FY 66 to meet the special needs of SE Asia, including Thailand. Without such action we are all in grave danger of being starved to death as we try with artificially constricted assets to meet the ever-increasing and voracious appetites of our neighbors.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–3 US–THAI. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to the White House, DOD, JCS, and CINCPAC.

2 The Far Eastern Chiefs of Mission conference held in Baguio, Philippines.

3 Not found.

4 Telegram 1274 from Bangkok, March 5, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI; CHJUSMAG 05645Z, March 5, has not been found.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, March 31, 1965, 7 p.m.

1458. Dept pass priority info DOD JCS unn from Bangkok. The embassy has been included as info addressee on a number of important military planning messages within recent days, all of which are directed at the pressing need for greatly strengthening the US military posture in this area. As indicated in my 14472 to Department of yesterday we have already taken action on the most immediate elements of the Air Force requirements package and assume more parts to this package will be forthcoming when final funding decisions are made shortly (Embtel 1439 to Dept).3 At the same time we are keenly aware of a growing list of urgent requirements for US ground forces now under development, ranging from POL and pipeline facilities (JCS 00747 to CINCPAC)4 to the proposed extension of the Bangkok by-pass road from Kabinburi to Korat.

The latter group of requirements is geared almost entirely to a major augmentation in the logistics base necessary to support US ground forces should they be deployed to this area. The timing of such deployments, i.e., whether they would be undertaken in advance of actual attack or under other predetermined circumstances is still being debated (we will be commenting separately on this aspect of the question). But regardless of when deployment is determined to be necessary, the central fact is that a general consensus of expert military judgment has now been developed, in which major new US requirements for augmented support facilities needed now must be negotiated in the very near future as a matter of highest priority.

Our own analysis tends to support this new sense of urgency. While we appreciate the need from the standpoint of sound management to refine and coordinate the plans in which these requirements are based, it is nevertheless clear that we will be needing more facilities in the very near future. The faster we can get a start on them, including the all important business of discussing them with the RTG, the earlier we can get on with the important business of land acquisition and actual construction. We accordingly urge that every effort be made to develop these requirements as rapidly as possible in a form which will permit us to put a coherent package to the RTG authorities. The same considerations set forth in paras 3–6 of my 1439 to the Department apply to these ground force requirements as apply to the Westpac Air package.

Similarly, and with equal urgency it seems to me, we must be prepared to act almost simultaneously on the balancing half of this package; namely, those measures designed to reinforce the capability of the Thai forces in this joint endeavor. I refer there to the vital importance of prompt and favorable action on the series of requests we have put to Washington for augmentation of the FY 65 and 66 Military Assistance Programs (my 1409 to Department).5 By far the larger part of these recommendations has now been reviewed and endorsed by all major US military headquarters in the Pacific (CINCPACʼs 192315Z to OASD/ISA and CINCPACAFʼs C 50007 Mar 65 (P 252034Z) (notal).6 We cannot reasonably expect the expeditious action we need here on our own requirements without parallel action on these MAP add-ons, which will enable Thai to make a maximum contribution to our combined efforts. It is, thus, imperative in our considered view that a favorable decision be reached in Washington in the very near future along the lines which we have repeatedly recommended which will assure the immediate availability of sufficient new MAP assets for the Thai program to make possible the achievement of our vital interests here.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 US. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1447 from Bangkok, March 30. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1439 from Bangkok, March 26. (Ibid.)

4 Not found.

5  Document 287.

6 Neither found.

289. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 289. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, April 15, 1965.

I–35358/65

SUBJECT

Additional Military Assistance for Thailand

In response to your memorandum of April 1,2 I have reviewed Ambassador Martinʼs proposed add-ons for FY65 Thailand MAP. In my judgment, additional FY65 MAP for Thailand must be justified on one or more of the following grounds: 1. To deal with the threat of subversion and potential low-level insurgency.

2. To deal with conventional war threat. a. By building up solely Thai capabilitie.

b. By building up facilities for joint US/Thai use. (Note that this item could be funded either by MAP or by the Services.)

3. To provide political “cumshaw” to the Thais for cooperation in SEA efforts.

Although Ambassador Martin has been pressing for these add-ons primarily on Ground 1, very few of his recommended add-ons can be directly identified as predominantly counter-subversion or even counter-insurgency oriented. Most appear to provide additional conventional war capability or would contribute to increasing the readiness and capability of US forces that may subsequently be deployed to Thailand.

Although none of the add-ons is urgent from a strict military view and although there has been a recent adverse GAO evaluation of Thai utilization of MAP equipment (Tab G),3 an argument could be made for the add-ons on either Ground 1 or 2 as contributing to Thai “over-all capability.” But we should be aware that the controlling justification for almost all of the add-ons would be the “cumshaw” Ground 3. Accordingly, I recommend that for now (pending receipt of formal JCS comments next week) you take no action on the add-ons. My present views on each proposed FY65 add-on are at Tab A. As indicated there, I am prepared to recommend—as being (a) militarily needed (b) now—approximately $2.26 million as possible add-ons and items approximating $2.3 million for reprogramming. State, as you know, has pressed for the add-ons on a Ground 3 rationale. I will explore with State the possibility of their being a little tougher with Martin and of their providing a special AID transfer for mutually agreed add-ons that would satisfy any genuine political requirement. (They have already agreed to do so with regard to $400,000 add-on for FY65 per diem support of certain Thai army training.)

Staff views are furnished at Tab B with regard to the add-ons requested for FY66, but no decision is needed now and I propose to look at these more closely when the JCS views are received.

John T. McNaughton

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 1265, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Under Secretary of Defense Vance saw it

2 Not found.

3 Tabs A–L are cited as attachments. Tab A is ISAʼs comments on FY 65 Add-ons; Tab B, ISAʼs comments on FY 66 Add-ons; Tab C, “Composition &Capabilities of Thai Security Forces;” Tab D, “Force Objective Study;” Tab E, “Major Items of Equipment in Country;” Tab F, “Thailandʼs Financial Capabilities; Tab G, “GAO Report Summary,” Tab H is Document 288; Tab I, “Thailand MAP Summary, FY 65–70;” Tab J, “Reductions to FY65 & FY66 MAP,” Tab K, “United States Policy Towards Thailand”; and Tab L, “Locator Map.”

290. Memorandum From the Special Assistant (Moore) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 290. Memorandum From the Special Assistant (Moore) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 23, 1965.

SUBJECT

Thai MAP Add-ons

Several things have happened since our talk with you on this subject which you should know about, and there is an immediate need to determine what kind of representation we should make to the Defense Department.

Developments

1. We have a copy of ISAʼs earlier memo to Secretary McNamara, the attachment to which outlines the JUSMAG, CINCPAC, and ISA positions item-by-item. This is at Tab A.2 This tentatively suggests $2.26 million for add-ons and $2.3 million for reprogramming. We feel the covering memo undersells the counter-insurgency relevancy and short shrifts the whole political rationale.

2. The JCS position has now gone up, supporting the CINCPAC position and the position we here had tentatively decided to take recommending add-ons of $8.9 million as long as the money doesnʼt come out of other MAP countries or the Services.

3. The Presidential Determination for the use of Section 510 to the amount of $75 million has been signed by the President and is at Tab B.3 This speaks in general terms of need, but Secretary McNamara presently intends to use it for Vietnam.

4. We have had a meeting with Peter Solbert and Al Friedman to discuss the whole question, out of which came the following points. a) Given the pressure ISA feels from their Secretary on this issue, there is little agreement between us on either the military or the political arguments, but they are trying to play a useful role if we supply the ammunition. Mr. Solbert, who is back into the play, is really trying to help. Their problem is, of course, that they simply canʼt find a source of money, and therefore keep talking about reprogramming in a vague manner.

b) McNamara made it clear to ISA that the $75 [million] would be only for Vietnam. He knocked out a portion designated “other SEA”, which could have included Thailand. The chances are good that he will later go for further Section 510 money this fiscal year, however. There is some talk that he agreed to use Section 510 only with the understanding that he would not restore any of the cuts which have already been made in the four forward defense countries.

c) ISA is concerned that they arenʼt getting the true picture in Bangkok. They wonder if the Thais really care all that much about these new items, are they really pushing on the add-ons, or is it Graham storing up goodies that they really havenʼt asked for yet.

d) ISA does have some real questions as to the military need involved, and makes the distinction between items being militarily required or merely militarily justifiable. They agreed under pressure from us that the add-on requests really did relate to the counter-insurgency problem, but argued that this was in terms of a higher level of insurgency and not the lower level of subversion, which was the problem the Thais faced first and hadnʼt worked out yet. In this regard, they mentioned that AID should be doing a great deal more in the insurgency business through the police, and why didnʼt we push AID harder? We pointed out that the whole problem of counter-insurgency tasks between the military and the police is now being worked on urgently both within the Thai government and our own mission there and simply isnʼt solved yet, but that the real power in Thailand rests in the military.

e) They have told us that they are going to do a new memorandum presenting their position to Secretary McNamara, now that the JCS position is in. They indicated that they would do a better job on the political side, but wanted a good position from us to use for the real firepower. They suggested either a Rusk-McNamara or a Bundy-McNamara or a Bundy-McNaughton memo.

Political Arguments

Generally, we should follow the basic line set out in the SEA memo to you of last week by Al Francis on page 5 under “Talking Points—Political”. This memo is at Tab C.4 We are working on some more language now that could be employed in a State-Defense paper. I feel we have got to get across the point that we simply cannot afford to take the Thais for granted, that they are not over the long run as absolutely firm as they may appear from one moment to the next, and that they need continuing reassurances from us that we are standing with them in Southeast Asia not just at the moment but into the future. It is not enough simply to say that we are protecting their country and thatʼs what they are getting out of it and what more do they want. Our increasing military presence does not actually help them with their basic problems, such as the growing subversion/insurgency menace, and our presence in their eyes does not necessarily look so permanent, but can disappear almost as fast as it appeared. They are watching our behaviour very carefully to see just how far weʼre willing to take it that far away from home. If we demonstrate our willingness to increase MAP, especially in the long-term counter-insurgency field, this would constitute a reassurance, a further symbol of our permanency. They see the counter-insurgency threat as something very real right now, and must be wondering if we recognize it in that sense or just let it fritter along until it becomes a really critical matter. The Thais have responded remarkably well to our series of requests for facilities use and military personnel, without a scrap of paper to back it up. There will be many more requests and Thailand—within and without the government—will come under increasing pressure and wariness about Thais being American puppets, pushed around by Americans without any guarantees, infesting Thailand. The Thais are encouraged by the strong commitment signal of our air strikes, but they know that what really counts is yet to come, that that could conceivably be just a passing phase. They need to be bolstered, to be encouraged, to ensure their vital continuing cooperation and to stave off the developing psychology of loss-cutting and neutralization which anxiety bred by a feeling of isolation breeds in turn.

Sources of Money for Add-ons

There are three approaches that occurred to us and to ISA: 1. Reprogramming. This would be the fastest, but probably also the least feasible. ISA had kind of encouraged this, but without being specific on where the money could be found.

2. Out of the $75 million draw-down McNamara has already requested. This would be a good initial position, falling back to 3. below, although Mr. McNamara would probably resist mightily. Apparently the $75 million will still leave him short on now-known FY65 South Vietnam MAP needs.

3. Out of the additional money which is anticipated to come under Section 510. This is the most feasible in terms of funds, but a long shot with limited guarantee, and would be difficult to set up in terms of letting the Thais know quickly.

ISA is obviously suggesting to us that in our position to be sent to Defense we outline what we think is the desired way to go about funding whatever we think is politically justifiable in the way of add-ons.

Recommendation

We feel we could prepare a memo covering the above points and requesting the CINCPAC/JCS level of add-ons in strong terms. We feel you should send it to McNaughton to be included in his recommendations to Mr. McNamara and that you might also want to contact Mr. McNamara personally yourself on the matter.5

Jon

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. No classification marking.

2 Apparently a reference to a memorandum other than Document 289; the memorandum at Tab A has not been found.

3 Not found attached.

4 Not found.

5 According to an attached April 23 note from Bundyʼs secretary, Bundy agreed with the recommendations in this memorandum and asked Trueheart to draft a letter from Bundy to send to McNaughton; see Document 291.

291. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 291. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, April 24, 1965.

Dear John:

The Department of State strongly supports the proposal for add-ons to the Thailand military assistance program for FY 1965 as modified and approved by CINCPAC and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Department recommends that the proposal as revised be approved and that it be funded out of the Section 510 drawdown authority.

Thailand has cooperated with us so totally in the past few months that we tend at times to assume that cooperation as a constant, and to overlook the possibility of its diminution or withdrawal. The readiness of the Thai to allow us to launch air attacks on Communist targets in Viet-Nam and Laos from Thai bases is essential. Thai pilots and artillerymen in Laos and the logistic base Thailand provides for operations there are of critical importance. The clear-cut commitment to us by the most stable country in the area is an asset of immeasurable importance.

Of course the Thai took this commitment for reasons of their own self-interest. They have our assurance that we will hold the enormous Communist land forces at bay. But this alone is not enough. Nor will “political payoffs” do the job. The Thai, and especially the Thai military, must feel that their partnership with the U.S. is of a permanent nature, consonant with the clearly increasing threat. This means greater emphasis on counter-insurgency in face of stepped up Communist activities in the northeast. It means gearing up for possible implementation of the plans drawn up in “Project 22” which envisages possible joint US-Thai action in the Mekong Valley.2 It means continuing effort to improve Thai capability to carry out their SEATO missions. The goal is maintenance of an atmosphere of growing capability and growing confidence in that capability.

Such an atmosphere cannot be maintained while continuing to slash MAP levels for Thailand. On the contrary, this can hardly fail to undermine the confidence of our friends in the Thai military and give strength to the arguments of those in Thailand who favor a policy of greater independence from the United States, who claim Thailand is becoming a puppet of the U.S. We know there is this sentiment in Thailand and that its proponents are prepared to seize upon any indication that we are hesitant or faltering. Foreign Minister Thanat has called it an “underground movement” of neutralism. If this should prevail, our access to Thai bases would go, our position in Laos would quickly become untenable, our whole strategic position in Southeast Asia would begin to crumble.

In addition, there is a subtle problem of political psychology involved in our sustained approaches to the Thai to permit and to give us authority to conduct US actions, while at the same time we do nothing even of a modest character to improve the capabilities of the Thai themselves. This relates to such efforts as we are now making on the pipeline problem and various other US projects. I grant that they have not been doing all they should for themselves, but the way to get them to do it is surely to add a little bit of carrot and not to give them the idea that Uncle Sam is going to do the guts of the job.

In sum, we cannot hope to succeed in Thailand by trying to come as close as possible to the margin beyond which the influence of our friends in the Thai military begins to wane or their confidence begins to be shaken. They must feel and be able to demonstrate clearly and decisively that the policy of total involvement with the United States is the correct one.

Obviously there is no magic MAP level which would assure this. But there is, I believe, a general order of magnitude which, carefully programmed by our military, can provide the necessary assurances. The present proposal in our judgment meets this criterion. To do anything less, at a time when the pressures on the Thai are so great, at a time when we are making added demands on them almost daily, would in our judgment pose an unacceptable risk.

“Reprogramming” within the present low ceiling strikes us as dubious. Telling ourselves we will make up the differences in FY 66 is impractical—we have no reason to believe the funding problem will have eased by then. Borrowing from other country programs offers little prospect. The Section 510 route proposed above seems clearly to be the best alternative.

Sincerely,

William P. Bundy 3

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Misc. Chron. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Pickering and Moore. A note on the source text indicates that the original was hand delivered to McNaughton.

2 Project 22 was the codename for joint U.S.-Thai military planning initiated in June 1964 and authorized by President Johnson on June 22, 1964 (hence its name). See Documents 275 and 277. Project 22 dealt specifically with the U.S.-Thai military planning for the contingency of a North Vietnamese/Pathet Lao drive towards the Mekong lowlands of Laos and the U.S. and Thai response to it.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

292. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk 292. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, April 30, 1965.

Dear Dean:

You will of course recall the request made to you by Thai Foreign Minister Thanat at Manila last year that U.S. command arrangements in Southeast Asia be modified.

I have noted the political problems repeatedly expressed by Ambassador Martin and the long-standing sensitivity of the Thai Government to the double-hat COMUSMACV/COMUSMACTHAI arrangement.2 Weighing equally in my view is the requirement to promote efficiency in current operations in the RVN by enabling COMUSMACV to concentrate his efforts on the immediate task of defeating the Viet Cong. Accordingly, I have decided upon the separation of the subordinate unified commands, COMUSMACV and COMUSMACTHAI, and the assignment of an Army Major General as COMUSMACTHAI/CHJUSMAAGTHAI and an Air Force Brigadier General as Chief of Staff, MACTHAI.

At the same time, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the planning responsibilities borne by COMUSMACV as Commander, U.S. Forces Southeast Asia (COMUSSEASIA) (designate) and as Commander, Central Region SEATO Field Forces (COMCRSFF) (designate) require that he be in a position to exercise policy control over the SEASIA and SEATO planning activities undertaken by COMUSMACTHAI.3 This control, I believe, should be exercised through a direct U.S. channel to be kept open between COMUSMACTHAI and General Westmoreland, as COMUSSEASIA (designate) and as COMCRSFF (designate). Accordingly, for staff support to accomplish the SEASIA and SEATO planning functions, the present small COMUSMACTHAI planning group at Bangkok should be augmented. Additionally, a communications and operations facility should be developed at Korat, Thailand, to permit a possible later expansion into a headquarters for COMUSSEA and COMCRSFF. You may wish to notify the Thai Government of this proposed change at the SEATO meeting in London next week.

Sincerely,

RM 4

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, 10th SEATO Meeting, CF 2498. Top Secret.

2  Martin made this point most recently in telegram 1456 from Bangkok, March 31, and recommended the command structure outlined by McNamara in this letter. Martin stated that the structure “would be completely acceptable” to the Thai Government. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 As stated in a memorandum from the JCS to McNamara, JCSM–319–65, April 28. (Department of Defense, JCS Official Files, 9150 (28 Apr 65)

4 Pinted from a copy that bears these taped initials.

293. Memorandum of Conversation 293. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 18, 1965, 11:30–12:15 p.m.

I–23518/65

SUBJECT

Visit of ACM Dawee Chulasapya, Deputy Minister of Defense and Chief of Staff of Supreme Command of Thailand

PARTICIPANTS

Thailand Deputy Minister of Defense—Dawee Chulasapya

Air Attaché—Group Captain Dakleow Susilvorn, RTAF

United States Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Assistant Secretary of Defense/ISA—John T. McNaughton

Ambassador to Thailand—Graham Martin

Assistant to Director, Far East Region/ISA—Captain J.B. Drachnik, USN

Desk Officer/Thailand, Department of State—Laurence Pickering

1. Introductory Remarks. The Secretary noted that we had resumed the bombing of NVN. Dawee indicated his pleasure and said he had been afraid we had stopped for good. Dawee said that Prime Minister Thanom sent his regards to the Secretary. He added that Thanom was a very cooperative person; very realistic.

2. Thai Assistance in Laos. The Secretary expressed his appreciation for the effective help given in Laos by the Thai T–28ʼs and artillery, to which Dawee responded that we would have to supply more T–28ʼs to the Thai to replace those in Laos. The Secretary believed that the return of the aircraft would occur in June or July and then added that if there were a delay we could always send more out.

3. Thai Counterinsurgency Efforts. The Secretary asked Dawee to tell him about Thailandʼs CI efforts in the Northeast. Dawee replied that their efforts were working very nicely. He noted they had found they would have to keep the MDU teams in place longer than was originally intended. There had been a few incidents in the NE—a few village chiefs had been killed. Nine of 15 MDUʼs were already established. There were thousands of villages in the NE and about 12 million people. Each MDU had to cover some 500 villages. They were trying to improve the land and water where the people lived; they were not forcing the people to move.

4. Village Radios. The Secretary wanted to know how many of the villages had radio receivers. Dawee answered that almost every village had. They had commercial transistor-type radios. As to transceivers, he noted that MAP had furnished him only some 400 sets; he planned for 4,000. The first 400 he had put into villages in the worst area. They worked very well. The Secretary expressed his concern that Thailand was very weak in such communications. Ambassador Martin offered that AID had now accepted the radio problem. Secretary McNamara stated that as far as he was concerned village radios were a military requirement, and he asked Mr. McNaughton to look into them and report to him.

The Secretary was advised that about 400 radios were in the FY64 program, had not been asked for until December 1964, were presently in construction and would be delivered in a couple of months. They were a commercial model and a production line had had to be started up. The Secretary noted that this was the same old story we had had with deliveries to Vietnam, and they could be shaken up. He said we would get the matter moving. He asked Dawee if he could absorb all of the 4,000 radios that he wanted within the next six months and take care of them. Dawee replied that the Thai could use all of them now. They were very good little radio sets and his people had been learning how to take care of them.

5. Communist Activity in South Thailand. The Secretary asked Dawee how much communist activity there was in Thailand. Dawee replied, “More than before”. He said every stranger is now reported and there seemed to be many. Ambassador Martin asked that he tell the Secretary of the new activity in the South. The Minister described the Chinese terrorist situation along the Malay border. He said they extorted money from the people. He spoke of the recently renewed agreement with Malaysia which provided a joint intelligence center at Songkhla. He said it was a very good operation so far. There were already 2 MDUʼs working there (not under his Supreme Command) and he would add two more from those under the Supreme Command. The border population was about 300,000, mixed Thai and Chinese; the total population of the five southern provinces was about 5 million. Ambassador Martin offered that Chinese teams had been infiltrated into the South. He repeated the information recently described in an intelligence report of the capture of a defector who had entered through Cambodia and was en route to the South. He noted the South was their priority area. He thought they had come by ship to Phnom Penh via the Mekong river. Dawee said that arms for these CTʼs come mostly from the coast by Chinese junk.

6. Project 22. The Ambassador thought Dawee would be interested in the approval of the Project 22 plan.2 The Secretary acknowledged that it had been approved here with minor suggested changes and was now on its way back to him via CINCPAC.

7. Inadequate Manning and Equipment Maintenance in Thai Armed Forces. The Secretary continued that we were disturbed at the low levels of maintenance of many of the Thai units, and at the inadequate manning of those units. He told Dawee that he should get rid of some of the ineffective ones and put the manpower into those required. Dawee replied that it wasnʼt all that easy. The problem was something like our problem with railroad firemen. The Secretary noted that we had solved the fireman problem. In a more serious mood, he then explained that Dawee had to do one of two things: either raise the men for his military or get rid of the unnecessary units. He continued that they must equate their manpower to the equipment. Dawee declared that the U.S. only supported combat units, not support units, and support units were necessary to any combat operation. We were supporting only some 80,000 of his military and there were 60,000 not supported. He said we had set up an RCT with no support units. Ambassador noted that the Thai had made a commitment to raise the Project 22 units to 80% of strength. Dawee confirmed this. The Secretary said he was pleased to hear that and in response said we would be pleased to do our part. The Secretary made the point that there were four things that had to be done. In priority order these were. 1. Economic improvement.

2. Counterinsurgency items.

3. Project 22 forces, an.

4. Development of balanced military forces.

He accepted for the U.S. a part of the responsibility for failing to make progress in these areas, but, he said, “we must set about correcting it.” He told Dawee that the Thais must move in that direction, and we would help.

The Secretary noted that the Thai Foreign Minister had made very good statements regarding our fight against communism. He noted that the security of Daweeʼs own nation was at stake. Dawee remarked that sometimes he had to press Americans to fight the communists. The Thai did not have to be urged to fight them. Ambassador Martin said that what had impressed him was that the Thai had made the offer of assist-ance to Vietnam and had paid for units to go there, by themselves. They did not come to us for help for that.

8. F–5 Aircraft for Thailand. Dawee then declared that he had no F–5ʼs; only F–86ʼs and T–28ʼs. The Secretary said that it wouldnʼt be F–5ʼs that saved the Northeast. Ambassador Martin said he would not (emphasized) recommend additions in the Thai air force without a change in the RTAF command.

9. Delivery of MAP Equipment and Stature of the Supreme Command. Martin hoped that the Secretaryʼs efforts would be pointed towards helping the Supreme Command, rather than the individual Thai services (referring to the matter the Ambassador had posed at an earlier date of MAP deliveries bypassing the Supreme Command). Dawee said he would appreciate help. He added that he had established a Joint Operations Center to exert proper control over service actions. The Secretary said we would tidy that up, sent for his secretary and dictated then and there a message to COMUSMACTHAI info the Ambassador Bangkok directing that he arrange immediately for all deliveries to a single representative of the Thai government.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 70 A 3717, 333 Thailand. Secret. Drafted by Drachnik and approved by McNaughton on May 24. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office at the Pentagon.

2 See footnote 2, Document 291.

294. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 294. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, May 18, 1965.

I believe it was clear from our conversation with Martin and Dawee2 that neither our own Country Team nor the Thai Government has yet acted to direct their military program toward effective counterinsurgency action. We must insist that the Fiscal ʼ66 Military Assistance Program be oriented to the counterinsurgency effort and to the support of a “balanced” military force. The latter will require that the Thai raise the manning level of their units to a point sufficient to support effective training and an acceptable level of equipment maintenance. This increase in manning levels can be achieved either by raising the total strength of the military forces or by reducing the number of units supported by the current strength.

In any event, I am not willing to continue the Military Assistance Program unless we have clear indications that the money associated with it will be spent effectively. Before any funds are expended in Fiscal ʼ66, and before any consideration will be given to expanding the Fiscal ʼ66 program beyond the currently projected level of $27 million, we must have specific assurances from the Ambassador and COMUSMACTHAI that these objectives will be met.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Confidential.

2 See Document 293.

295. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 295. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, May 25, 1965.

Dear John:

In light of Daweeʼs commitment to Secretary McNamara to raise the Project 22 units to 80 percent manning levels, and our common agreement that we should be focussing our MAP program on the Project 22 units, on other units that make a clear contribution to over-all counter-insurgency capabilities, and on joint U.S.-Thai requirements, we have again gone over the proposed add-ons to the FY 65 program and have also reviewed the basic FY 66 program and the additions that have been proposed to it.

The results of our review, and the resulting State Department positions, are stated in the attached memorandum with tabs.2

In essence, what we have done is to review this from the standpoint of basic compliance with the criteria stated by Secretary McNamara, i.e., the necessity for orientation to the counter-insurgency effort and to support of a “balanced” military force.3 This we have done by sorting out each category of expenditure in terms of the recipient unit. You will see in the attached memorandum that each item is stated precisely in terms of the unit that would receive it and of the manning and/or utilization capacity of that unit.

What we really find from this study is that the JUSMAG has in fact been applying a highly selective criterion in the formation of the program, and has in fact been selecting as recipients of program items, in a clearly disproportionate number of cases, units that were in fact meeting the kind of standard the Secretary has in mind. In short, to my own satisfaction, we have been bourgeois gentlemen who have been talking prose without knowing it (at least in Washington).

It remains true, of course, that the over-all manning level of the Thai forces (56 percent of authorized strength) is too low. We have considered whether we should make continuation of the whole MAP program contingent on bringing this over-all level up to some set percentage. Our conclusion is that this would not be practical, for two reasons: a. A large over-all increase in numerical strength of the armed forces is not an urgent military requirement and would be obviously expensive to the Thai budget itself. Although the budget is perhaps not as high as it should be for a government in the position of Thailand, it is being steadily increased (at the rate of about 9 percent in the next fiscal year commencing in October) and it would be a mistake to divert funds within the budget from economic development purposes to military purposes. The 9 percent increase, assuming the present proportions as between economic and military uses, can be better spent in the modest force increases required to bring the Project 22 units up to the Dawee commitment, and in various other small cost increments.

b. The politics of the Thai army are two-fold. It is the base of the whole regime, and different parts of it are the respective power bases of Messrs. Thanom and Praphat. Both political elements require that somewhat greater numbers of officers be maintained than make military sense. To attempt to correct this situation, in any short term, would run serious risks of disrupting the regime, souring Thanom or Praphat, or both.

Thus, as a practical matter, we are accepting a military structure in Thailand that is not as effective as it should be. However, by carefully selecting the units to which we give equipment support, and by getting Dawee to take the first big step in bringing up the strength of the Project 22 units, we should be setting in motion a train of events that will move fairly rapidly toward a more effective army structure. Meanwhile, we are at least making sense with what we do contribute, although undoubtedly there is some lesser wastage in the handling of operating costs among units that are below appropriate strength levels. This again seems to be the price of the contemporary Thai state of progress.

In all this, I have not sought to refer to the basic politics of increasing our present MAP levels in Thailand, which I went into rather fully in my letter of April 24.4 As we see it, we can count on full Thai cooperation in the present ways, although it is obvious that they feel themselves under some pressure and you may have noted that one or two Thai voices have recently spoken out in a neutralist vein. The real point, politically, is that the odds are very heavy that developments in the near future will compel us to ask for even greater Thai support, may tend to increase the existing Thai impression that the U.S. will do things for them, and could conceivably be adverse so as to cause a decline in present levels of Thai confidence in us. To meet all these points, it is our judgment that we should really meet the Thai need under the criteria discussed at the outset of this letter, and that we should therefore adopt the funding plans stated in the attached detailed memorandum and in its tabs.

Sincerely,

William P. Bundy 5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

2 Attached but not printed.

3 As stated in Document 294.

4  Document 291.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

296. Letter From the Assistance Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 296. Letter From the Assistance Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 4, 1965.

I–23, 740/65

Dear Bill:

I very much appreciate the thorough review you have made of the MAP and the proposed add-ons for Thailand. I have the following comments, keeping in mind the Secretaryʼs memorandum of 18 May.2

As you recall, the Secretary made clear the requirement that the Thai orient their efforts towards effective counterinsurgency measures and also develop a “balanced” military force. In his memorandum of 18 May, he made assurances to this effect a condition of proceeding with the funding of the FY 66 MAP program for Thailand. I think we can all agree that Marshal Dawee has given us a commitment to bring his units for Project 22 up to 80% manning strength. This Dawee commitment, along with Ambassador Martinʼs assurances, is sufficient to permit us to begin the funding of essential items in the FY 66 program, with the continuation of funding being contingent on support by the Thai of Daweeʼs commitment and of visible efforts to orient to counterinsurgency.

I feel that we should reach a formal determination, agreed to with the Thais, of the particular Thai units we are talking about for Project 22. I understand that the necessary details regarding the Thai units that will be committed to Project 22 are now being developed by the Joint US-Thai Planning Group in Bangkok. In this regard, we have some reservations as to the accuracy of the strengths of the committed units described in the attachments to your letter. We understand that the Ambassador is aware of the need for accurate data on the present strengths of these units to provide a basis for a more informed judgment on the Project 22 force structure. I believe that in due course we should also have assurances for Ambassador Martin and COMUSMACTHAI as to the exact Thai plans for raising their manning levels (raising total strength or reducing units), so that there will be effective field training and acceptable equipment maintenance, with follow up reports from the Country Team as to Thai progress.

Although we continue to be of the opinion that the existing programs, $33 million in FY 65 and $27 million in FY 66, are ample for the development of Thai forces in the manner outlined by Secretary McNamara and consistent with the ability of the Thai to assimilate assistance, we recognize the desirability of certain of the proposed add-ons. Accordingly, we have raised the MAP level for FY 65 by $2.7 million to $35.7 million to provide Thai funds to pay for [(a)] per diem support in the field (with reimbursement from AID), (b) the two battalion posts at Muang Nan and Sakon Nakhon ($1.6 million), and (c) increased costs for packing, crating and other supply operations (which otherwise would have been absorbed within the current-level program). The Ambassador may notify the Thai of these items at any time. To go beyond these items in FY 65 MAP funding gives us difficulty in view of the tight MAP situation worldwide and the desire not to reduce the FY 65 MAP levels of such forward defense countries as Korea and China. Moreover, in our discussions with Ambassador Martin, he made it clear that he did not view funding of the add-ons in FY 65 as essential, particularly since we were so near the end of the year.

Further with regard to FY 65, Ambassador Martin has been informed in detail by a separate message of a significantly large package of U.S. construction for Thailand recently approved as part of the FY 65 supplemental budget request. Major items of this program have joint use aspects and will have a direct impact on the question of influencing the Thai as to the seriousness of the U.S. commitment in Southeast Asia. This Thailand construction package of about $22 million (out of a total of $107 million for all of Westpac and Southeast Asia) does not at this time include items proposed as MAP add-ons. In any event, Ambassador Martin may wish, in his dealings with the Thai, to emphasize the Thai-oriented nature of the U.S. construction projects wherever possible. This includes, for example, the Kabinburi-Korat road ($6 million), the Korat tank farm ($.54 million), and the Ban Sattahip port development ($.8 million). I think Ambassador Martin should hold up discussing any of these construction items with the Thais until we have had a final cable from CINCPAC on these items, which should be in our hands shortly.

Once there have been adequate assurances that the Thai are in fact moving rapidly in the direction indicated by Secretary McNamara, we can then give further consideration to funding in FY 66 of the various add-ons proposed by the Ambassador which may be thought necessary either in addition to or in place of those initially programmed. In addition, we will have in hand fairly soon a study by Tim Hoopes on the Thai MAP program, which will be supplemented about the end of July by a RAND study which, among other things, will address itself to Thai MAP.

Sincerely,

John

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Secret.

2  Document 294.

297. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 297. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, June 29, 1965, 3:56 p.m.

2208. For Ambassador from Bundy. Embtel 2041.2

We are impressed by recent indications of an atmosphere in which major constructive change can be achieved in Thailand, most notably your remarkable success in negotiating in a very brief span an agreement laying the basis for critically important reforms in the police. We share your belief that an achievement of similar proportions now seems possible vis-à-vis the armed forces. As you know we also share your estimate of the consequences of failure to seize this opportunity.

We are prepared to make a maximum effort to obtain the negotiating authority requested reftel, despite great difficulties noted Deptel 2114.3 Next step will be our reply to McNaughton letter of June 4 to this end. In addition we will if necessary ask Secretaryʼs direct intervention (as we did in support of your request for FY 1965 add-ons—Deptel 2167).4 We will have to be prepared to be quite specific about what the Thai must do—and when they must do it—in order to live up to their side of the bargain. In my judgment we will need as a minimum: 1) some concrete evidence that the Thai are starting to move toward fulfillment of the Dawee commitment and that it will be fulfilled within a reasonable time frame; 2) further RTG commitments to undertake promptly a) to provide for intensive field training, with adequate stress on CI missions of all Project 22 units and other units having a CI mission; b) to bring all Project 22 units (including reserves) up to levels adequate to assure ability to utilize and maintain equipment to be provided in FY 66 plus equipment previously provided and to execute missions assigned by joint plans; and c) to assure proper utilization and maintenance by RTAF of all aircraft provided in FY 66 program and add-ons as well as aircraft previously provided under MAP.

Request your comments on likelihood of Thai being willing and able to deliver on above in return for our proposed FY 1966 package. Would also greatly appreciate any suggestions of alternative or additional RTG commitments which we could reasonably seek.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret; Priority; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Pickering, cleared by Dexter, and approved by Bundy.

2 In telegram 2041 from Bangkok, June 15, Martin made a strong appeal that the “add-ons” to the Thai military assistance program were in complete conformity with McNamaraʼs criteria. Martin concluded his long cable with the observation that he had just secured “Thai commitment to massive reorganization of one pillar of power establishment—the Thai police system.” Martin thought that the Thai were now receptive to reform and modernization and he believed “we now have a similar opportunity to achieve same massive reorganization of the military power establishment” at “infinitesimal” cost. Martin was confident he could achieve results and would stake his career on it. (Ibid.)

3 As explained in telegram 2114 to Bangkok, June 15, the appropriation was not yet voted upon or the program allocated, so Martinʼs request for immediate authority to pre-sent to the Thais the total Military Assistance requested for FY 66 created great difficulty. (Ibid.)

4 Dated June 23. (Ibid.)

298. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 298. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 5, 1965.

Our Thai desk officer, Laurence Pickering, a first-rate man with long experience in Thailand, recently spent over two weeks there. His report, which I attach for your personal interest, brings out the central features of the situation more clearly and succinctly than any compact document I have recently seen. I believe it would be worth your while just to look this over for a feel.

My office is already working with ISA on the possible terms of an FY ʼ66 MAP package which might be presented in return for firm Thai commitments. We hope to have something ready for high-level discussion during the course of the week.

William P. Bundy 2

Attachment

Washington, June 28, 1965.

Paper Prepared by the Officer in Charge of Thailand Affairs (Pickering)

SOME OBSERVATIONS BASED ON RECENT TRIP TO THAILAND

I was in Thailand from June 3–20. Of this time, I spent one week (June 10–16) on an up-country trip via Air America helio-courier through Chieng Rai, Chieng Mai, Udorn, Nakon Phanom, Ubon, Roi-et, and Korat. I met with provincial governors (many of whom I had known before) and other Thai officials and with Americans at our many and varied installations. While in Bangkok I had numerous opportunities for discussions with senior Thai officials whom I had known from my previous assignment there in addition to meetings with all senior officers of the U.S. diplomatic mission.

Following are the outstanding impressions of the present situation which I carried away.

1. There is evidence of considerable progress toward meeting basic problems. There is no question in my mind but that the Communists are active in Northeast Thailand. The assassination of the Kamnan (township head) of the village on which the ARD project in Nakon Phanom is centered just one day before the visit to that village of General Praphat is one more of a series of incidents which can hardly be explained otherwise. However, Communist activity is as yet not intensive, and there are a great many positive factors at work to make the most of the time we have. A. A big payoff from our investment in roads is beginning to be evident. The Bangkok to Nong Kai highway has tied the Northeast into the rest of the country in a new and important way. Even towns well off the path of the highway, such as Rio-et, have reaped clear economic benefits from the ready access to the Capital and its markets, and travel to and from the Capital is much more frequent (witness the appearance of three new hotels in this small provincial town since the Bangkok-Nong Kai road was opened). Bill Klausner, an Asia Foundation representative who knows the Northeast about as well as any American and who is married to a Thai from a village in Ubon province, tells me that, primarily as a result of better roads plus a long period of political and economic stability, the economic lot of the average villager in the Northeast has visibly improved in recent years. The economic effects of the Northern security road, both in terms of reduced transportation costs and better prices for rice and other produce, are already a matter of record although the road is still under construction and traversing it entails bypassing many bridges still not completed.

B. The MDUs have had a valuable impact, and the ARD is just now reaching a point where it should begin to pay off. A great many problems were encountered in the first year of the ARD (e.g., inadequately trained personnel, some hold-up in delivery of certain items of equipment) but many of the bugs have been ironed out and during the coming dry season a great deal should be accomplished. ARD projects are already underway in six provinces and will begin in five more during the next dry season. The main emphasis continues to be placed on road building (which in my opinion is not a bad focus of effort) but in the provinces I visited there is adequate recognition of the importance of improvements in other fields as well.

The MDU effort is as always of greatest impact in its initial period, and the need for adequate follow-up is as great as ever. If I had to single out one weakness in this picture, I would cite the evident lack of careful coordination at all levels between the ARD and MDU. I think our side should focus hard on this one.

2. The Thai recognize the magnitude of the problem they face and are prepared to undertake reforms, even drastic reforms, in order to prepare themselves to meet it. A. Their willingness to make unprecedented delegations of authority and budget to the provincial governors in connection with the ARD is already fully documented. In the critical province of Nakon Phanom, the Thai have assigned a tough, effective governor with a record of successful crime suppression in other areas of the country, and have given him extensive authority over the security forces in the province as well as within the traditional range of civil authority.

B. During the brief span of my visit to Thailand, the mission negotiated a program with the Thai laying the basis for critically needed reforms in the Thai National Police. Many skeptics felt that nothing meaningful could be achieved in the short period remaining between the completion of the police study and the end of the fiscal year 1965. In the event, however, the Thai not only agreed to put up the equivalent $4–1/2 million to meet local currency costs in this important program, but they also made an important break-through toward open budgeting of police expenditures instead of the traditional single figure in the budget for all police activities, and agreed to the establishment of a joint Thai/U.S. evaluatory committee to measure progress of this program, a committee which will include senior Thai civilians committed to reform as well as senior police. Ambassador Martin very carefully laid the groundwork for this negotiation in a meeting with General Praphat, a meeting which I attended. The Thai clearly understand the implications of this undertaking and are fully prepared to go through with it.

C. My conversations with senior Thai left me with a conviction that the Thai are ready for similar basic reforms in the Armed Forces and in the civil bureaucracy as well. If given authority similar to that provided in connection with the police program, i.e., the authority to offer a specific package of assistance in return for Thai commitment to achieve certain goals on their side, I firmly believe we can obtain Thai commitments which will result relatively quickly in bringing all Thai ground forces under Project 22 to a level of manning and training that will make them capable of carrying out their missions, and transform the Thai Air Force into the kind of effective organization which the unquestioned skill of many of its individual pilots entitles it to be. This can and should be undertaken on the basis of the relatively modest requests for FY 66 program and add-ons already on the record. There is no need to wait for the completion of any further studies of the situation. In fact, to do so would run a serious risk of losing the atmosphere of readiness to accept major constructive change which clearly exists at present but which could be quickly dissipated by evidence of hesitancy or uncertainty on our part.

I understand from Rand Team members that one of their major recommendations will be for a rather thoroughgoing overhaul of the civil bureaucracy and an across-the-board salary increase of important proportions for the civil bureaucracy as well as the police and Army. (This is basic to getting at the problem of corruption at the lower levels.) Such an ambitious program will of course require an important new increment of U.S. support. If that is forthcoming, the necessary reforms on the Thai side are quite within the realm of possible achievement in the next few years.

3. Many if not most senior Thai feel a sense of uneasiness about the totality of the commitment to the United States which their government has accepted. This showed up most often in comments about Thanatʼs recent statements and speeches in the United States and Japan. Given adequate attention to this problem on our part, I do not see any real danger that this will result in an erosion of the Thai commitment. We must never forget, however, that this commitment is viewed critically and even skeptically by many Thai and that we must miss no opportunity to demonstrate the fact that it is in Thailandʼs interest in the broadest sense to continue the commitment.

4. The impact of the U.S. military build up in the Northeast is immense. When I first visited Udorn in 1961, there were seven Americans, mostly missionaries, in the community. My visit was occasioned by our plan to commit at that time a force of 300 Marines to Udorn as a helicopter support unit. We undertook that step with great trepidation about the impact of such a build-up on a sleepy provincial center such as Udorn. The number of Americans there now is approaching 1,500. In addition, there are even larger numbers committed to Ubon and Korat, plus a small force (200 plus) at Nakon Phanom. Their presence is felt not only in the inevitable frictions and occasional incidents which ordinarily come under the heading of “troop community relations.” Because of the intense air activity in and out of Thailand occasioned by the fact that practically all the land based raids on North Vietnam are being mounted from Thailand, their presence is felt quite pervasively throughout the region. Not only are U.S. planes almost constantly overhead, but the occasional crash of a U.S. aircraft (my friend the governor of Roi-et has had two in his province in recent weeks) and the sticky problem of disposition of ordnance after missions over Vietnam and Laos abort often become a major focus of attention. In the latter case, the ordnance has to be dropped in Thailand. The present area into which such ordnance is dropped is located near Korat. Although the 750 pound bombs usually involved are dropped on “safe”, they very frequently detonate on impact. Two 750s so detonated during a briefing I was receiving from the American base commander at Korat. At present there are said to be some 130 of these 750 pound bombs in the drop area near Korat, all of which will have to be detonated there according to the briefing officer. There have been other cases where it has been necessary to drop ordnance in the Mekong River and in at least one case the ordnance detonated near the Thai side and did considerable physical damage to property. The point of all this is that over the next year or so, as the build-up continues and as air activity intensifies, the government is sure to feel the pressure of complaints of its less pleasant aspects, rendering more difficult the maintenance of a favorable political climate in the country.

To my mind more important than the “troop community relations” problem, however, is the danger that, in the course of our build-up, which has only just begun in terms of construction, augmentation of staff and of aircraft assigned to the area, the role of the Thai Armed Forces, and especially of the Thai Air Force, will be relegated to a position of obvious insignificance. The Americans now assigned to senior positions in the Northeast recall the great contribution to the development of our policy made by the Thai pilots who made the first effective use of air over Laos. However, the turnover of Americans is quite rapid there and in the course of the expansion which I have just referred to there will be a strong and natural tendency to completely forget the Thai role and to come to view these bases as strictly serving U.S. unilateral objectives. Nothing could more certainly poison the atmosphere between the U.S. and the Thai Armed Forces, which in light of the political role of the Armed Forces in Thailand could have a general deleterious effect. In my judgment this cannot be overcome merely by paying deference to the Thai base commander (whose role in this respect will tend to become an almost nominal one), but requires the establishment with the Thai Air Force and with the Armed Forces generally of a truly working relationship which has as its objective preparing the Thai forces for roles that are meaningful in terms of the present situation. This can be done, I believe, through the medium of rapid implementation of Project 22 plus increased emphasis on improvement of the performance of the Thai Air Force and preparation of the Air Force for continued and expanded roles in the present action in Southeast Asia. This could best be achieved by authorizing the Mission now to go in with a specific package of assistance which will be delivered contingent upon performance by the Thai Armed Forces of specific commitments respecting field training and adequate utilization and maintenance of equipment provided.

In conclusion I want to emphasize that the American forces presently deployed to the Northeast and particularly the mission they are carrying out from there are strong plus factors in our relations with the Thai. In emphasizing potential problems related to their presence my objective is to assure that this continues to be true.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. III, Memos, 4/65–12/65. Secret. Also sent to Rusk and McNamara.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

299. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 299. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

Thai Unit for Viet Nam and Thai MAP Add-ons

1. Attached at Tab A2 is a letter to Defense Secretary McNamara for your signature proposing that we authorize Ambassador Martin to advise the Royal Thai Government of our FY 66 MAP program, including add-ons, as a means of laying the groundwork for a subsequent proposal for a Thai RCT in South Viet Nam.

2. Secretary McNamaraʼs position has been that the proposed MAP add-ons are not justified. However, he is willing to provide them in return for a Thai commitment to put a unit in South Viet Nam. On the other hand, Ambassador Martin, in response to our query (Deptel 168, Tab B)3 has told us in Embtel 190 (Tab C)4 that to link the MAP add-ons directly or indirectly (by simultaneous discussion) with such a proposal could have extremely serious consequences in Thailand. He has further said that failure to provide the MAP add-ons would badly hurt our position in Thailand. Ambassador Martin may have overstated the case, but FE fully agrees that the risks he cites are present and that they are not remote.

3. Ambassador Martin further states that if given the authority to discuss the MAP add-ons with the RTG now, in relation to getting commitments from the Thai armed forces for improvement of their state of readiness, and if given a little time to otherwise condition the RTG, he would anticipate RTG approval of a request for forces in South Viet Nam.

4. The requested MAP add-ons total $12.7 million, which would bring the FY 66 MAP to $39.7 million. This compares to $38 million for FY 65, $42.8 million in FY 64, $73.5 million in FY 63, and $81 million in FY 62. In other words, what is being proposed is only a continuation of a fairly low level of MAP rather than a major increase over previous levels. In addition, it would be given only in return for commitments to bring about improvements in the Thai armed forces. In view of the relatively small sum involved in comparison with overall expenditures on Vietnam, and in view of vital importance of Thai cooperation in that connection, we feel that it would be extremely shortsighted for us not to go ahead with the Thailand MAP program as requested by Ambassador Martin and approved by CINCPAC and the JCS. If in addition it helps to lay the groundwork for obtaining a Thai unit for services in South Viet Nam, so much the better.

Recommendation:

That you sign the letter to Secretary McNamara and initial the telegram attached at Tab A.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Pickering. The date is handwritten on the source text.

2 Tab A was not attached, but the letter was signed, see Document 300.

3 Dated July 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Dated July 31. (Ibid.)

300. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 300. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, August 2, 1965.

SUBJECT

Thai MAP

Attached (Tab A)2 is a letter to you from Secretary Rusk which puts us back to where we were three months ago.

In essence, it proposes that we give the Thais not only the FY 66 MAP ($27 million) but also the $12.7 million of add-ons which keep raising their heads in this duel between State and Defense. He wants us to make the concession on MAP before we press to get the Thai troops for Vietnam.

Secretary Ruskʼs approach, in essence, is that “the MAP problem must be settled by itself before we proceed to the question of a unit.” I do not see why this is necessarily the way to proceed, but we can bow to his judgment in this regard. We can do so by “settling the MAP issue” on the terms which we have been pressing all along—namely, telling the Thai they can have their FY 66 MAP (without add-ons) provided they take appropriate steps to address the counterinsurgency problem and to increase the manning (and thus combat readiness) levels of their regular forces.

We have queried Ambassador Martin as to the commitments which he thinks he can obtain from the Thais and he advises that (a) Daweeʼs commitment to increase manning levels of Project 22 forces should be broadened to include support forces as well as combat forces; (b) he would press for intensified field training; (c) he would enforce perform-ance by individual services by channeling MAP through Thai Supreme Command; and (d) he would require continued improvement in utilization and maintenance of aircraft. While Martin does not think we should ask for more, we had in mind a somewhat more precise list of conditions or commitments (see Tab B).3 Also, we emphasize counterinsurgency.

Cables referred to in Secretary Ruskʼs letter are at Tab C.4 The $12.7 million of add-ons is set forth at Tab D5 ; it constitutes about half of Ambassador Martinʼs request.

I suggest that you take this matter up with Secretary Rusk at lunch on Tuesday.6

John T. McNaughton

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 1266, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Secret.

2 Not found; see footnote 2, Document 299.

3 Attached but not printed. The sentence following the superscript is handwritten.

4 See footnotes 3 and 4, Document 299.

5 Not found attached.

6  McNamara wrote the following note on the source text: “8/3 To Mr. McNaughton. John, please assemble & review with me the entire state of Thai military forces: a) current vs proposed manning levels for all units, b) recent appraisal of training of forces, c) current vs proposed ʼin commissionʼ rates for gd & air equips, d) current vs proposed counter insurgency force & programs (popular forces, communication hamlet identification, etc.), e) current vs proposed Thai defense budget, f) current vs proposed MAP for ʼ66, esp. major items, etc., etc., g) describe Project 22 forces & how the ʼadd-onsʼ relate to them & their readiness, h) origin of items in Bundy letter to McNaughton, i) content of cable 63, j) what are Stilwellʼs views—shouldnʼt he come to Washington before we settle. RSM.” Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and Valenti had lunch with the President on Tuesday, August 3, from 1:45 to 2:14 p.m. No record has been found, except that the Presidentʼs Daily Diary indicates that they discussed the “Pakistan situation.” (Johnson Library)

301. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 301. Note From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 6, 1965.

In his last conversation with you, Secretary McNamara said that he wanted to look again at the conditions that we might attach to our FY ʼ66 MAP offer to Thailand. I now find from McNaughton that they have been directed to do a complete re-survey of the Thai military situation and that this will take at least a week before the matter could even be faced again.

In my judgment, this is simply losing sight of the forest. We have gone into the Thai situation as thoroughly as we possibly can from the data available in Washington, and McNaughton agrees with us that the total MAP package of $39 million at least makes reasonable military sense, even though it might be improved slightly by further examination. McNamara is also questioning the necessity for the add-ons of $12.6 million, but these too have been carefully reviewed and are agreed to make fairly good military sense.

The real problem, which McNamara either rejects or does not recognize as the key, is the political one. Since we sent you the memorandum on Monday,2 we have had still further indications of the depth of Thai feeling and the real danger that the Thai will really lose confidence in our whole relationship. Praphat has made an unprecedented speech specifically saying our MAP is inadequate, and I have cross-examined the highly competent [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] who reports that our MAP deficiencies (in Thai eyes) have come up in virtually every recent conversation he has had with any senior Thai military man, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. (Graham Martinʼs failure to report these conversations is simply another in a list of quirks that forms a separate subject.)

In short, I am more than ever convinced that: 1. We have got to move now, and specifically when Martin sees Thanom on Tuesday.3 It is absolutely clear Thanom expects a message on MAP at that time.

2. We have got to move with the full Thai MAP package of $39 million in return for the kind of conditions Martin has described in his 634 (summary attached).

3. Whatever improvement in the Thai program we could devise by further study in Washington, or by the efforts of General Stilwell when he arrives (he is standing by to go out) are simply not significant elements compared to the political stake in immediate action on the above lines.

Recommendation:

I recommend that you call Secretary McNamara with the above arguments and seek a decision not later than tomorrow. I hate to be this blunt, but we simply have got to have a policy and an immediate action on this one, in my judgment, and in the judgment of my whole staff, as well as that of Ambassador Martin.

William P. Bundy 5

Attachment

Commitments Which Ambassador Martin Proposes to Obtain from Thai Government in Connection with Provision of MAP Add-ons (Bangkokʼs 63 to Department)

1. Broaden the existing Dawee commitment to increase manning levels to 80% for Project 22 Combat Forces to include also Project 22 Support Units.

2. Press for Thai achieving desired manning levels before FY 68 (the present goal as outlined in the JUSMAG Force Objectives Study).

3. Try to include reserves in the over-all increase of manning levels.

4. Press for intensive field training.

5. Establish meaningful jointly agreed training standards.

6. Enforce the principle of performance by individual services as criterion for delivery of military support.

7. Seek to assure continuing improvement in utilization and maintenance of all RTAF aircraft provided under MAP.

8. Attempt to remove the present incompetent C-in-C of the RTAF.

9. Increase the effectiveness of the JUSMAG-Thai joint evaluation process.

Martin does not believe he should ask for more but hopes that a great deal more may be accomplished: “I am completely confident that if given the support and latitude in the MAP program I am seeking, we will be able to make substantial strides in the direction of producing needed reform and modernization in the Thai Armed Forces. At the same time we will be in a better position to continue cultivating the sense of real partnership with the Thai which is so critically essential to assuring the continuing extraordinary cooperation of the Thai. Without this, attainment of U.S. objectives in Southeast Asia will be infinitely more costly.”

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Miscellaneous Chron. Secret.

2  Document 299.

3 August 10.

4 Telegram 63 from Bangkok, July 8. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

302. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 302. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, August 9, 1965, 3:09 p.m.

224. Joint State/Defense message. Embtel 63.2

1. Your are authorized to inform Thanom that we have examined Thai military needs carefully and desire to do utmost in FY 66 program to meet them at most rapid rate possible; and that we are willing to provide for FY 66 MAP some increase over FY 65 (which FYI was $38.3 million end FYI) provided we have Thai commitments with respect to measures we believe Thai must take to achieve more effective counterinsurgency effort and increased combat effectiveness of their forces.3 A specific set of goals and performance schedules would have to be worked out as an essential element of reaching final agreement on specifics of FY 66 MAP program. In explaining what we have in mind you should draw on following.

2. With respect to the counterinsurgency effort, our concern is that a major emphasis must be placed today on speeding up the program of coping with potential insurgency in the northeast and northern areas of Thailand, including the increased AID police programs [1 line of source text not declassified]. From the military side of counterinsurgency, this means such things as increased deployment of forces from headquarters to outlying areas, more effective training exercises and instruction for the military forces for counterinsurgency, increased civic action and the development of systematic analysis of efforts to meet any future insurgency.

3. With respect to conventional forces, you have mentioned in Embtel 63 the fundamental commitments that will be needed (e.g., relating to manning levels, field training, agreed training standards, in-commission and utilization rates, joint evaluation procedures, etc.) The question of increased Thai budgets to cover these improvements will have to be faced.

4. As you know, serious maintenance and other deficiencies noted in last two years have given us grave concern about effectiveness of our assistance and general organization of Thai effort in relation to threat which we believe to be basically subversion but including possible Communist overt moves against Mekong for which Project 22 planning has been designed. Thai maintenance and in-commission difficulties have also occasioned major criticisms in U.S. Congress which are already causing some problems and could become more serious unless it is clear Thai are moving to correct them.

5. We are sending separate cable with our thoughts on specific commitments.4 We would like your suggestions and recommendations with respect to specific commitments, schedules, techniques for measuring progress, methods of ensuring performance, and best way to work the thing out with the Thai.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Solbert, cleared with McNaughton and Trueheart, and approved by Berger.

2 See footnote 4, Document 301, and attachment to it.

3 In telegram 250 from Bangkok, August 10, Martin reported his conversation with Thanom, Sawaeng, and Pote Sarasin. Martin informed the Thai officials that they could expect at least last yearʼs figure of 750 billion baht in military aid and maybe a little more depending on how quickly they could improve their combat effectiveness and general performance of the Thai military forces. Martin reported that Thanom was relieved and promised to cooperate with the new JUSMAG and COMUSMACTHAI, General Stilwell. Martin ended his report with the admonition that it would be a “mistake to develop a complicated series of mathematical formulae” for military aid. He suggested that Washington should rely on his and Stilwellʼs judgment to determine how far forward the Thais could be carried. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI)

4 Telegram 259 to Bangkok, August 12. (Ibid.)

5 Telegram 282 from Bangkok, August 15. (Ibid.)

303. Special Memorandum Prepared by the Board of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency 303. Special Memorandum Prepared by the Board of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, September 10, 1965.

22–65

SUBJECT

The Threat of Communist Subversion in Thailand

SUMMARY

Thailandʼs chief vulnerability to Communist subversion lies in the northeast region, which borders on Laos. The Chinese have recently increased their efforts to encourage dissidence among poorly integrated minorities in this region, and the level of dissident activity, although still very low, has risen somewhat. Bangkok is responding with more vigorous security measures and efforts to remove economic grievances. The chances are good that the government will be able to stay abreast of the likely increase in Communist subversion. The outlook in Thailand would alter greatly, however, if the Communists achieved definitive victory in Laos or South Vietnam.

[Here follows the body of the memorandum.]

For the Board of National Estimates:
Sherman Kent
Chairman

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. III, Memos, 4/65–12/65. Secret.

304. Memorandum From Richard K. Stuart of the Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) 304. Memorandum From Richard K. Stuart of the Office of the Deputy Director for Coordination to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes)1

Washington, September 10, 1965.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundyʼs Meeting with Mr. Colby, September 8, 19652

PARTICIPANTS

Messrs. Bundy and Moore for FE;

Messrs. Colby and [name deleted] for CIA;

Mr. Thomson for White House;

Messrs. Trueheart, Pickering, Barbis and Cuthell of FE for their respective areas; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC

Thailand

Mr. Colby opened the discussion on Thailand with a brief review of conversations between CIA and Ambassador Martin during his recent period of consultation in Washington. Ambassador Martin had reported that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had approached the Ambassador before his recent return to Washington and asked for help in the election which would follow adoption of the new Thai constitution, possibly in the middle of 1966. These Thai politicians wanted approximately [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] US dollars in order to obviate the necessity of approaching Chinese merchants in Bangkok, the usual source of political funds. While their reasons for approaching the U.S. seemed somewhat far fetched, the Ambassador believed that, in effect, they did not want to be beholden to the Chinese. Before he returned to Bangkok the Ambassador wanted some idea of how far he could go in conversations with these Thai politicians. The Ambassador felt that an ideal solution would be to get 303 Committee agreement in principle for support of the Thai election.

Mr. Bundy said that he felt that it might be worth [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] dollars to have control of the Thai political scene but that he did not want to see the governmentʼs administrative machinery used as a political party. This had always been done in the past and he did not think that it augured well for the future of democracy in Thailand if this practice were to continue. Mr. Stuart asked who the opponents would be to the politicians presently in power in an election as far off as 1966. He was not aware that there was any opposition worth mentioning now and it was doubtful that, even after the adoption of a constitution, an opposition would be allowed to develop. Mr. Colby replied that the money would be used less to defeat an opposition than to build stability on a democratic basis in Thailand. Mr. Pickering said that he felt that there might be some opposition, particularly in Bangkok, although he was not sure that there would be much in the provinces. He went on to say that we do not know whether the constitution would require the present leaders to stand for election to Parliament before they could lead the government.

After an inconclusive discussion of the prospects of future party growth, it was left that CIA would produce a draft paper for the 303 Committee. The paper, however, would be thoroughly discussed with FE before being presented to the Committee.3

Mr. Bundy said that Ambassador Martin would be returning to Washington early next week and that he expected to discuss this matter further with him at that time.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, 1965. Secret. Also sent to Deputy Director of INR Denney and Deputy Director for Research Evans. Sent through Albert E. Carter of INR/DDC.

2 Agenda attached at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text. No agenda was attached.]

3 For the paper as submitted, see Document 305.

305. Memorandum Prepared for the 303 Committee 305. Memorandum Prepared for the 303 Committee1

Washington, September 28, 1965.

SUBJECT

Covert U.S. Government Financial Support to Thai Elections

1. Background & Summary

Following the coup dʼetat of 1957, which resulted in the overthrow of Prime Minister Phibun Songkram, the Government of Thailand was subsequently re-established under an interim constitution. The Revolutionary Party that assumed political control of the Government established a military dictatorship, dissolved the old constitution and the parliament, and proscribed all political parties. An interim Constitution of 1959 provided for an appointive Constituent Assembly charged with the responsibility of drafting a permanent constitution. The final draft of this constitution was completed in June 1965 by the Drafting Committee of the Constituent Assembly, and following action on minor amendments and revisions, by early 1966 it is possible that the permanent constitution will be promulgated. If the Constitution is promulgated it is estimated that by the end of calendar year 1966 general parliamentary elections will be held in Thailand. Ambassador Martin has proposed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] a program of covert political action to include the financing of a political party, electoral support for this party, and support for selected candidates for parliament from this party. While it is impossible at this time to speak of exact orders of magnitude, past experience indicates that the cost would be at least [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Such a program is now in preparation. After Ambassador Martin has reviewed the program in detail, he will submit definitive recommendations for the 303 Groupʼs consideration. Most of the funds required would be for use in Fiscal Year 1967.

2. Problem

Following the final reading of the draft permanent constitution in June 1965, Ambassador Martin was approached [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] with a request that the U.S. provide financial assist-ance to support general elections in Thailand which will probably take place in mid or late 1966. Traditionally the ruling groups in Thailand have drawn upon the Government controlled Lottery Bureau for funds to finance political activities, but because the present members of the ruling group have been so critical of the late Prime Minister Saritʼs misuse of Lottery Bureau funds, they appear reluctant to use this source. Support is also available from a variety of sources subject to internal pressure such as Chinese businessmen. They would expect legislative favors in return for their contributions, [3 lines of source text not declassified].

Thailand today is still under martial law which does not permit political parties or any activities by individuals, groups, or organizations that could be construed as being politically (particularly anti-government) motivated. Although some small remnants of former legal political parties still exist, notably former Prime Minister Khuong Aphaiwongʼs Democratic Party, they represent little more than disorganized and undisciplined political “outs”.

However, the illegal and underground Communist Party of Thailand is well organized and disciplined, and it can be anticipated that the Communists will make every effort to capitalize on the forthcoming election for their own purposes. (In December 1964, Prime Minister Thanom made the statement that if elections were to be held that month the Communists would win easily.) Most certainly the Communists will direct a significant part of their propaganda efforts to create additional difficulties in terms of popular confusion as to the trend of events, domestic and foreign policy issues, corruption and governmental mismanagement, etc. Also, in keeping with traditional Thai politics, there will undoubtedly be a proliferation of political parties organized to contest the elections. The Communists can be expected to attempt to influence and penetrate some of these parties as well as to organize front groups to serve their own political interests. The result can be instability if not Communist influence.

To date, the ruling group has done little or nothing to develop and organize politically in preparation for the forthcoming elections, except that largely in response to pressures kept on by the Mission over a long period of time, the key members of the ruling group have agreed to compose any differences they might have and join forces within one party. It is felt that it is both consistent and consonant with U.S. policy objectives in Thailand to support the continuity and stability of the present ruling group. To this end the funds requested in this paper will be used to underwrite some of the costs of organizing and supporting a government party in preparation for the general elections.

3. Factors Bearing on the Problem

a. Pertinent U.S. Policy Consideration.

The Thai Government commitment to adopt a constitution and establish an elected parliament and other democratic freedoms paves the way for the Communists to increase and expand their political agitation efforts. When political campaigning is again permitted in Thailand, it is to be expected that appeals for neutralism and agitation aimed at discrediting the pro-U.S. leadership of the Thai Government will be encouraged by Communist influence through every available means. There is a danger that in reacting to this increased propaganda and agitation the Government might revert to harsh suppressive measures which, although providing an immediate relief to the situation, will only serve to generate more confusion and problems over the long term. The risk of overreaction can be minimized if the transition from an authoritarian system of government to one more democratic is smooth and gradual, and it is the intent of this proposal to assist the Thai in developing the necessary popular base and political organizational structure to make a smooth and gradual transition to a more democratic form of government.

b. Operational Objectives (1) The primary objective is to promote and organize a Government political party under the leadership and control of the present ruling group. A corollary objective is to attempt to ensure that the party created is successful in winning a comfortable and commanding majority in elections. A breakdown of funds by category of expenditure is not feasible at this time, but when the program has been fully developed and approved by Ambassador Martin, such a breakdown will be submitted.

(2) [1 paragraph (21 lines of source text) not declassified.

(3) In implementing this proposal, every effort will be made to influence the Thai to conduct elections at the local village and district levels prior to the parliamentary elections. Such elections would be for the purpose of forming elected bodies, such as provincial committees and local district councils. This influence will be exerted by overt means through the Ambassador and covert means as set forth in this paper.

c. Risks Involved (1) Exposure of U.S. financial support to a RTG political party would provide excellent propaganda material for the Communists. Local Government opposition groups and the World Communist press could cause considerable embarrassment to the U.S. Government and the RTG. The only insurance against disclosure is that of making witting of the operation only those Thai and U.S. Government officials absolutely essential to the accomplishment of the objective. The Thais could be expected to use as much caution and discretion in the selection of witting officials as would we. The actual mechanism by which funds and assistance are to be made available is a vulnerability which will be minimized [1 line of source text not declassified]. This will permit plausible denial of U.S. Government involvement should there be any question of the source of support.

(2) To avoid as much as possible the danger of corruption and misappropriation of funds, precise programs will be negotiated with the Thai prior to authorizing and passing funds. Additionally, as feasible and within the limits of security, a system of audits and fiscal controls will be employed to require simple accounting and reporting procedures from the Thai.

(3) This proposal for support of the development of a Thai Government political apparatus does not preclude [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] support to other political opposition groups [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Any such actions would of course not be undertaken prior to coordination with the Ambassador and approval by the 303 Committee.

4. Coordination

a. U.S. Ambassador

This proposal originated with the U.S. Ambassador to Thailand and has been discussed with the Department of Stateʼs Far East Regional Bureau which recommends approval.2 [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

b. Host Country

[1 paragraph (2–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

5. Recommendation

It is recommended that the 303 Committee approve the proposal to create a political party in Thailand using as a basis the current ruling group and secure the parliamentary election of leaders of this party.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, 303 Committee, 10/7/65. Secret; Eyes Alone. For background information on the role of the 303 Committee and its predecessors in approving U.S. covert actions, see U.S. Covert Actions and Counter-Insurgency Programs, pp. XXXV–XLI.

2 In a memorandum to Thompson, October 8, William Bundy recommended that the program be supported. (Ibid.)

306. Memorandum for the Record 306. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, October 8, 1965.

SUBJECT

Minutes of the Meeting of the 303 Committee, 7 October 1965

PRESENT

Mr. Bundy, Ambassador Thompson, Mr. Vance, and Mr. Richard Helms

Ambassador Graham Martin was present for Item 1

Mr. Joseph Smith was present for Item 1

Colonel Ralph D. Steakley was present for Item 2

Mr. John Waller was present for Item 3

1. Thailand—Covert U.S. Government Financial Support to Thai Elections

a. A rather detailed discussion took place of the proposal to provide covert support to the Thai government for elections projected for autumn 1966. Ambassador Graham Martin noted a change requested by Assistant Secretary William Bundy in the language of the proposal. Ambassador Martin emphasized the importance of keeping together the leaders who have established some cohesion in recent months after the promulgation of a constitution in January 1966 following which political parties would be legalized and an electoral campaign organized. By beginning now and literally building a democratic electoral process from the ground up, reinsurance of a stable pro-Western regime in an anchor land in Southeast Asia was envisaged.

b. The Committee members expressed strong sympathy for the purpose but did not gloss over the risks and difficulties in successfully conducting such an operation on a covert basis. Ambassador Martin believed that the number of witting Thai officials could be kept to a figure of six. The proposed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would constitute perhaps a third of the total cost.

c. Mr. Bundy stated that the proposal would first have to be presented to Secretary Rusk and later to higher authority.2 It was hoped that these steps could be taken before Ambassador Martin returns to Bangkok later in the month. Ambassador Martin indicated that he felt he could respond [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that the U.S. favored assistance in principle and would hope to provide support on a scale which had not yet been determined.

[Here follows material unrelated to Thailand.]

Peter Jessup

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, 303 Committee, 10/14/65. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Peter Jessup.

2  Rusk approved “in principle” on November 5 and Johnson reviewed the proposal on November 11 at his ranch and gave his endorsement. (Memorandum from Koren to William Bundy, November 17; ibid.)

307. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Helms) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 307. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Helms) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 14, 1966.

SUBJECT

The Security Situation in Thailand

Pursuant to your request at our meeting on 5 January,2 I would like to offer the following observations on the security situation in north Thailand. (I understand a full dress assessment of the situation is on the way from the Bangkok Country Team and should be in Washington some time next week. This will undoubtedly contain recommendations for counteraction.)3

The parts of Thailand in question are areas of traditional disaffection from the central government. These areas are racially allied to a large degree with groups in Laos and now Vietnam, with approximately 40,000 refugees from the latter. There has been, in the past few years, an increasing Communist concentration on agitation and organization within this area with Thailand being singled out by the Chinese Communist Government as the next country in Asia in which a war of national liberation would most likely develop. This statement was made by Vice Premier Chen Yi in January 1965 following the announcement of the Thai Independence Movement and the Thai Patriotic Front. Soon thereafter, two ex-members of the Thai parliament, Phayom Chulanond and Mongkhon Na Nakhon, who had earlier left Thailand for Communist China to evade arrest, were installed as spokesmen for these two exile front groups.

Since August 1965, several jungle camps have been discovered by Thai Security Services; and concurrently, intelligence reports began to indicate that Thai Communist cadre have received instructions to switch from the defensive to the offensive and since that time several jungle camps have been discovered. During 1965 there were over 30 attacks by subversives against government officials and police informants, with 25 occurring in the last half of the year. The most recent intelligence has indicated attacks on police and security installations.

The Thai Government reaction to this situation varied from initial disbelief that it was serious, to a later precipitate deployment of military forces up to and including air bombardment of suspected redoubt areas.

The Thai Government has been carrying out, with American support, a variety of programs aimed at showing Government concern with the rural areas, especially in the northeast, and improving the social and economic situation there. More recently, the Thai established a central command to exercise general authority over the suppression of insurgents.

The United States program of assistance to Thailand includes a number of elements targeted against the development of subversion or insurgency, and this program has been kept under regular review by the Special Group (Counterinsurgency). This U.S. assistance is given to expand civilian police programs, a village communications project, construction of security roads, Accelerated Rural Development, water development, local Government administrative development, Mobile Development Units, rural electrification, vocational education, etc.

[2 paragraphs (30 lines of source text) not declassified]4

Despite the current programs to improve the suppressive ability of the Thai Government and the extensive activities aimed at assisting the Thai Government to bring economic and social betterment to its rural population, I am much concerned that, unless this vital element of popular participation and commitment can be developed, our efforts may well be defeated. I assume that the forthcoming recommendations from the Country Team will address themselves to this subject.

Richard Helms 5

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI/Executive Registry Files: Job 80–BO1676R, Box 4, Defense, Jan.–Dec., 1966. Secret.

2 Not further identified.

3 Transmitted in telegram 1428 from Bangkok, January 20, in which the Country Team stated that there was an intensification of an insurgency threat to northeast Thailand and recommended both short- and long-range programs to counter it. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–7 THAI)

4 [text not declassified] January 7, attached but not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Helms signed the original.

308. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 308. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, February 15, 1966.

DTG 141920. Eyes only for the President from the Vice President and Ambassador Harriman.

1. As I promised in my earlier cable today (Embtel unn, cite 140552Z).2 This is further comment on our meeting last evening with the Prime Minister, his two Deputy Prime Ministers, and his senior Cabinet Ministers—Foreign Affairs, Defense, National Development, and Interior. We had already been informed through our intelligence sources of the concern expressed in the Cabinet meeting last week over the Honolulu Conference. Foreign Minister Thanat said that although their fears had been allayed by Ambassador Martinʼs reassurances and your own two recent letters to the Prime Minister, they thought it would be useful to tell me of their concern that we might be contemplating negotiations which would recognize the Viet Cong as a legitimate participant in its own right in some future conference and that we might be contemplating putting pressure on the Republic of Vietnam to accept the Viet Cong in a coalition government. Needless to say, both Averell and I completely reaffirmed Ambassador Martinʼs prior assurances that you would never permit any sort of solution which would turn South Vietnam over to the Viet Cong. I am sure they have accepted this fully but it is startling to realize how much damage is done in this part of the world by the Lippmann columns, the Mansfield report on Cambodia, and particularly Wayne Morseʼs recent statements accusing the Philippines of contemplating sending “mercenary” troops to Vietnam and accusing the Thai of violating international law by permitting us to use their bases to bomb North Vietnam, all of which were mentioned by the Prime Minister. We again made clear that only you speak for the people of the United States and that the people of the United States do fully support the course you are pursuing despite the vocal complaints of a small minority.

2. We then turned to a discussion of the recent upsurge in the terrorist and insurgency activities of the Communists in Thailand. We received a very frank and full report of these activities and of the measures the Thai are taking to meet them, with particular emphasis on the establishment of the new suppression command under General Praphat, the Deputy Prime Minister. We believe that, within their present capabilities, they have moved effectively and aggressively to meet this challenge. At the same time they have reorganized to accelerate their activities in the fields of community development, health, education, and welfare, which they have long realized is a necessary part of suppressive action. But they pointed out they now face an acute problem of resources. Although for almost a decade they have consistently devoted more than 60 percent of their current income for badly needed social and economic development projects and wish to continue this percentage, they cannot do so unless they receive external help to move more rapidly to counter the present stepped-up subversive campaign which is being mounted against them from the outside. This subversion and terror is all part of the Communist attack in S.E. Asia. North Vietnamese troops invade Laos and North Vietnamese and Chinese trained Communist agents infiltrate Thailand in ever increasing numbers. They kill village chiefs, teachers and other leaders just as they began in South Vietnam.

3. Both Averell and I questioned them sharply on the use of their own resources and we are convinced that with the attempts they are making to improve the internal allocation of their own resources, it will be necessary to support them in certain critical fields if they are to move as rapidly and effectively as the situation demands. We both feel, as we believe does Bob McNamara, that it would be a very great mistake for them to cut back on the percentage of the resources they are presently allocating to social and economic development projects. These projects are a vital part of their defense against Communist success. We therefore believe that the action program recommended by Ambassador Martin to the CI Special Group should be implemented fully and rapidly with the full cooperation of all Washington agencies, and we hope that you will so direct.

4. On the immediate situation in the northeast, a primary and vital requirement is for additional helicopter lift to permit the rapid deployment of government forces to engage subversive groups when they are located. General Praphat, with the endorsement of the Prime Minister, specifically requested the immediate provision of the H–34 helicopters in the MAP FY-66 and FY-67 program. These total 22. With this requirement is a priority on pilot training both in Thailand and in the United States. General Praphat said that he recognized our production difficulties and the time required for pilot training. He hoped that both could be expedited, but he emphasized that the need was urgent and immediately present. He therefore said that he had requested in a letter of February 7 to General Stilwell, COMUSMACTHAI, that the U.S. provide immediately one TOE helicopter company, complete with supporting personnel and equipment to furnish direct support to the Communist suppression headquarters. General Praphat said that it would not be desirable for this unit to be identified as U.S. military and that therefore it should be given appropriate cover.

5. The need was also expressed for 12 light Bell 47–J–2A helicopters for use on the border.

6. It was stated that an urgent requirement existed for 30 fast light river craft, with suitable armament to patrol the Mekong and its tributaries to interdict Communist infiltration.

7. To work with these river craft, it was requested that 20 light aircraft, O–1, L–19 type, be furnished with compatible radio equipment.

8. General Praphat specifically pointed out that there was an urgent requirement for M–16 rifles since it was difficult for the Thai to compete with their M–1ʼs against the Communists who are equipped with the Chinese equivalents of the M–16ʼs.

[Here follows the beginning of paragraph 9, which is missing from the source text.] assistance in the provision of training center for special forces troops.

10. Ambassador Martin advises that General Stilwell has already underway request through military channels for the M–16 rifles and for the training center.

11. We believe these requirements to be modest and thoroughly justified and we hope that you will direct that they be promptly met, not only because of the evident, urgent, immediate need of the Thai for this assistance, but because of its effect on our whole position in Southeast Asia for which the continued forthcoming cooperation of the Thai is essential.

12. I am sure you are well informed of the extraordinary degree of Thai cooperation. It is reassuring. Without any specific agreement other than the basic 1950 Military Assistance Agreement, the Thai have nevertheless gone to extraordinary lengths in their cooperation with us. To be sure, they seek to preserve a posture of independence. The Thai will not, except in the event of an overt Chinese aggression, give blanket authority to U.S. military forces to use Thai bases and facilities. They required the daily approval of flights departing from their bases for strikes in other countries. Nevertheless they have taken the unusual step of in effect delegating to Ambassador Martin the authority to extend these approvals in their behalf with notification given to them later on, which avoids any possibility of a leak prior to the actual bombing of the target. Ambassador Martin informs me that not once in the hundreds of times that he has gone to the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister for authorizations to conduct our operations has there even been a quid quo pro between such approvals and the amount of our assistance to them. Indeed, as the Foreign Minister said last evening, “we have no intention of putting our hands in your pocket. We simply want to know whether you can provide us these items which we rather desperately need at the moment.”

13. We believe these requests should be met and we further believe that the MAP ceiling which has been requested by General Stilwell for FY-67 in the amount of $70.7 million is realistic and should be approved. Frankly, Iʼm deeply concerned over the step-up of terrorism and Communist infiltration into Thailand. This coupled with the intensified Communist activity in Laos demands our urgent attention and action.

14. On the civilian side, the impression we gained today in a quick look at the A.R.D. program leads us to believe this activity should be substantially accelerated. Though well conceived, program is too limited to meet increasing pressures. Signed Hubert H. Humphrey and Averell Harriman.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. There was no time of dispatch on the source copy, which was received in the Department of State at 4:39 p.m. on February 14. The DTG used here is from telegram 1618 from Karachi, Document 309. Vice President Humphrey was in Thailand February 12–15—with a brief trip to Vientiane, Laos, on February 14. Humphrey was on a trip of East and South Asia and he visited in addition to Thailand and Laos, South Vietnam, Pakistan, India, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, and South Korea. Memoranda of Humphreyʼs conversations with Foreign Minister Thanat en route between Udorn and Bangkok on February 13, and with Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn at 7 p.m. on Sunday, February 12, prepared in Bangkok by Deputy Chief of Mission James M. Wilson, Jr., are ibid., POL THAI–US.

2 Not found.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 1

Karachi, February 16, 1966.

1618. Eyes only the President from the Vice President. Dept pass White House.

1. My meeting with His Majesty the King of Thailand on the same day as my meeting with the Prime Minister reported to you earlier (Bangkok Embtel unn DTG 141920Z)2 also brought home from a completely different source the same sense of grinding urgency and concern felt by the Thai about the Communist threat to their country. The King wasted no time at all over pleasantries and went straight to the point. He is deeply worried about the Communist killings and terroristic threats in the northeast particularly and determined to see something done about it. For this, however, he was frank to say his people need further help from US.

2. His Majesty has been studying the situation in Viet Nam very carefully and pointed to a number of things which has been done there which could be applied here. He specifically mentioned river craft and light helicopters equipped with radio and radar to control Communist infiltration across the Mekong. Other things such as transportation and communications to enable the police to provide basic security in threatened up-country areas were also of vital importance. I told him I too was concerned by the clear parallel between what was going on now in Thailand and what had happened in South Viet Nam and that the time to act was now, before it became too late. I said we were willing to assist with technical equipment and the best advice we could provide, but it was up to the Thai to provide the manpower. With this His Majesty readily agreed.

3. The King was concerned also about the broader question of the fight for menʼs minds, pointing out a number of examples of Communist trickery which had taken in the naive and gullible people living in the rural up-country areas principally threatened. I replied that we could meet this type of unconventional warfare if we could organize ourselves properly to meet it, and one of the most important things was to let the people know that their government was really concerned about them and willing to help in a whole variety of ways, besides providing basic security, in such fields as health, education, and assistance to the basic economy. His Majesty agreed completely (I understand he has been doing a lot of this himself out of his own pocket) but went on to say that we couldnʼt at the same time wait for technical perfection and to meet all the technical standards set up by the professional economists as preconditions to future U.S. assistance. He appreciated our problems with the Congress but the time to move in Thailand was now. An example of this, supplied by Amb. Martin, was our insistence on applying here rigid criteria for the establishment of up-country rural electrification cooperatives demanding proof of sufficient customers to provide immediate economic returns on the investment. I said this was something you would particularly appreciate with your own early experience in Texas, where application of such criteria would have meant that there never would have been a start on the Texas cooperatives.

I found most moving the Kingʼs genuine worry and concern and his great desire himself to help. It was an impressive plea which he made, and I did my best to reassure him both as to our own intentions in SE Asia as brought out in Honolulu and on our specific concern with the situation here in Thailand. Taken in conjunction with my conversation with the Prime Minister and members of his Cabinet and my own brief observations in my short stopover yesterday in the northeast, I believe the Kingʼs remarks serve to add further impetus to the need of cutting bureaucratic red tape at home and moving as fast as we can to implement the recommendations already made by Ambassador Martin and all his principal advisors here on the ground.

McConaughy

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/HUMPHREY. Secret; Exdis. There was no time of transmission on the source text, which was received in the Department of State at 3:44 a.m. on February 16. A memorandum of this conversation between Humphrey and the King, 3 p.m., February 12, prepared by Deputy Chief of Mission Wilson in Bangkok, is ibid., POL THAI–US.

2  Document 308.

310. Report From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Group (Counter Insurgency) 310. Report From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the Special Group (Counter Insurgency) 1

Washington, February 28, 1966.

THAI SECURITY SITUATION

Introductory Note

The following observations and recommendations are based on a brief (3 day) visit to Bangkok in early February. I had an opportunity for extended discussions with Ambassador Martin, General Stilwell, and with members of the Embassy staff, AID [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. I also participated in sessions between the Vice President and members of the Thai cabinet at which the matter of security and insurgency were discussed. And I had some private sessions with Governor Harriman. But I did not have an opportunity to visit the Northeast, nor did I have time to talk with certain experts (such as the ARPA group) who might have shed further light on some of the problems that concern us. Finally, I should add that what follows attempts to supplement rather than repeat or substitute for the views and recommendations (with which I concur) sent from Bangkok by Vice President Humphrey and Governor Harriman .

General Observations

Much has been written about the deteriorating security situation in the Northeast, the South, and certain other sections of Thailand. I have little to add to these general reports except to say that the extent and seriousness of insecurity was worse than I had been led to expect from my reading of reports from all sources except CAS . On the other hand, the Government of Thailand appeared to be more aware of and more determined to cope with the situation than I had believed.

This leads to a more general, more philosophical point. In the last analysis, the insurgency will have to be dealt with by the Thais themselves. Obvious as this is, we tend to lose sight of it in the day-to-day development and implementation of our policies. But here, as in Vietnam and in Laos, we are dependent on the wisdom, energy, effectiveness and honesty of the Thai Government for success. We can supply the substance and the advice and even much of the manpower. But we can only marginally affect the situation unless the Thais press forward with the substance rather than merely the forms of a counter-insurgency program. And here is one of the keys to the current situation: The Thai Government (unlike the Lao or even the Vietnamese) is too well-established, proud and institutionalized to push around or ignore; on the other hand, it is too ineffectual, relaxed and centralized to tackle the problem of counter-insurgency on its own—at least at the pace we would like to see. We have to rely on the arts of persuasion and diplomacy to get the Thais to move faster, or to shift priorities, or to undertake programs that make sense to us, but not necessarily to them. Our actual leverage is limited; we need the Thais at least as much as the Thais need us (or think they need us—which is the same thing). For example, our air bases in Thailand are there under the loosest and most informal type of arrangement—an arrangement that the Thais might choose to modify at any time. And their cooperation in regional programs, both economic and military, has been of great value to American objectives in the area. In short, the Thais regard themselves as an ally, not a vassal, of the U.S.

Having said this is not to suggest that we should adopt a passive or permissive stance in our relations with the Thai Government—nor is it to suggest that this is our present stance. However, there are two general areas where I think a bit more starch could be injected into our relationship: In providing military assistance we should implicitly, perhaps explicitly, condition the continued granting of the kind of equipment the generals want, but which we think is marginal, to the effective and energetic use of the less exotic materiel which we provide for the counter-insurgency program. Secondly, we should be somewhat less entranced with the present Thai budgetary policy which devotes about 75% of current income to economic and social projects. While this is most commendable, the Thais should be induced to stretch out some of their own Great Society planning (as we have had to do) in favor of some less-exalted, but presently critical programs such as the police effort.

The Police Program

It is the police program, and, in particular, the Provincial police program, which I believe is the weakest element in the Thai counter-insurgency effort. A detailed examination of the policy situation has been made by the RAND team last summer (RM 4744).2 I assume that its findings and recommendations have been looked into by relevant agencies in Washington and Bangkok. There is reason for concern in that this program, which we know from our experience in Vietnam and elsewhere is essential to the success of other Government efforts, is still lagging in recruitment, training and overall implementation. There are a few specific points that are worth mention.

The assignment of police at the village levels has been intolerably slow. And yet the provision of day-in, day-out (and more importantly, night-in, night-out) security and Government presence is fundamental to maintaining Government control in threatened rural areas. The two reasons given for the failure to move ahead on this program are the lack of village police stations and the general shortage of personnel. But a local police station is a modest enterprise and one wonders why the building program, now months old, should take so long to get under way. More shocking is the fact that some villages on their own initiative have built police stations hoping thereby to get full-time police protection, but to no avail.

The shortage of personnel is obviously an inhibiting factor. However, I was impressed, or rather depressed, by the apparent lack of an aggressive recruitment program. Surely, there is a large pool of young men who have served their time in the Army and who thus have been exposed to discipline, weapons training and the concept of national serv-ice. While this pool might be a prime target for police recruitment, my meetings in Bangkok led me to believe that it is not.

More important than gross manpower considerations is the absolute necessity (if our experience in Vietnam is valid) of recruiting men for service in their own communities. The Provincial Police Program is basically a national service. While, by design or accident, there is some correlation between a manʼs home province and his Provincial Police headquarters, it is clear that the Thai authorities have insufficient understanding of the need and the advantages of “home” service.

This raises yet another point: The concept of Provincial Police serv-ice seems to be based on fairly traditional ideas of patrolling out from a central barracks for the purpose of routine population control or crime suppression. This is probably an appropriate mission for Provincial Police per se. But local, “live-in” police require a different kind of training, a different motivation, and a different mission. Thus a local policeman is not simply a Provincial cop who happens to be posted to a small outlying community. He is the personification of the Government in all its facets.

Nothing that I have said should reflect on AIDʼs Public Safety Officer in Bangkok. He is an able, experienced and energetic man. I believe, however, that the administration and supervision of the local police effort (as opposed to the National Program) should be under an officer familiar with the special problems of local security/political requirements in areas which are targets of anti-Government activity. In particular, I would recommend that a special deputy be appointed to AIDʼs Public Safety Officer to develop and supervise this aspect of the police program. This man should be seconded from CIA, and should have had recent experience in the Vietnam police and political action team programs. [1 line of source text not declassified]

Further Thoughts

Aside from the police program, there are two other, but related, suggestions which may be worth further exploration. First, there should be a conscious and systematic cross-fertilization of our experience in Vietnam with the problems in Thailand. While there is danger in over-stressing the analogy of the problems in each area, there must be many lessons and ideas that can be transferred—not only from Vietnam to Thailand, but in the other direction as well. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

Secondly, we should relate the problems of Thailand (and of Laos, too) more directly to those of Vietnam in our planning and programming at the Washington level. Proposals for more effective Washington policy and program management of our non-military effort in Vietnam are now being considered. It may be worthwhile to broaden this concept to include counter-insurgency programs for Thailand, as well. Indeed, the idea, recently implemented, of having a senior officer in Saigon specifically and exclusively responsible for “pacification” might be worth exploring for Bangkok, too.

Summary of Recommendations

1. Condition the granting of further conventional military equipment desired by the Thais, but regarded as marginal by us, to the effective high priority use of counter-insurgency materiel.

2. Persuade the Thais to reduce their expenditure on “Great Society programs” for the purpose of expanding and improving the critical police effort.

3. The Thais, with our help, should move ahead more rapidly to make the Provincial Police Program more effective and more relevant to the problems the Government confronts in the insecure areas. In particular, the village police program should be re-examined to assure that recruitment, training and missions are relevant to local as opposed to Provincial situations.

4. A special deputy for the local police program should be provided AIDʼs Public Safety Officer. This deputy should be seconded from CIA, and should have experience with police and political action programs in Vietnam.

5. A greater effort should be made to exchange ideas and U.S. personnel between Vietnam and Thailand.

6. Counter-insurgency programs for Thailand should be given the same treatment at the Washington level as is being contemplated in the new approach for the management of Vietnam pacification policy and programs.

7. A counter-insurgency or pacification czar be designated in Bangkok (a la Ambassador Porter in Saigon).

C

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Thailand 091.3 MAP. Top Secret. Komer sent this report to Harriman, Vance, Bell, Wheeler, Raborn, and Leonard Marks of the Special Group, CI. In an attached covering note, Komer noted that McGeorge Bundy sent Cooper and him to Bangkok “to have a close look.” Komer stated that Cooper was “an old hand at this game and his report is first class.”

2 Not found.

311. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Raborn to the Executive Chairman of the Senior Interdepartmental Group (Ball) 311. Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Raborn to the Executive Chairman of the Senior Interdepartmental Group (Ball)1

Washington, March 11, 1966.

SUBJECT

A Suggestion Concerning the Present Insurgency in Thailand

1. At the last Senior Interdepartmental Group (SIG) meeting, Mr. Vance proposed we defer making concrete recommendations regarding specific proposals presented by our Embassy in Bangkok, stating that we should take a more comprehensive look at the entire problem and our response to it, to make sure we would start off on the right track. It is in connection with our starting off correctly and effectively on this problem that I wish to make certain observations and recommendations to you and to the other members of the SIG.

2. Much of what I shall say here will be based on our experiences in Vietnam over the past few years. I know that we should all like to avoid some of the faulty courses which we pursued there, and should at the same time like to apply some of the hard-won lessons of that experience.

3. In the first place, we should adopt a mental approach to the Thai problem which gives full recognition to the fact that at least the initial stages such as we see today, are distinctly civil (as opposed to military) in character, and should be approached from a civil standpoint, with military capabilities playing an important but supporting role. We should avoid at all cost a gradually hardening view that the Thai subversive problem is one that will essentially respond to military suppression. Rather, we should recognize it as a fact that the present purposes of the Communist insurgency in Thailand are to intimidate segments of the rural population and detach them from their government. Their purpose here is to carve out a popular base on which their program can grow in terms of capability to develop terror, subversion and armed insurgency.

4. Thus, our response to this challenge, and our advice and support to the Thais, should be principally directed at these tactics and activities of the Communists, to prevent their creating such a base. Suppression and the military punishment of armed bands of insurgents indeed play a role in such an effort, but we have learned it should be a supporting role, and not the dominant one. I therefore feel most strongly that our American support of and advice to the Thais should start from a civil premise, with our military playing a contributory role. In this field, I feel that the Central Intelligence Agency has in Vietnam developed unique and valuable doctrine of immediate significance to the situation in Thailand, and I believe that this doctrine should basically be adopted as our starting point.

5. Attached you will find a copy of a telegram from the AID Mission in Bangkok to its headquarters in Washington.2 This telegram is self-explanatory, but it may be useful to observe that the Thais are showing a good instinct in recognizing a need for advisory help. What seems to me to be missing, however, is the expansion of this thought to the degree necessary to deal with the kind of insurgency they face now and in the near future. The Thais request in effect a technician. I think it would be an error to respond in such a narrow fashion. I think rather that we in the SIG should recognize that an American of seniority, experience, and practical background in this field should be added to Ambassador Martinʼs staff, responsible directly to the Ambassador, who would exercise positive guidance and coordination of our total effort to assist the Thais against their insurgency in the military, civil and intelligence sectors. This position should be roughly analogous to the position of Ambassador Porter in Saigon but in Thailand this person need not be in the Embassy chain of command as such, although he must have some authority, in the Ambassadorʼs name, over our military and civilian agencies, certainly as their work relates to counterinsurgency. He should be the Ambassadorʼs assistant for driving forward and shaping all of our American effort, both military and civil, in helping the Thais combat their insurgency. The raising of this function to this level would not only insure effective and constant coordination of the Ambassadorʼs effort, but would also emphasize to the Thais the gravity and importance we attach to the really massive problem facing them and against which they have asked our help.

6. If you and the other members of the SIG generally concur in the observations contained in this memorandum, and should like to adopt them for implementation, I would be happy to offer for this post my Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs, Mr. Peer de Silva, who, as you know, has had recent and detailed experience in Vietnam in the field under discussion. To avoid any possible misunderstanding, I am offering Mr. De Silva for the specific assignment described in this memorandum.

W.F. Raborn 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Memos & Misc. [IV]. Confidential. The Senior Review Group (SIG) was created in early March 1966 and chaired by Under Secretary of State Ball. Under the SIG were Interdepartmental Regional Groups chaired by the appropriate Assistant Secretary of State. The idea was to return to the Department of State primary responsibility for foreign policy and the supervision of interdepartmental activities abroad. Copies also sent to the other members of the SIG.

2 Not further identified.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Raborn signed the original.

312. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) 312. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson)1

Bangkok, May 7, 1966, 1230Z.

6327. Eyes only Under Secretary Johnson.

1. In your considerations today2 of some of the issues which will be vital to the direction Thai policy takes in the future, I venture to place before you and the Secretary the following observations. Although they contain little not already reported, perhaps they will make small contribution in cutting through the many irrelevancies to the root of the matter.

2. My primary immediate concern is rotary air lift for Thai counter-insurgency forces. This problem divides itself into these primary segments. A. Provision of 10 CH34ʼs already programmed and funded in FY 66 Thai MAP. (1) Last summer, I requested and received authority to announce to Thai basic level and major investment hardware items. I told Thai of basic level but delayed announcement hardware items until Stilwell could review program. He did and these 10 CH34ʼs were significant item in lists he presented to Thai. Upon receipt OSD funding approval, Thai were notified as we were authorized to do.

(2) In August I frankly told Thanom US dissatisfied with performance RTAF and we saw little chance improvement under Marshal Boonchoo. I was told on my return, Thanom called him in and told him he must go. After emotional scene and copious tears, Thanom gave him one more chance. Boonchoo has been on the wagon ever since. Drunk or sober he is not exactly the greatest leader that ever lived. But the change did snap RTAF out of doldrums and all qualified professional observers attest to the dramatic improvement.

(3) Deficiencies in rotary air lift capability were dramatically impressed on Thai in Phu Phan range operation at turn of year. Thai do not—and I repeat with emphasis—do not want US directly involved in insurgency operations any more than is absolutely essential. They have scrapped all precedent to produce maximum number pilot trainees for both US and local training. The 10 CH34ʼs which have been committed by US in FY 66 are essential for this training and no juggling of statistics across the river can obscure this fact. Additional to these critical practical considerations is the rather simple matter of the USG honoring its promises. As you know, I cleaned up all the old broken promises which had accumulated after your departure and before my arrival, raised enough hell with JUSMAG to insure we promised absolutely nothing we were not absolutely sure we could deliver. In this specific case, I made very clear point with Pentagon that if I was given authority I requested to announce these items to Thai, I must have absolute assurance the commitments would be meticulously honored. This just must be done.

(4) The only remaining problem is the source. I understand reluctance to withdraw anything more from Europe. But there is a simple solution—borrow if necessary from SVN. I know there is a statistical shortage in CH34 requirements. But “requirements” are regarded much more realistically in the field. Westy understands the urgent necessity here, and I am sure out of the 2200 he has he will let me have ten.

B. (1) The second segment of this problem is the problem between now and January when Thai will be able to carry major burden themselves. In 27 April letter from Bill Bundy he said: “Our delay and repeated requests for additional information have, I am sorry to say, been due in part to the negative reactions triggered in many quarters by the very fact that your latest requests came to Washington in such dramatic fashion, and carried to many people here the flavor that high-level visitors had been subjected to a heavy assault by the Thai which seemed to go beyond realistic needs as we saw them”.

(2) I would have thought a few words from him could have dissipated any such reaction. As you and the Secretary recall Honolulu was a rather dramatic affair which caused certain concerns here. I cabled Secretary at Honolulu asking if you might come here to put conference in proper perspective. (In addition to official reasons Jennifer and I would have both been delighted to see you.) Instead of you alone, I got instead the Vice-President, Harriman, Marks, Valenti, Hand, and Cooper accompanied by 50-odd representatives of news media.

(3) Their arrival coincided with reappraisal of Thai after Phou Phan sweep (2A3 above). Rotary lift to multiply effectiveness of scarce manpower by greater mobility was obviously first priority. Thai have great and growing disinclination to have US directly involved. But there is simply no other way to keep pressure on insurgents in interim until Thai pilots and choppers available without asking for our assistance in unmarked helicopters. They did so, not stridently or with suggestion of quid pro quo, but with seriousness and dignity and quiet closing of subject by Thanat: “We are not trying to put our hands in your pocket. We simply want to know whether you can give us this assistance we rather desperately need at the moment.” While I outrank the Vice-President here and did the honors including the toast to the King, etc. I do not know that I should have over-ruled his instructions to address his report to the President. I thought I was skating on rather thin ice when I had message sent through State rather than Army SS channels as directed thinking Ben Read would do what seemed appropriate on routing. In any event, although I could do very little to curtail “dramatics” inherent in visit, I do not really see what this has to do with merits of objective judgment on realistic needs. Recent reporting seems to conclusively establish that even with complete fulfillment of JCS recommendation we could still effectively utilize more.

3. In addition to “dramatics” and “need”, I understand it is argued that this interim help would be too visible. This is not the case. From Udorn we are now dispatching all manner of helicopter lift. USAF unmarked rescue craft, Air America support operations for Laos, USAF support for certain MACV, SOG operations with which you are familiar. This is simply not a problem. Another factor allegedly is that providing this help will slow down Thai efforts to help themselves. The exact contrary is true. I would suppose the “realists” argue against additional commitment. With enormity of US air strength in N.E., I would think we should rather be thinking in terms of protecting that investment by assisting in every way possible the acceleration on Thai momentum in their campaign to contain and eliminate subversion now.

3. I am well aware that we are going through the periodic exercise of “failure scenarios” and the climate of defeatism. The Secretary may remember the early days in G–2 when Col. Truman Smith who had been our military attache in Berlin simply refused to credit the fact that the Russians were beginning to chop up some of his former clients panzer armies. The analogy is not exact but I sometimes fear we become so captivated with the logic of this type of scenario, that we overlook hard objective facts that might disturb the even flow of the logic.

4. I do not for a moment discount the hard days ahead but I believe we are on the verge of breaking the back of the Communists capability to mount or sustain regimental or battalion sized engagements. By this time next year we could be very well back at Geneva or, far preferably, we will have seen repetition of Greek and Malaysian pattern where hostilities gradually tapered off into a manageable police problem.

5. It seems to me that it would be a very grave error to lose the momentum we have so painstakingly built up here. For reasons which as far as I can see are either wholly irrelevant or based on ancient misinformation.

6. I have carried this as far as I can alone, I have given all the information we have. I believe it should permit favorable decision to be made on basis of objective evaluation of all factors involved. I hope that decision will be made by the Secretary, or if this not possible, that it will be taken to the President.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. [text not declassified]

2 Apparent reference to a meeting which eventually took place on May 17. See footnote 2, Document 313.

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

313. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 313. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, May 16, 1966.

SUBJECT

Basic Policy Choices Concerning Thailand

1. The attached memorandum (Tab A) was prepared jointly with John McNaughtonʼs office to provide a basis for your discussion of this subject with Secretary McNamara at 5:00 p.m. today.2 It indicates a considerable measure of agreement on the key factors affecting our policy choices and the choices themselves. There are, however, some important differences and these are noted in the text.

2. The differences are largely of emphasis, e.g., how much, rather than whether, Thai MAP should be increased in future years. The one disagreement requiring decision now relates to the provision of additional U.S.-manned helicopters to provide lift for Thai troops and police engaged in counterinsurgency operations. We consider, and Defense agrees, that there is a clear need for additional helicopter lift. We believe further that a refusal of this assistance would probably be read by the Thai as a lack of resolve on our part and a beginning of disengagement and could lead rather quickly to a sharp deterioration of Thai support and cooperation. For example, the Thai could withdraw approval for the introduction of three additional U.S. tactical fighter squadrons, an approval which was apparently granted by the Prime Minister in expectation of favorable U.S. action on the Thai request for helicopter support. Ambassador Martin foresees much more far-reaching repercussions: stalling on all future requests for deployments; pressure for a status-of-forces agreement and/or a bilateral defense treaty; insistence on full prior consultation on use of Thai bases including target selection; possibly restrictions on certain Laos operations mounted from Thailand. Martinʼs most recent message on the subject (Embtel 2399)3 is attached (Tab B; Sec saw).

3. Defense, on the other hand, argues that the provision of U.S.-manned helicopters will not prove to be temporary, will cause the Thais to do less themselves, will get us more deeply involved in “fighting Thailandʼs battle for her”, and will lead to a situation in which the U.S. pilots cannot be withdrawn without causing a major political crisis.

Tab A

Memorandum for Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara

SUBJECT

Basic Policy Choices Concerning Thailand

We confront a series of action decisions on Thailand, notably (a) whether to authorize additional US-manned helicopters to assist the Thais in counterinsurgency operations; (b) whether to accept substantial increases in the Thai MAP for FY 1967 (AID FY 66 contingency funds might be available for early funding of increases in this program); (c) whether to authorize further major increases in the already very large military construction program in Thailand. Affirmative decisions have already been taken with respect (d) to the 10 FY 66 helicopters and (e) to FY 66 CONUS training for Thai helicopter pilots. The more we look at the issues, the more we all feel that the time has come to draw back and assess our total policy toward Thailand, particularly against possible adverse developments in the Vietnam situation.

Principal Elements of the Situation

1. Our Present Degree of Involvement with Thailand. The SEATO Treaty and the Rusk/Thanat communique (at Tab C)4 have created a firm bilateral commitment to assist in the defense of Thailand against overt aggression. Since February 1965 we have deployed major US military forces to Thailand, principally air, and are now operating eight US squadrons from Thai bases, which account for all, or virtually all, US land-based strikes against North Vietnam. Deployment of three more squadrons has been approved by the RTG, and will arrive in Thailand over the coming 10–12 weeks. We have authorized and cleared with the Thai Government a major construction program to build a large new port and airbase complex at Sattahip, to enlarge airfields and other installations, and to build extensive road, rail, and pipeline connections—all premised in large part on needs for operations related to Vietnam but to some extent also on possible contingencies for the defense of Thailand and Southeast Asia generally. This construction is now well underway. On the military planning side, as a result of a basic commitment in the summer of 1964, we have confirmed with the Thais, in mid-1965, the so-called “Project 22” planning and force designation arrangements calling for joint limited US/Thai military action to meet a conventional threat in the Mekong Valley. In terms of material support, we have provided, in addition to a continuing MAP program recently on the order of $40 million, substantial AID inputs which will run this year to roughly $30–35 million. US personnel are advising the Thai military, police, and intelligence forces at all levels.

2. Thai Attitudes Towards Involvement with the US. Ambassador Martin has been successful in getting the Thai oligarchy (for practical purposes, Thanom, Praphat, Dawee, Thanat and Pote Sarasin) to go along willingly, though with some minor frictions, with all that we have asked. It is important to note that this consent rests today on a very personal and politically fragile basis. Permission is secured directly from the Premier or Vice-Premier, without consultation with the Foreign Office, and does not involve any inhibiting status of forces or operational mission clearance agreements. The Thais are well aware that these are unusually permissive arrangements. This is not to say that they have acted altruistically, because these same leaders do recognize their own vital stake, as well as the substantial economic benefit to the country, e.g., from the construction program. Moreover, the Thai leaders have recognized their special and direct concern for the Communist threat in Laos—to them a much more immediate problem than Vietnam—by their significant artillery and air contributions to the defense of Laos. Within the last few days, they have publicly announced their direct contributions in Vietnam: An LST, a PGM patrol craft and two C–123 transport aircraft, all operational under the Thai flag. (Both Peking and the clandestine “Voice of the Thai People” have attacked the RTG very heavily for this latest action.)

Nonetheless, despite all the realities of self-interest involved in the Thai actions, we must recognize that the Thai leaders have gone much further than Thailand has ever done in its history to align itself with one of the major contending forces in the area. Significant elements within Thailand have been grumbling at this degree of commitment, and the Thai leaders are sensitive to this. The historic Thai tradition of not becoming this deeply involved is a fact, and we must recognize that it exists.

More specifically, Thai military leaders—and more vehemently the Thai military below the top—feel that we have been grudging and even inadequate in our assistance to the Thai military and, harking back to their disillusionment with our Lao policy in 1961–62, question whether we are in fact a dependable ally in a crunch. They are particularly sensitive to the point that US operations from Thailand have been importantly responsible for the increased insurgency in the Northeast as well as to the increased threat of overt aggression. They feel the US should recognize this and respond accordingly. Thus, there are important elements in the second-echelon Thai military who especially question the degree of commitment the RTG leadership has accepted; this attitude could become a serious danger.

3. Thai Response to the Increased Threat to Their Security. The Thais have been late and slow in their response to the increased threat to their security posed by developments in Laos and Vietnam. Beginning last fall, however, when their insurgency problem in the Northeast became increasingly apparent, the Thais reacted with new determination and vigor to meet this situation. Moreover, the US acceptance in mid-1965 of the Project 22 plan, and our increased in-country construction which the Thais regard as partially conceived to meet threats to Thailand, have spurred the Thais to increased efforts to improve their capability to resist conventional aggression. The country team is in agreement that a new spirit and will are evident in Thailand.

Probably the greatest weakness of the Thai Government in the face of the threat of subversion and insurgency is the inadequacy of its direct links with the villager. This applies both to its provision of security and of government services. Fortunately, the Thai leadership sees this flaw and is taking steps to correct it. Programs to improve and augment the police and to make their presence felt at lower levels in the administrative hierarchy are already underway. In the more critical areas, the police are being supplemented quite ably by the Army, particularly by Thai Special Forces teams and an airborne company which has been deployed to the Phu Phan Mountain area. Strides have been made in the collection, collation and exploitation of intelligence with the establishment of regional Joint Security Centers where Provincial Police, Border Patrol Police, Special Branch, Army, Air Force, and Marine Police contribute to and share in the intelligence take. Since December of last year, the Counter Subversion Operations Center in Bangkok has provided a central repository and backstop for these regional centers and has also brought about a great improvement in the coordination of countersubversion operations generally.

In the field of better government services and government presence at the village level, the MDUs have continued to do good work and new ones have recently been established so that thirteen now are in operation. The Accelerated Rural Development program continues its drive to enable developmental projects to be carried out at the Provincial and District level, and the Developing Democracy Program is reviving the township councils so that there will be village and township-level participation in the process of planning and implementing ARD projects.

The steps taken so far have been small but, in spite of the intensified Communist effort, there is good reason to hope that the Thai will have some success in overcoming the weaknesses of the traditional over-centralized administrative system.

In the field of military preparations more narrowly defined, the Thais have not in the past done an adequate job. Their basic policy of devoting 60–70% of their national budget to economic development has appeared to us sound, and we still strongly support it. But the unfortunate fact is that the Thais have not chosen until recently to start to raise the over-all level of the budget sufficiently to make adequate funds available for defense purposes, nor to increase the percentage of manning in the RTA units and improve training and utilization of equipment in the Armed Forces generally. The result has been persistent weaknesses in these respects, which led to an adverse GAO report in 1964 that criticized their performance. However, the current budget items for defense and police now have been increased 27% over the previous year and a new extension and expansion of the draft is expected to raise manpower levels in the Army from the present 83,860 to 96,540 by June 30 and 102,365 by the end of CY 1966. Pursuit of the joint evaluatory effort which MACTHAI has initiated will give us good leverage in those areas where the Thai effort still falls short.

4. Thai Reaction to Developments in Vietnam. This is perhaps the key question in relation to future policy. Last June, when we were deliberating our major force commitment in Vietnam, it was the conclusion that the Thai simply would not stand up to the combined Chicom and North Vietnamese threat that would exist if South Vietnam fell. We made a similar informal judgment in assessing our Vietnam policy recently, and specifically concluded that the Thai reaction to failure in Vietnam would not be significantly different even under circumstances where the US had made every possible effort militarily and the situation fell apart because of internal political divisions.

In the event Vietnam goes bad, there will undoubtedly be many elements in Thailand which will take the view that, if the alternative to accommodation is a conflict on Thai soil, such as that now being fought in Vietnam, then accommodation is to be preferred. They will also reflect the feeling that if the US effort has failed in Vietnam, it will in the end fail in Thailand, too, despite the rather different circumstances which apply in Thailand.

However, as a result of all we have done, the Thais would be more likely than we previously believed to stand firm or at least attempt to. The present leaders have almost burned their bridges, particularly with the recent announcement of overt assistance to South Vietnam. There are many other factors which might lead them to conclude that they could avoid the political disintegration which poses the greatest danger to the effort in Vietnam. The King is popular, the government is generally responsive to and accepted by the people, and the economic situation has been steadily improving with the conscious effort being made to expand the rural share in this improvement, although this is still inadequate in the Northeast. Further, the Thai leadership would fear the effects of accommodation with Communist China on their 3–4 million overseas Chinese who would be extremely difficult to control once a Chinese Communist Embassy were established in Bangkok.

In short, there is at least the chance that even if South Vietnam went bad, Thailand would persist at least for some time to try to maintain its relationship with the US. This would be true, however, only if the US somehow managed to come through the Vietnam experience without vitally damaging the credibility of its commitment to assist in the defense of Thailand.

Nevertheless, we believe that if Vietnam goes bad it remains more likely than not that the Thais will seek an accommodation with the Chinese Communists and that the minimum price for this would be Thai disengagement from their treaties with the US, the removal of US operational military units and the reduction of US military assistance to a minimum basis if not its total elimination. We do not believe it necessarily would follow that Thailand would be subjugated by the Communists.

Broader Policy Considerations

5. Thailand in Relation to the Area. If Vietnam goes bad, Cambodia will almost certainly become for all practical purposes a Chinese Communist ally, and in Laos there may remain at best only a tenuous and shaky hold on the Mekong Areas. Communist Chinaʼs stock would rise automatically, and the effect on the attitudes of the overseas Chinese in Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore would be electric. Confidence in the US would be shaken throughout the Far East. If Thailand decides to accommodate, it would then seem likely that, if they had not already done so, Malaysia, Singapore and Burma would change their orientation in the direction of Communist China, and would in a period of time become for practical purposes areas of Communist Chinese influence or possibly domination. Indonesia, now so thoroughly aroused against the Communist Chinese, might maintain true independence, but would be threatened over a period of time by a recurrence of political forces prepared to accommodate in some fashion. In any case, all of mainland Southeast Asia would be subject to Communist influence and we would face a very grim strategic and psychological aftermath.

In short, while the situation is again less fatalistic than a year ago, particularly with respect to Indonesia, the over-all consequences of Thailand falling or even accommodating would still be extremely serious and would have major disruptive effects in India, and in East Asia as a whole.

6. Consequences of Another US Failure in Southeast Asia. As the previous analysis indicates, any major US effort to support Thailand, assuming the worst in Vietnam, would confront basic Thai attitudes, as well as concrete problems, that add up to a substantial chance that the effort would again fail, as in Vietnam, whatever we did. Failure in Vietnam alone would have created a major shock to US prestige and credit world-wide, and it may well be asked whether we should head into another situation fraught with possibilities of failure, or whether we might then seek to cut our losses. We may well wonder, also, whether the American people would support a “second effort” in Thailand, and one can already hear the voices of protest attacking the non-democratic and unattractive aspects of Thailand, while on the other hand major voices would be heard demanding that we deal with the threat by military measures involving a major risk of large-scale conflict with Communist China. The prospect is less than appetizing.

U.S. Policy Options

7. The Theoretical Options. There would seem to be four basic postures we could adopt at the present juncture. A. One restricted posture would be that we do those things, and only those things, necessary to maintain essential US operations from Thailand in connection with Vietnam. This posture may, of course, require elements of Postures B–D below to be successful.

B. Another restricted posture would be that we largely ignore the quid pro quo aspects of our assistance above and provide aid only for programs designed to help Thailand achieve an ability to deal successfully with their subversion and insurgency problems. This posture would involve a side-tracking of the Project 22 efforts.

C. A less restrictive posture would be that we go beyond Posture B above by as much as necessary to assist Thailand to attain a conventional warfare capability such that Thai forces alone might be a credible deterrent against small-scale overt aggression, and such that Thai forces could complement US forces to some extent in the event of major conventional war in the area. (This posture would include providing additional equipment for Thai forces and might also include some further construction in order to improve our ability to respond to overt aggression and to make our commitment to do so more credible without requiring repositioning of US forces.)

D. A posture of all-out assistance to Thailand, which would include the elements of Postures A–C above, but would go further—including a construction program that would make provision for and contemplate making major troop deployments, involving a military assistance program that would meet every useful purpose conceivable, and implying readiness to participate in the Thai counterinsurgency operation on “1962–65 Vietnam” lines.

8. Analysis of These Theoretical Options. In assessing our options, we must recognize that our position already includes certain elements that are largely irreversible. This is true of our treaty commitment, the Project 22 arrangements, and such small but significant actions as our establishing facilities for limited numbers American troops and headquarters in Thailand (which we have already done or authorized) and our participating in joint headquarters with the Thais on a skeleton basis for Project 22. Nonetheless, we should as a matter of principle seek to stop short of actions that would be interpreted by the Thais to commit us to actions beyond the countering of overt aggression in some form. This permits us to reject option D, and we would recommend that it be rejected. Option A would seek to achieve only the continued unrestricted use of bases in Thailand for operations in connection with Vietnam. Even in pursuing this minimum policy objective, unless we provide significant added assistance, the State Department believes that the Thais may well read our actions as the beginning of disengagement and withhold or withdraw the kind of operating rights and privileges we seek to maintain; that any attempt to put our aid largely in the context of getting our necessary operating rights could seriously impair our whole relationship and give the Thais the feeling that we would not stand by them in any case; and that psychological effect could stimulate the very “give up” mentality that we seek now to avoid. Moreover, assistance given under option A might well not be sufficient to accomplish a prime current objective of US policy towards Thailand, namely helping them become sufficiently capable and strong to have an option of remaining independent from China, without direct US involvement, if Vietnam goes bad. The Defense Department adds the thought that defense of the area is of joint US-Thai concern and that the principle of “giving the Thais aid in order to persuade them to let the US protect them” should be rejected where possible. The arguments emerging from the foregoing analysis militate against A.

Option B likewise fails because it excludes attention to the conventional role of Thai forces, because it is inconsistent with our commitments associated with Project 22, and because the political facts of life in Thailand require that the military side receive attention if CI is to receive attention.

It is our conclusion that option C best serves current US aims in Thailand—although there are differences between State and Defense as to how generously option C should be interpreted. If handled properly, (1) it will serve our present desire to have the full support of the Thais for US operations from bases there, (2) it will give enough to the Thai military forces to create a worthwhile deterrent to overt aggression against Thailand and a worthwhile complementary force to fight alongside us if need be, (3) it will keep the (Army-oriented) oligarchy reasonably pacified in the face of a build-up of countersubversion (police) capabilities, and (4) it will go furthest toward fulfilling our desire to have the Thais capable of resisting on their own the current internal and external attempts to undermine their independence, which we believe would be sharply stepped-up if Vietnam goes bad.

Option C has implications regarding current policy choices. (1.) The instructions guiding the make-up of FY 67–72 MAP should place priority emphasis upon development of CI capabilities and to a lesser extent on Project 22 needs. Progress on these fields should be carefully checked and the Defense Department believes that MAP funds should be conditioned upon reasonable progress being made. With respect to conventional capabilities, particular attention should be paid to building Thai forces to a level of manpower, equipment and budget support which they could essentially maintain without substantial continuing US support.

(2.) Funded and unfunded construction for FY 66, FY 67 and later years should be reviewed in terms of its contribution to the Thai capability to meet limited overt attack and to deal with insurgency, as well as to making credible the US commitment of intervention against massive overt attack, and the over-all requirements for US strategic posture in broader regional terms. Particular attention must be given to minimizing for the Thais the social and economic effect of the US presence in their country; and the value of the construction program to Thailand—the port, roads, pipelines, airfields, etc.—from the peacetime point of view should be analyzed and noted.

9. Certain undesirable involvements of US personnel may be necessary even to achieve option A. The following is the firm judgment of the State Department and of the in-country team in this connection: That such an action is a positive response to the Thai request for increased participation by US-manned helicopters in support of Thai CI operations; that it is unquestionably true that the Thais desire to carry out increased CI operations now and it is agreed opinion of all on the scene that they should do so; that it is true also that if the Thais are to train now in-country and in CONUS enough pilots to later carry out these operations alone, they will not have enough qualified crews or available craft to do these operations today using their own people only; and that to fill this gap, which will last until the summer of 1967, the Thais have asked specifically for the introduction of an increased number of US-manned helicopters. The Defense Department view is that past performance of the Thais has been bad with respect to provision of manpower, to budget support, to usage of equipment and to attention to the problem of countersubversion and counterinsurgency; that the “lift gap” exists and will continue to exist long beyond 1967; and that despite protestations to the contrary, provision of US-manned helicopters (1) will cause the Thais to do less themselves, (2) will get us deeper involved in fighting Thailandʼs battle for her, and (3) will lead to a situation in which the US pilots cannot be withdrawn without causing a major political crisis.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret;Nodis. Drafted by Trueheart on May 16. The memorandum is hand dated May 16.

2 The phrase, “at 5:00 p.m. today,” is handwritten. Ruskʼs meeting with McNamara, McNaughton, Vance, U. Alexis Johnson, and William Bundy, was at 5 p.m., May 17. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) On Bundyʼs copy of this memorandum the meeting with McNamara was “on May 17,” suggesting that this memorandum, dated May 16, was given to Rusk on May 17. No other record of the 5 p.m., May 17 meeting has been found.

3 Telegram 2399, May 9, attached, but not printed. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw telegram 2399.

4 Attached, but not printed. The Rusk-Thanat communiqué is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

314. Memorandum of Conversation 314. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

US/MC/5

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Canberra, June 27–29, 1966

ANZUS MINISTERIAL MEETING

Canberra, June 30–July 1, 1966

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Martin

Thailand Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister

Dr. Sompong Sucharitkul, Private Secretary to Foreign Minister

SUBJECT

Situation in Northeast Thailand

The Secretary said he would like to comment on the situation in the northeast of Thailand. He said he felt very strongly that the Thais should exert maximum effort now to smash this activity as quickly as possible. He said that in retrospect, looking back at the conference between Kennedy and Khrushchev in Vienna2 when it became apparent Khrushchev would not budge on Vietnam, there should have been maximum effort made against the Viet Cong. He said that as Khrushchev was threatening simultaneously a war over Berlin it was not judged prudent to increase American material or manpower support in Vietnam at that time. He said he felt that the Thai should exert a maximum effort to eliminate this menace now.

Thanat expressed complete agreement with the Secretary. He said that he had consistently urged such a maximum effort. He said, however, that General Praphat, Deputy Prime Minister and CINC of the Royal Thai Army, had argued that American slippages in equipment deliveries expected had not left the RTA sufficiently equipped. Thanat said General Praphat argued that if Thai troops were openly used it might invite the incursion of North Vietnamese regular units now passing through Laos on their way to South Vietnam. He said General Praphat argued that he could not depend on American materiel help and did not desire American troop participation. The decision had therefore been made to attempt to handle the matter as a civilian police affair.

Thanat said he felt so strongly that a maximum effort should be made that he took the unusual step of intervening with the King, who used his influence with Praphat to add Army elements to the suppression operation in the northeast. Thanat indicated that if the Thai could be reasonably certain of materiel assistance they could handle the job without American troops. The Secretary indicated that he would review the situation, (and attempt to insure that the necessary materiel support would be forthcoming).

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI. Secret. No drafting officer is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on July 19. Rusk was in Canberra, Australia, for meetings of SEATO and ANZUS. The meeting was held at the U.S. Ambassadorʼs residence in Canberra. This memorandum is part VII of VII that comprised the Rusk-Thanat conversation. Part V is printed as Document 315. A complete series of Ruskʼs memoranda of conversation at Canberra, including the other parts of this conversation with Thanat, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 47 and 57.

2 The Summit Conference of June 3–4, 1961, in Vienna.

315. Memorandum of Conversation 315. Memorandum of Conversation1

Canberra, June 28, 1966, 9 a.m.

US/MC/5

SEATO COUNCIL MEETING

Canberra, June 27–29, 1966

ANZUS MINISTERIAL MEETING

Canberra, June 30–July 1, 1966

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Martin

Thailand Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister

Dr. Sompong Sucharitkul, Private Secretary to Foreign Minister

SUBJECT

SOFA

In raising the question of SOFA, Thanat made it quite clear that it would be necessary to take action soon on the SOFA draft that had been submitted by the Thai to the U.S. over two years ago as a basis for negotiation. He asked the Secretary whether we were now ready to proceed. The Secretary responded that his answer, in principle, would be affirmative. He asked Thanat whether there were any special problems. Thanat said that the recent flurry of intense press criticism had made non-existence of SOFA in Thailand a pressing matter of national sovereignty, particularly in view of the existence of SOFAs in Korea, GRC, Philippines, and Japan. He said there were no special problems, but with over 24,000 American troops in Thailand it would seem to be as much in our interest as in the Thai interest to have them protected by a proper agreement, since in the absence of such an agreement these troops are now subject to Thai law.

The Secretary said we were especially concerned to assure full protection to American troops for actions taken in duty status in specific compliance with orders. Thanat said he thought this category fully covered in the draft submitted to the U.S. by the RTG as a basis of negotiation.

The Secretary indicated he also desired to give proper protection to troops off duty and on leave. He asked whether there had been many incidents. Thanat and Ambassador Martin both confirmed that the incident rate was amazingly low. Thanat observed that there seemed really no basis for fear that any constitutional rights would be violated. The Secretary asked Thanat where he thought the SOFA negotiations should be conducted. Thanat replied they should be carried on at Bangkok as he wished to keep a close personal watch on the progress of such negotiations.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret. No drafting officer is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on July 19. This memorandum is Part V of VII. For further information on these memoranda, see footnote 1, Document 314.

316. National Intelligence Estimate 316. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, July 1, 1966.

NIE 52–66

COMMUNIST INSURGENCY IN THAILAND

The Problem

To assess the threat of Communist insurgency in Thailand over the next year or two.

Conclusions

A. Communist-supported insurgency in Thailand does not constitute a present danger to the stability of the Thai government or a near-term threat to its control over any large section of the country. The guerrilla forces are small and their operations are generally confined to remote and relatively sparsely-populated areas.

B. Nevertheless, the insurgency will probably expand further in geographic scope and intensity over the next year or two.2 Its growth will be due primarily to continuing direction, guidance, and support by the Chinese Communists, and to the political and economic vulnerabilities which exist in certain parts of the country, especially the Northeast.

C. In coping with insurgency the Thai government has the advantage of a generally loyal and contented population. Dissidence is not a serious problem in the most populous areas of the country. The government now recognizes the growing dimensions of the threat in the Northeast and the potential threat in the North and the Malay South, and has undertaken major political, economic, and security measures to deal with the situation.

D. Much remains to be done in terms of organization of security forces and in the field of political action before government programs become fully effective. However, barring a collapse of non-Communist forces in Laos and South Vietnam, we believe that the problem will remain manageable and that over time the Thai government with US assistance will be able to maintain reasonable levels of security in the Northeast and other possible trouble spots. But a long and costly effort will probably be necessary.

[Here follows the 12-page Discussion portion that includes a map of “Major Ethnic Groups” in Thailand and tables of Thai military force strength (127,700), major Thai police and paramilitary force strength (45,800), and U.S. forces in Thailand (24,470) as of June 23, 1966.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 165, NIE 52–66. Secret; Controlled Dissem. A covering note on the source text indicates that the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, and the NSA prepared this estimate. It was approved on July 1 by all the members of the USIB except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map of Thailand indicating areas of “Communist Activities and Major U.S. Military Bases” are not printed. In a June 29 memorandum to Hughes, Allen S. Whiting of INR/RFE stated that CIA/ONE initiated this estimate primarily “to put the intelligence communityʼs seal of approval on conclusions that have already become the basis for policy decisions.” Whiting described those agreed conclusions as, “that there is an insurgent threat in Thailand, that it is likely to expand somewhat in the next year or so but not to the point of menacing government stability or control, but that, notwithstanding its present and potential limits, insurgency will be quite an expensive nuisance.” Whiting stated that the DIA was most worried about Thailand becoming “another Vietnam,” but it backed down when challenged by the rest of the intelligence community. (Ibid.)

2 On July 20 McNamara sent a memorandum to Vance referring to this conclusion and its further exposition in the body of the paper. He asked: “Who in our Government is responsible for directing a program to prevent the insurgency from expanding in the next year or two, and who is responsible for correcting the deficiencies in the National Police which is assigned such a major role in counterinsurgency?” McNamara suggested that this issue should be considered by the Senior Review Group. A note on the source text indicated it was to be discussed with Ball, Helms, and Gaud on apparently a more informal basis. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4443, Thailand 370.64)

317. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 317. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, July 7, 1966.

229. Eyes Only—Ambassador Martin/FE.

1. Steadman completed visit2 today thoroughly convinced of dangerous insurgency threat confronting Thailand, completely sold on requirement for improved rotary airlift and for concentration Thai efforts on CI.

2. At same time these conclusions appear to have served largely to reinforce earlier preconceptions that Thai simply are not doing enough with what they already have in terms of men and equipment; that their approach to insurgency problem is so cumbersome and unwieldy situation likely to get much worse before it gets better; and that missionʼs assistance to RTG in some activities was hampered by what he interpreted as lack of coordination and singleness of purpose or policy.

3. These views were reflected earlier in informal discussions and reemphasized during exhaustive review of 67 MAP level. While his reactions to MACTHAI arguments for $68 million program largely inconclusive, several specifics were clarified for him and some outright errors rectified. As result Steadman will be making some revisions of proposed DOD position. In virtually every case, however, he referred to need for reassessment of priorities within the proposed $44.4 million ceiling and conveyed impression that whatever changes he might be required to make in line items, dollar level not likely to move up appreciably if at all.

4. Throughout MAP level discussions he stressed need for Thai to improve utilization of what they already have, need to have evidence of RTA getting out into the field and of RTN using its ships. He was categoric in assuring responsiveness to requests which were clearly CI, but did not give this broad application or precise definition.

5. He accepted complete personal responsibility for $44.4 million level proposed, saying that despite coincidence with FY 66 level he had not been directed to stay under any figure. Recommendation based on “objective” evaluation of priorities in view tightness of MAP funds. He displayed ignorance of essential facts regarding some items which he had deleted from program; but, in almost every case when rationale was provided and he seemed persuaded that item belonged in program, he tended in effect to contradict his guidance of not being bound to a fixed dollar figure by referring to need examine priorities within proposed ceiling.

6. While generally non-committal on most items he came out clearly negative on following. A. POL—Without addressing question of consumables policy he said we would be “unlikely get increase in ceiling to accommodate POL”. Inference remained that we could get waiver on policy but would have to fund within whatever level we get.

B. M–16ʼs—He said SecDef decision on 4,600 rifles was one-shot matter based on “morale factor”, desire to see Thai “get out into field”. Believe Thai have capability required now, and do not need M–16ʼs. Besides, reequipping RTA is a “$25 million decision”, not to mention implications for entire MAP program. Priority of Thai not high compared to some others.

C. Units in Being—Believes Thai need to improve usability of equipment they already have. Deliberate decision made (recognized as departure from past MAP practice) that TO&E not to exceed actual manning percentage. (It was not clear whether this was being directed solely against Thai; usually 80 percent manning would permit 100 percent equippage.)

D. Naval Items—(Except possibly for PF modifications regarding which he was uninformed.) He is against all these until RTN does more with what it already has and against “deep water” ships in any case. Said Washington does not know what RTN is doing [illegible].

E. F–5ʼs—Too large an item for funds available, hence proposed stretch out. Didnʼt know why decision taken to speed up delivery. Has requested Blouin in personal message to get details on F–5 program for his return Monday, July 11.

7. Full presentation of our position on FY 67 program being pouched Friday, July 8.3

Fluker 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; No Distribution Outside Department. No time of transmission appears on the source text, which was received at the Department of State at 9:06 a.m. on July 7.

2 The Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Richard C. Steadman, was in Thailand to assess Thai military assistance needs.

3 Not further identified.

4 Robert J. Fluker, Supervisory Economic Officer, Embassy Thailand.

318. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 318. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis (Enthoven) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, July 21, 1966.

SUBJECT

Need for Better Reports on Thailand

The attached staff study of recent developments in Thailand was prepared on the basis of readily available documents and discussions with staff officers in ISA, DIA, and the State Department.

The paper indicates that events in Thailand are moving rapidly, rates of insurgency have sharply increased, Thai utilization of MAP equipment has improved, the Thais are anxious for U.S. advice and materiel assistance while retaining their desire to solve their own internal problems. It further states that the basic reports to Washington need to be expanded to permit a better and more current assessment of the developing situation.

The attached memorandum for the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff requests expanded reports on insurgent and counterinsurgent operations in Thailand, on Thai military performance, and on the performance of U.S. assistance programs. It will also request assessments of insurgent threat to U.S. bases in Thailand, U.S./Thai military dependence on the AID/Thai rural police program, the implications of moving U.S. troops into Thailand under current contingency plans, and the implications of losing U.S. bases in Thailand.

I recommend signature on the attached memorandum. OASD(ISA) concurs.2

Alain Enthoven

Attachment

Staff Study Prepared in the Department of Defense 3

DEVELOPMENTS IN THAILAND

The Threat

Communist infiltration and activity in Thailand are accelerating and will probably expand further in geographic scope and intensity over the next year or two. This deterioration in the security situation commenced in mid-1965. In part, it is due to increased U.S. activity in Laos and North Vietnam conducted from bases in Thailand. Rather complete “safe haven” training facilities have been located. Incidents in Northeast Thailand in the first five months of 1966 are greater than the total for all of 1965. Terrorism and ambush are employed; officials, school teachers and government informants are the principal targets. Estimates of 750 incidents of all kinds from January 1–May 30, 1966 are reported, including about 200 fatalities. (Regrettably, the availability of structured incident statistics at the Washington level is weak.) Available evidence indicates that during May the conflict between the RTG and the insurgents resulted in at least 12 armed clashes, more than 40 casualties, and discovery of at least 6 more communist camps. During the first four months of 1966, RTG security operations captured 219 communists and induced 903 more to surrender.

Even more important than the outbreak of incidents is the central point that between 500 and 1000 armed insurgents have free access to the rural populations and have begun to develop an organization and base of support for their activities against the government.

Discussions with staff officers in the concerned agencies reveal agreement that insurgent activity in Thailand is definitely increasing and is serious. Clearly, increased subversion activity in areas adjacent to U.S. air bases at Takli, Ubon, Udorn and Korat is cause for concern since these facilities are vulnerable.

The acceleration of communist and RTG operations requires that the structure and content of basic reports to Washington be improved to enable interested agencies to better follow and assess the rapidly developing situation.

The Thai Response

Available evidence from State, DOD, and CIA sources indicates that the Thai are becoming concerned with the threat and are groping for ways to attack the problem. MACTHAI and USOM consider recent evidence of RTG concern in their respective spheres of interest to be “dramatic.” The Thai leadership elite is united under the leadership of Marshal Thanom, and the key operating figure, General Praphat (Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Interior, and Commander-in-Chief of the Army) has personally assumed command of all communist suppression operations in Thailand. Further evidence of their concern is the record of Thai accomplishments reported in the last six months. Their achievements include exceeding the USAF standard utilization rates for certain aircraft while flying counterinsurgency support missions; exceeding 6 months ahead of schedule the agreed manning levels for Thai Army troop units in Project 22 (a U.S. initiated joint program); increasing total Thai Army troop strength from 83,840 on May 1, 1966, to 96,000 by June 30 (with plans to reach 103,000 by the end of CY 1966); and increasing the defense budget by 27% for this fiscal year, with an additional 20% predicted in the next fiscal year. Above all, the Thai wish to minimize the involvement and presence of U.S. personnel, an attitude which can be quite advantageous to us.

The Thai Contribution

Aside from reacting to the immediate internal threat, the Thai have contributed without publicity to U.S. objectives in Southeast Asia in the following ways: 1. Acceding without delay to every U.S. request to deploy USAF and Army units to Thailand, even at the cost of physical displacement from their own bases.

2. Accepting almost all U.S. recommendations for construction of military facilities to meet U.S. needs.

3. Approving every U.S. request for assistance on highly classified operations.

4. Ignoring, until recently, the absence of a Status of Forces Agreement covering U.S. troops, despite the fact that every other major Asian ally of the U.S. has demanded one.

5. Loaning aircraft and bombs from limited Thai war reserves to meet U.S. emergency needs on Laos.

6. Providing pilots to fly T–28 missions in Laos.

7. Committing an artillery and infantry screen of 300 troops (still there) to Laos who fought with distinction in checking the Pathet Lao.

8. Providing cadre for most of the intelligence teams now operating in enemy-held sections of Laos and North Vietnam.

9. Agreeing to keep their unit in Korea to preserve the image of a United Nations Force.

Lack of U.S. resolve in supporting the Thai in ways the Thai consider meaningful could eliminate assets of this type, and hurt U.S. policy and operations in Southeast Asia. We should not force the Thai to “blackmail” the U.S. or increase the strain in the relationship.

The U.S. Side

On a long term basis, the U.S. has undertaken clear commitments to support the Thai. These commitments extend across the Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations and have been progressively strengthened. It has been consistent U.S. policy to encourage the Thai to devote their resources to economic and social development, and to minimize military programs. They have done so, which is unusual for a military-dominated government, however enlightened.

The U.S. response to the recent Thai insurgency threat has been ambiguous. In view of the evidence at hand, the reasons for this ambiguity are difficult to understand (there is an unusual degree of unanimity at the staff officer level in every concerned agency that the threat is real, the Thai response to U.S. recommendations has been good, and the requests for help reasonable). The U.S. reluctance to respond is in part based on dissatisfaction with past performance by the Thai, and a belief that the Thai have not taken the effective actions to counter the insurgency that are within their resources and capability. These factors were evident in the U.S. delay in granting the Thai request for temporary helicopter augmentation. The Thai were disturbed by the slow U.S. response to what they considered an urgent and legitimate request from an ally in need.

There have been delays in the delivery of committed MAP items, and in supplying USOM police advisors. A brief review of the MAP program, with specific reference to the delivery situation, indicates that fair grounds do exist for the Ambassadorʼs assessment of May 24, 1966, when he pointed to “the rather shockingly poor United States record on the military assistance side.” Even when a policy decision is made in Washington to undertake a program, it is not necessarily carried out automatically, and there is no follow-up to ensure implementation. OSD might profitably consider some inquiry into the latter question.

The nature of the relationship between DOD and AID programs pertaining to rural security in Thailand is also hazy. The Thai have taken some limited steps to organize civil, military and police elements into an effective, unified counterinsurgency effort. Coordination of U.S. performance in assisting this effort is uneven, considering the separate and distinct AID, USIA and DOD programs.

Conclusions

It is difficult to understand why the U.S. does not have a coordinated counterinsurgency plan for Thailand, especially in view of the clear determination of the Thai to do the counterinsurgency job themselves with minimal involvement of U.S. personnel. In view of our commitments to the Thai, a clear determination of the U.S. position is essential.

The structure and content of basic reports to Washington needs to be improved to enable interested agencies to better follow and assess the rapidly developing situation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

2  McNamara signed the memorandum to the JCS, which was attached, but is not printed.

3 The staff study is undated.

319. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 319. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, August 6, 1966.

Dear Bob:

I suggest that both of us should take a good look at the Thai MAP program for the coming year, including the ways in which a satisfactory level may be funded. I do not know what the exact amount should be but understand that the field has made a strong case for seventy million dollars, and that your staff has been thinking in terms of about forty-five million dollars.

While I know that the Thai have in the past tended to take a somewhat relaxed attitude toward the growing internal threat they are facing, I am impressed with the fact that they now seem to be putting a much greater effort into facing up to it. I understand that DOD staff studies indicate very substantial accomplishments on the military side during the last six months and exceedingly fine cooperation in all that we have asked of them for our operations both in Viet-Nam and Laos. On the political side they have also been a source of great strength. The Thai Government, especially Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman who is emerging as an Asian leader of real stature, has given us the strongest kind of political support. I thus feel that we should do what we can to preserve and nurture this important asset in Southeast Asia.

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret. An attached covering memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Rusk, indicated that Johnson drafted this letter after discussion with Rusk. Johnson stated: “I deliberately avoided tying you to any figure but I believe $60 million would be satisfactory.”

320. Report by the Chief of the Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby) 320. Report by the Chief of the Far Eastern Division, Directorate of Plans of the Central Intelligence Agency (Colby)1

Washington, August 16, 1966.

[Here follows a report on the war in South Vietnam and the war in Laos.]

Thailand

11. In Northeast Thailand, the Communists are clearly in Phase I, subversive operations, of a Peopleʼs War. Despite some underlying differences, the similarities with Vietnam of 1958–1959 are startling: armed propaganda teams circulating through the country villages, agitating, taxing and recruiting; the murder of village leaders and attacks on police posts; a radio “Voice of Free Thailand”; a Thai Patriotic Front and the circulation of leaflets in Bangkok itself; the infiltration of cadres, local boys trained in North Vietnam and China, repatriated to NVN under the Red Cross over the past few years but returned under clandestine auspices. The RTG reaction on the ground is also not dissimilar from that of Vietnam at that time: isolated police posts asserting (unbelievably) that they patrol every night, the use of direct military force against reported Communist camps and concentration on the “enemy.” A heartening item is the presence of a very few senior, although not top level, officials such as Dr. Chamnan, General Saiyuth, etc., begging to be told of techniques to avoid the Vietnamese history and repeating almost by rote the key doctrine that the principal target is the people, not the enemy. [4 lines of source text not declassified]

12. It is clear that we are engaged in a race in Thailand and that the enemy may initially outstrip us. Our model should be our history and technique in Laos, however, rather than Vietnam. Our eventual success will come from effective organization on the American side, for which the appointment of Mr. deSilva is a welcome step, the rapid development and application of “people” techniques, including the necessary education of various levels of the Thai bureaucracy in them, and avoidance of the type of political explosion which occurred in Vietnam as a result of the Buddhist uprising. [5 lines of source text not declassified] The question of a Constitution and popular elections will probably drag along without clear resolution for some time between those who believe the government vulnerable to charges of authoritarianism and those who fear the result of unleashing competing political forces.

13. [2–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[Here follows discussion on Indonesia.]

1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harriman Papers, Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, Far East General. Secret.

321. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency 321. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, August 11, 1966.

COMMUNIST INSURGENCY IN THAILAND:

STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES

Summary

The growth of the Communist movement in Thailand over the past two years has raised the specter of another protracted insurgent struggle in Southeast Asia. At the present time, however, the balance sheet in Thailand does not appear to favor the insurgents. An essentially stable socioeconomic situation and a long history of independent nationhood are key factors militating against Communist efforts to win popular support in the countryside. In addition, the military oligarchy in Bangkok, after a slow start, is now coming to grips with the insurgent problem and its counteroperations are gathering momentum.

Nonetheless there are soft spots in the Thai internal situation which have favored the Communists and which could prove to be increasingly troublesome over the long haul. Despite the important progress which has been made, there are still substantial underdeveloped and isolated areas which provide favorable ground for the Communists. The governmentʼs political machinery throughout the country remains extremely weak, and the military oligarchy does not appear to appreciate the contribution that government-backed political movements could make in fighting the insurgents.

In Bangkok, the Thanom-Praphat government is enjoying its third year of stable rule, but serious factional infighting, during which the counterinsurgency effort would almost certainly suffer, could flare up with little warning. The present governmentʼs greatest weakness in meeting the insurgent challenge, however, is simply that is does not command substantial popular support.

The Communist movement in Thailand is still in the embryonic stage, despite the increasing number of insurgent incidents. It does not, for example, yet exhibit the tight discipline and effective structure that is characteristic of Communist organizations in the neighboring countries. The Communists also suffer from a severe shortage of experienced and dedicated cadres, which has limited their ability to expand into new areas. Despite these weaknesses, the insurgents are likely to step up recruiting, propaganda, and terrorism in the coming months.

In the final analysis, the insurgency will be limited less by the action of the Bangkok government than by the fundamental strength of the Thai nation.

[Here follows the 8-page body of the paper.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Country File, Thailand, Vol. IV, Memos, 1/66–10/66. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A note on the source text reads: “Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates.”

322. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 322. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 17, 1966.

SUBJECT

Your 4:00 oʼclock Meeting with Secretary McNamara on Thai MAP 2

I attach at clip a possible memorandum to the President. This summarizes the arguments fully. My recommendation, of course, is that you stand firm for the $60 million figure under your over-all power to determine the ultimate figures of aid programs. Ambassador Johnson concurs, and will be present for the discussion. He and I have gone over this issue thoroughly over the past month.

On the question of the availability of funds, you should know that the House Appropriations Committee yesterday cut the MAP program by $50 million. It cannot be excluded that this cut will stand in the Senate or even be increased by one of the two chambers. On the other hand, there is the possibility that the Senate, which has normally been sympathetic to MAP in the appropriations, will keep the present full figure, so that the eventual cut would be $25 million.

I have gone over the resulting MAP situation with John McNaughton, whose tentative judgment is that anticipated savings from the India and Pakistan programs (approximately $100 million) will be largely canceled out by additional requirements for Laos ($35 million), Korea ($12 million), the NATO Headquarters move ($12 million), and added sales requirements ($10 million). He appears to agree, however, that we can find some money for a Thai increase above the presently projected planning level of $35 million. However, sound planning requires that a $60 million commitment to Thailand anticipate the possibility that it would have to be handled in one of two ways: a. At the expense of cuts ranging from $15–25 million in other major MAP programs. In the Far East area, this would mean Korea and China. In my own judgment, the importance of the Thai commitment is such that we should be prepared to take such cuts if necessary.

b. Through moving the Thai and Laos MAP accounts in January to the anticipated DOD Supplemental. This is what was done for Viet-Nam last January, and would provide flexibility for increases in both programs without penalty to other MAP allocations. On the other hand, McNaughton tells me that the Services and the DOD Comptroller would have serious difficulty with this, and also that—although the DOD Supplemental goes before the military committees—Senator Fulbright would be in a position to exert strong negative influence. In other words, this is a hope (and in my judgment a sound way to proceed), but it cannot be regarded as a certain fall-back.

All in all, this is a tough issue, but I do think it is not too much to say that our whole relationship with the Thai, and their own performance, would be drastically affected if we cannot come up with the $60 million figure.

I have not attached to this memorandum the recent cables on Than-atʼs pressure for a mutual security treaty. Since I talked to you Wednesday night, Martin has been able to persuade Thanom to hold off on this. Nonetheless, it remains a threat, and fundamentally reflects the “souring” in our relations that is described in the draft memorandum to the President (underlying).

Tab A

Washington, September 16, 1966.

Draft Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 3

SUBJECT

Level of Thailand MAP Program for 1967

Recommendation:

That you authorize informing the Thai Government that we will furnish from FY ʼ67 funds in the MAP program designated items totalling $60 million. The precise dollar amount would not be used, except in the general sense of informing the Thai that the program was significantly greater than last yearʼs total (which they know to have been $44 million). In giving Ambassador Martin this authority, he would be further instructed that we expect him to persuade the Thai to undertake substantial further improvement in their counterinsurgency performance.

Alternative A

Discussion:

1. The Departments of State and Defense have been unable to agree on a level of MAP for Thailand for 1967. Ambassador Martin has for a long time recommended a $70.7 million program with a firm commitment for two, and more recently, three years. State has urged a minimum of $60 million for 1967. Defense is unwilling to commit more than $44.3 million and Secretary McNamara will be submitting a separate statement on this issue.

2. I believe that a strong case exists for $60 million. This would add to the $44.3 million program which Defense has approved provision for additional helicopters, POL, full equipment for units that have been raised to manpower levels we have urged on the Thai, additional training and fighter planes, additional airfield construction and the higher cost of ammunition.

3. Our relations with the Thai have until recently been unusually good and cooperative. They have acceded to almost all our requests in connection with our Air Force operations against Laos and Vietnam. Moreover they have been intensifying their efforts to develop a well-rounded counterinsurgency program. They have more than doubled government expenditures since 1962. Most of this increase will go to programs building against subversion and insurgency, largely in economic and social programs but also through improved police and armed forces. They have been taking the lead in international forums in support of US policy in Vietnam. They have played a dominant role in initiating and promoting regional cooperation institutions in Asia in the last year. Finally, Thanat was the first Asian leader to call for a collective Asian initiative for a peaceful settlement in Vietnam.

4. Some months ago we began to detect signs of irritation among Thai leaders arising from our delay in supplying a Thai MAP figure, which they need for their own forward planning. This irritation turned to anger when a series of highly critical articles, some of them very personal, appeared in the American press during the summer. The Thai termed the articles “unfair,” “unjustified,” and “insulting to the Thai nation,” and have sent us a protest note. When Senator Fulbright publicly called attention to these articles, raised questions about the shaky validity of our commitment to Thailand and our presence there, and announced his intention to hold Senate hearings, their concern took on a new dimension. Ambassador Martinʼs recent cables indicate the atmos-phere among top Thai leaders is souring, and that Foreign Minister Thanat in particular has become so concerned as to suggest the need for a new bilateral mutual security treaty to define our relations.

5. I believe that a $60 million program is entirely warranted on grounds of the usefulness of the equipment itself. Unlike the possibly excessive program of the 1961–63 period, which led to criticism of Thai maintenance and utilization, there is no question that all the items in the $60 million program can be effectively utilized.4 It can be argued that $7–10 million of this figure relates to conventional forces that would not be the best possible force structure for counterinsurgency; nonetheless, I believe we must recognize that the Thai continue to fear a possible conventional threat, and that—pursuant to your letter to Prime Minister Thanom of June 19645 —we have entered into bilateral planning for joint conventional action in case of need. Above all, I believe that the political aspects of our whole relationship with the Thai, and their present role and importance in the area, should be over-riding. Last yearʼs aid was $44 million. Since that time the Thai have been under increased communist pressure; they have sent small units to engage in military action in South Vietnam with us and our allies; and they are continuing their secret military operations in support of Souvanna Phouma in Laos. In the light of this and para 3 above they expect a larger military assistance program this year. Our mission in Bangkok believes they now can effectively use even a larger amount.

6. I do not think it necessary to make a commitment beyond one year, although I recognize that this would go further to alleviate Thai anxieties. Moreover, Secretary McNamara and I are in full agreement that any MAP commitment should be accompanied by the strongest possible instructions to Ambassador Martin to push the Thai to remedy significant continuing defects in their military and counterinsurgency organization and performance. Although this has been significantly improved in the past year—which Ambassador Martin attributes to our making a similar commitment in August of 1965—there is no doubt that they have further to go.

Alternative B

(In the event that the two Secretaries are able to agree on a $60 million or other figure, language of the discussion would be tailored accordingly, drawing on the above.)

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI. Secret; Exdis. Ruskʼs initials are on the source text.

2 The meeting lasted from 4:35 to 6:45 p.m. and was attended by Rusk, McNamara, Vance, William Bundy, U. Alexis Johnson, and McNaughton. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) No other record of the discussion has been found.

3 This memorandum, drafted by Bundy, was not sent to the President. A different joint memorandum was sent to the President on October 13; see Document 329.

4 At this point on the source text is the following note in an unidentified hand: “Sec Def disagrees and [we] may be trespassing.”

5  Document 277.

323. Memorandum of Conversation 323. Memorandum of Conversation1

New York, September 22, 1966, 5 p.m.

SecDel/MC/15

SECRETARYʼS DELEGATION TO THE TWENTY-FIRST SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY

New York, September–October 1966

SUBJECT

Thai desire for security guarantee from U.S.

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary

William M. Owen, U.S. Delegation

Thailand H.E. Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister of Thailand

H.E. Sukich Nimmanheminda, Thai Ambassador to the United States

Anand Panyarachun, Acting Thai Permanent Representative to the UN

After an initial discussion on other subjects, including Senator Fulbrightʼs desire to examine US relations with Thailand (separate Memcon),2 Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman referred to his desire for a security guarantee from the United States. Thanat said that while Thailand was willing to make considerable effort to help in the Vietnam war, he did not think they should let decisions on their policy be made by “outside people.” If they were to run the risk of being involved, they must do so in “full conscience.” That was why they wished to have a reasonable guarantee if they ran the risk of attracting retaliation, which might very well come. They would like to know where they were going.

The Secretary replied on the first point that it had been his understanding that there was nothing the United States had done in Thailand that had not been discussed with the Thai Government and to which that Government had not given its full consent. Thanat responded that he was not aware that it had always been done explicitly, and added that it was a very grave matter. Thailand had a collective government; it was not only a case of the Prime Minister. Thanat had told the Prime Minister that while he for one was willing to take worthwhile risks to establish peace and stability in Southeast Asia, they must do it in full conscience, and not let the US planes go and bomb Vietnam, otherwise they would find themselves in war. The pressure in various quarters in Thailand, including the universities and colleges, was building up, and his concern was not only for the present government but for some future administration. This situation was not helped when some influential people abroad took the line that Thailand was not worth defending. Senator Fulbright, for example, had said in so many words that Thailand was not worth protecting or defending.

The Secretary noted that Senator Morse had said that Southeast Asia was not worth the life of a single US soldier, but it was evident that the US Congress did not agree with him. Thanat interjected that the case of Senator Fulbright was different since he was Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The Secretary asserted that he hoped that these matters could be resolved between governments and not by the various people Thanat had mentioned. Thanat responded that some people insulted the Thai nation. Thanat added that it was one thing for people of oneʼs own nationality or blood to make insulting comments, but it was quite another when such observations were made by people of other nationalities.

The Secretary then reverted to the matter of assurances and observed that Thanatʼs approach on the matter had caught him somewhat by surprise in the sense that the United States had made a vast commitment of its power and resources to the security of Southeast Asia. Thailand was a signatory to the SEATO Treaty, while South Vietnam was a protocol state. In reply to Thanatʼs assertion that the Secretary was a lawyer and that there was no guarantee in the Southeast Asia Treaty, the Secretary replied that the Treaty was costing us 100 men killed every week and that that was what the SEATO Treaty meant to us. Thanat responded that Thailand had no treaty, but that nevertheless, for example, when the United States supplied arms to India we received the support of Thailand. “My God,” he added, he came to the United States last year to tell the General Assembly of that support. The Secretary replied that he understood, and added that he had noticed that Michael Stewart had said on TV that if Thailand were attacked, Britain would meet its responsibilities. He had drawn a line between the British attitude toward Thailand and that toward South Vietnam. Stewart had said that they would retain forces in Southeast Asia. The Secretary said that he would see whether he could find a transcript of Stewartʼs statements for Thanat.

Thanat said he hoped the Secretary would put himself in his shoes as an official of a small nation who had a responsibility for the future of his small country. Large countries which are defeated in wars do not disappear, whereas small nations which were crushed simply vanished. He thought that Thailand deserved a guarantee. His country had shown its loyalty and he did not believe that he was asking for anything which was especially costly or unusual. The United States had such security agreements with the Philippines, Japan, Australia, and other countries. The Secretary responded that the United States had the same thing with Thailand. The Philippines was a special case because agreement came on the heels of the Japanese peace treaty.

Thanat then remarked that the Philippine agreement was not unusual. The Secretary responded that he did not know of anything he could say that he had not already said in the light of our constitutional system. It seemed to him that we have spoken in the clearest and most eloquent terms—with more than 175,000 American casualties in Asia since 1945—that we considered Thai security vital to the United States. Thanat then inquired whether it was so difficult to put it in words “in black and white,” to which the Secretary responded that he did not think we would want to take on a procedure as a result of which Congress would get on to us both. Thanat replied that the Secretary could do it and could work out something appropriate. The Secretary replied that he did not sign his joint statement with Thanat two or three years ago without checking with the Senate. Thanat replied that he understood that, but as one lawyer to another he would observe that the joint statement was not a legal document.

The Secretary stated that the heart of the matter was that as far as the SEATO Treaty was concerned it was ratified by the US Senate by a vote of 82 to one and that there could be nothing stronger than that. The history was that Secretary Dulles recalled that when the NATO Treaty was up for ratification Senator Taft and others had raised questions as to the automaticity of certain of its provisions. The SEATO Treaty had therefore been worded slightly differently, but there was no difference in substance. The heart of the matter was the question of will. France signed the NATO Treaty but DeGaulle was now demanding that all foreign forces be pulled out of France. It was a matter of keeping to oneʼs word. It was evident that in a number of cases DeGaulle was not doing that. He was of course in a fortunate position in that United States power was between him and Russia and between him and Communist China. Thanat replied that because of the NATO Treaty DeGaulle could afford to play a game like that. This confirmed Thanatʼs concern. If DeGaulle simply had a promise in words he could not do what he had been doing.

The Secretary responded that we were pretty simple people in the United States and he just did not see how it could be imagined that because of an internal debate with people like Fulbright we would fail to live up to our commitments under these great treaties. Thanat replied that when he suggested a guarantee he was not suggesting that the United States would not see it to its advantage to repulse aggression. As long as there were people like Fulbright and his group, however, it was unavoidable to give rise to doubts. The Secretary said that he understood, and that perhaps we could keep Ambassador Sukich better informed as to what the feeling was around the United States away from Washington. He noted, for example, that in an Oregon primary the candidate who campaigned against US policy in Vietnam was defeated by a vote on the order of two to one, even though Senator Morse had campaigned actively for him. Similarly, a candidate in Massachusetts who had opposed US Vietnam policies received less than one eighth of the votes cast.

Thanat said that he was trying to explain to the Secretary his position as a leader of a small country. The Secretary said he gathered from what Thanat had said that he was not necessarily talking about a formal treaty. Thanat agreed. The Secretary then proposed that they give the whole subject some further thought. Thanat then commented in a low voice to the Secretary that if it was not a formal treaty it would carry certain risks (this remark was not entirely clear to the reporting officer). The Secretary responded that in the background there had been the formal determination made continually by every President from Harry Truman on, with the National Security Council, composed of the Secretaries of State and Defense and other top officers, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, affirming that the security of Southeast Asia was vital to the security of the United States. Truman first came to that conclusion and was subsequently joined by the UK and France in a similar tripartite conclusion. The difference between the UK and France and the United States, if one wishes to be rude, was that we are the United States and have tremendous national interests in our friends on the far side of the Pacific. We have asked our NATO allies never to choose between our friends in the Atlantic and the Pacific because both are vital to us. There were some who apparently thought it would be comfortable and pleasant if we were under the illusion that we could forget about Southeast Asia.

Thanat then asserted that not long ago some simple people in Thailand came to him and wanted the United States to leave. The Secretary asked if Thanat knew that if we could fight these people in Vietnam we could deliver more fire power today than we could deliver in any whole month during World War II, but the problem was to find them. Thanat stated that he was simply the small Foreign Minister of a small nation, but if they were to be derelict in doing their duty he would want to quit. The Secretary replied that he would amend that phrase to read “a great foreign minister of a country whose safety is vital to the security of the United States.” If Thanat wanted us to consider how we could make that as clear to everybody as he had just done, we would be prepared to do it. Thanat responded that Thailand had quite a few problems. They could not see how their picture here had been misrepresented. More and more they appeared as a satellite. He had told Alexis Johnson (at lunch earlier the same day) that some people looked on them as a prostitute. It could not occur to these people that because they cooperated with the United States and agreed with the same objectives, they could still be independ-ent. Some of these critics had asserted that this year the amount of aid given by the United States to Thailand was less than the preceding year. These words, whether true or not, got around. Thailand let the United States use military facilities and was accused of prostituting itself. That was not very pleasant.

The Secretary responded that he understood Thanatʼs feelings. It was not easy for us to prevent people from saying things of that kind. Incidentally, Senator Mansfield had been very helpful recently in speaking in support of Thailand. In response to Thanatʼs question whether that meant that Senator Mansfield was giving equal treatment to Thailand and Cambodia, the Secretary laughed and replied in the negative, saying that Mansfield was trying to balance some of the other views. The Secretary pointed out that he would be a little feverish and unattractive during this election campaign. We get that way every two years. He recalled that Khrushchev had remarked that it was very difficult to deal with us because we were always having one of our “damned elections”.

The conversation then turned to other topics (separate MemCons).3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Nodis. No drafter is indicated on the source text, but it was approved in S on November 10.

2 Other memoranda of this conversation are ibid., Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 83, Box 267.

3 One of which was Vietnam. (Memorandum of conversation, September 22; Department of State, Central Files, UN 3 GA) A complete set of Ruskʼs memoranda of conversation at the 21st General Assembly is ibid., S/S-International Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 83.

324. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) 324. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin)1

Washington, September 23, 1966.

Dear Graham:

Yesterday I went to New York and invited Thanat to a lunch which just the two of us had in the Secretaryʼs suite. In brief, I found Thanat in the foulest mood I have ever seen him and for somewhat more than two hours we had the most acid conversation we have ever had.

I started out by telling him how well Bill Bundyʼs hearing had gone before the Foreign Relations Committee2 and how no one had challenged or called into question the validity of our commitments to Thailand based on the SEATO Treaty and the Rusk-Thanat communiqué. This rolled like water off a duckʼs back and he immediately plunged into his request for a bilateral and the regularization of our use of Thai bases. There were long bitter tirades concerning the treatment of Thailand by the American press, some U.S. Senators, and so forth. In effect, Thailand was being called the prostitute of the United States. The situation was intolerable and would have to be corrected. There were many bitter words about U.S. willingness to give a NATO Treaty formula to the “white” countries of Europe but unwillingness to treat the “brown races” of Asia in a similar manner. There was much of the same talk that you had already gone through about our willingness to enter into bilaterals with other Asian nations but not with Thailand. Thailand was always left with the short end of the stick while we showed such great interest in our “great friends” such as Cambodia and India. He had made recommendations to his Government on the whole situation and they would either have to straighten it out or he would resign. SEATO was some “old furniture” which the “conservative Thai” were willing to let lie around but we shouldnʼt try to kid anybody into thinking that it was worth anything. We would have gone into Viet-Nam with or without SEATO just as we had gone into Lebanon without any treaty commitments. The Thai were exposing themselves to great danger without any assurances or guarantees from the United States. There was no problem with the present Administration in Washington but what would happen to Thailand if there was a change to an Administration which would disengage from Southeast Asia as was being advocated by so many Americans? How could I say that the Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee really did not have any influence on American policy or how could I assure him that the views of the Chairman and others like him would not ultimately prevail? In this situation, given the attitudes of some of these people, my statements that the de facto situation of American presence on Thai bases was their firmest guarantee of American reaction in the event of a Chinese attack might well not turn out to be correct. American reaction might be to shrink from the contest with China and withdraw, leaving Thailand to its fate, etc., etc., etc.

He drew a sharp distinction between the “presence” of American forces in Thailand and the use of American aircraft for “offensive” operations. He alleged that Thanom had told him that, while he had given permission for the introduction of American aircraft into Thailand, he had not given permission for their “offensive” use against North Viet-Nam. When I challenged him on this he pointed to the lack of any “written agreements” and, without walking away from his charge that Thanom had not given permission for the use of aircraft against North Viet-Nam, said that Thanom did not have the authority to give such permission on a matter so deeply involving the whole Government and that he had told this to Thanom.

We went round and round the circle of whatever enables us to bring more force to bear on the Vietnamese conflict and thus hastens a satisfactory settlement there contributes to Thai security and the allegation that U.S. “offensive” use of Thai bases increases the “dangers” to Thailand.

On the image of Thailand here in the United States, I told him I very honestly and objectively thought that it had been much improved in recent years and that he deserved much of the credit. I pointed out that in recent speeches I have cited him as an outstanding Asian leader who is bringing a sense of community to the area and otherwise went to great lengths in massaging him for his work with ASPAC, ASA, and the Indonesian-Malaysian confrontation. I said that our inability to speak more specifically and officially with regard to Thai cooperation was inhibiting our ability to present a still better picture. This led him to say that, in speaking here, he was going to be open and specific and I pointed out that this would completely undercut the basis on which we had obtained executive rather than open hearings in the Foreign Relations Committee. I pointed out that, in spite of the inevitable newspaper leaks, we had rigorously sought to respect what we understood to be the Thai desires on this matter. All of this discussion led around to the only agreement we reached, which was that immediately on my return to Washington I would seek to devise a formula for consideration by both Governments which would surface military cooperation between ourselves and Thailand in the Vietnamese war.

The whole discussion reached the point at which I felt it essential that I categorically tell him that, whatever he might feel with regard to the matter or whatever the desires of our Administration might be, the political realities were that there was just no chance whatever of obtaining Senate ratification at this time of a bilateral U.S.-Thai treaty, especially one that would involve the NATO formula. His reply to this was, “Well, we now know where we stand.” I probed him hard on what he felt were the implications of this statement but got no place.

Following this exchange, he said that he was hereby formally withdrawing the request that the U.S. vote for him for the ICJ. I then returned to our regard for him as Foreign Minister, our hope that he would stay in the job and that he would especially continue to pursue the Asian-wide initiatives he had undertaken but that, if it became clear that this was not possible, we would vote for him for the ICJ. He did not acknowledge this except sometime later to imply that our vote would not be worth much unless we were prepared to give him support with others.

As a result of an inconclusive discussion that we had with regard to the formulae in the SEATO Treaty as compared with our bilaterals with other countries in the Pacific, it was agreed that I would get out the texts and make available an analysis to him.

There was no specific mention of MAP or other issue, nor was the SOFA specifically mentioned.

During the course of the conversation I pointed out that, if his concerns with regard to possible future trends in U.S. foreign policy were justified, a treaty such as he had in mind would not be of much help to Thailand and that we were entitled to have the same concerns with regard to the possible trends in the policy of future Thai governments. He did not deny this but felt that his obligations as Foreign Minister were to do all possible to assure that there was an unequivocal treaty relationship in such a manner that, if Thailand were attacked, U.S. failure to come to its assistance would be a clear treaty violation and thus constitute a maximum pressure on us to come to their help.

In sum, my interpretation of his statements and the implications was that, unless a satisfactory bilateral treaty relationship with the United States was established for the future and unspecified steps taken to make our present military relationship compatible with Thai sovereignty, the Thai Government would take unspecified steps with respect to at least “U.S. offensive” operations from Thai bases. If the Thai Government did not do this he would resign as Foreign Minister. However, I am unable to reconcile this with his assertion that he was seriously running for the ICJ. A possible interpretation is that, knowing that he was not going to get a bilateral from us and that he would not be supported in the Government with respect to present operations, he is already reconciled to resigning under circumstances in which, looking to the future, he can present himself as a stout Thai nationalist and defender of Thai sovereignty.

Incidentally, in reply to my question, he said that he was not coming to Washington. My feeling was that he did not want a rebuff on seeing the President. He was seeing the Secretary at 5:00 p.m. the same day and I of course briefed the Secretary on what had happened at the lunch. I deliberately did not attend his meeting with the Secretary. As you will see, he of course did not let down his hair in the same way to the Secretary but the essential lines remain the same.3

Both of us have seen Thanat in his many moods but yesterday was the worst in my own experience. My feeling was that it possibly arose as much from controversy with his own Cabinet colleagues—and especially the failure of Thanom and Dawee to cut him in on all aspects of the military picture—as it did from his hypersensitivity to disparaging American press stories and Congressional statements on Thailand. It was a day in which he was simply not open to reason—at least he would not admit so to me—and I can only hope that some of the things I said will, on reflection, have a little influence on his attitude for, as you know, I feel that he is a valuable man for both Thailand and Asia, and we need to do all possible to preserve him if that can be done.

The substance of the foregoing will of course be covered in various ways in official traffic but I thought it important that you have the full flavor. It has been written the following day amid the press of other matters but I believe I have covered most of the important profits. I regret that one of my last forays into Thai diplomacy was not very successful. My only hope is that getting some of this off his chest to me will have some cathartic effect.

Sincerely,

Alex 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text indicates that the original was pouched to Bangkok.

2 For the statement made by Bundy before the Committee, and the question and answer session by Bundy and Committee members, September 20, see Committee on Foreign Affairs, Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Historical Series), Vol. XVIII, Eighty-ninth Congress, second session, 1966, pp. 927–1014. U. Alexis Johnson prepared a summary of the testimony and attached Bundyʼs prepared testimony as a note for the Presidentʼs reading on September 20. (Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, WPB Chron, May/Sept 1966)

3 See Document 323.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Johnson signed the original.

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 325. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, September 27, 1966.

3954. For the Secretary.

1. I understand you will make a decision today on the Thailand MAP aid level you will recommend to the President.2 I would like again to request that I be authorized to inform the Prime Minister that we will support the Thai military forces at the level of $70 million for the next three year.

2. I would be the last to argue that our professional military establishment has any more claim to infallibility than the rest of us. Yet I do think it important that after the most searching reexamination and reevaluation by Comusmacthai, by Cincpac, by the Joint Staff, and by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, it is still their unanimous judgement that this level is essential. It is also pertinent to record that an independent evaluation by the staff of Assistant Defense Secretary En Tho Ven supports this conclusion and further notes the staff level unanimity throughout the government that the need is apparent, the Thai response and performance has been adequate, and the requests are reasonable in relation to the need and the Thai response. On the basis of my personal continuous, detailed and searching review I fully support these recommendations.

3. It is my understanding that ISA disagrees for reasons which have never been quite clear. Certainly their positions, as they have been made known to me, are demonstrably unsupported by the facts, as any objective examination of the records will clearly attest. The last argument of which I have heard is typical of the rest, that our inability to secure Rtc clearance for permanent PCS establishment of General Accounting Office unit, was indicative of Thai reluctance to have auditors around. The actual facts are (1) The Thai have been concerned that any further augmentation of an already large American presence could cause problems we have so far successfully avoided; (2) they have indicated they do not favor additional permanent assignments with families which will compete for already scant housing; (3) they have no objection to our TDY introduction of as many auditors as we wish, and; (4) eight GAO auditors arrive next week for an indefinite stay. And so it goes.

4. Therefore, I believe the recommended Map level is fully justified on its own intrinsic merits. Even if this was not the fact that all professional judgement certifies it to be, there are still compelling political reasons why it should be approved.

5. The first is the argument you made so appropriately to Thanat at Canberra—that the insurgency should be aggressively smashed now, as, in retrospect, you wished had been done in Vietnam in 1961. Thanat and I have both used this very effectively since to push for maximum commitment of Thai resources to this end.

6. The second reason is the dilemma produced by the first. In this commitment of their own resources, with a consequent budget deficit of 25 percent, they have gone as far as they can without grave risks of inflationary spiral which has cost the Vietnamese and US so dearly. The only other alternative is for Thai to scale back their commitment of the extraordinary percentage of their own income (60 to 70 percent) they have for a decade invested in the social and economic infrastructure programs which have contributed so much to stability here. We learned late in South Vietnam the essentiality of paralleling the military effort with “nation-building.” The Thai are deeply so engaged and I think it would be vast and really unforgivable mistake to force them to break this pattern which, in the nature of things, is not likely to be resumed.

7. More current compelling reasons include the dangerous game Thanat is now playing on his own in New York. As is sometimes the case, too much public attention can contribute to certain delusions about ability to translate successes in international affairs into domestic political support. If Thanat is not elected to the World Court, he presently is thinking of avoiding loss of face by challenging this present government in some fashion. He hopes to come back having “forced” US into what he will present openly as far more binding bilateral security commitment, if not, unless Pote dissuades him, he may lash out at US in openly demanding participating in determining military strategy as a price for continuing to enjoy the unlimited freedom now accorded US. Or he may resign with blast at US. In any of these cases his primary point of attack internally will be the inadequacy of our military aid level, hoping thereby to attract a military following essential to a viable power base. In any event he may have done great damage within US and to Thai-American cooperation.

8. I do not believe Thanat can succeed in securing influence internally here he was not authorized to take the actions he has taken in demanding the bilateral. If we can remove the chief point of vulnerability by moving affirmatively on $70 million MAP level, I am confident we can completely box him in here.

9. In view of forthcoming Manila meeting, I strongly recommend we make no concessions to him now. Whatever is decided upon in way of new security arrangements should be done with Prime Minister at Manila. To attempt to mollify Thanat will gain us no lasting advantage with this government which presently is in mood to drop him. I would recommend nothing be done with Thanat to accede to his demands until you or Alex can talk with Pote, who can influence him. And if MAP recommendation is approved we can forget about him as a threat. Although he has been useful, there are other Thai such as Pote or Konthi who could serve our short and long range purposes equally well.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI. Secret.

2 The issue was not sent to the President until October 13, see Document 329.

326. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President (Rostow) to President Johnson 326. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the President (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 6, 1966.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with Pote Sarasin and Thanat Khoman 2

I have forwarded separately my briefing memorandum3 on the above, with Stateʼs briefing book.4

You will be interested in the attached memo from Acting Secretary Katzenbach in this connection. It reports on a conversation between U. Alexis Johnson and the two Thai officials.

The main points were: (1) That instead of a bilateral treaty at this time, we might consider a joint statement of mutual assurances. If this matter is raised, you may want to assure Pote and Thanat that we will see what can be worked out, perhaps for use at the time you meet with Prime Minister Thanom;5

(2) the Thai have been deeply upset by Senator Fulbrightʼs criticism of them and of U.S. policy toward them. Pote believes that, without engaging in a debate with Fulbright, it would be very helpful if we could issue a statement after his and Thanatʼs call. The statement would reiterate our support for Thailand and for existing policy.

State supports this suggestion. I agree that it is reasonable.

A text of the proposed statement is attached.6 If you agree with this recommendation, you might want to show a draft of the statement to the two ministers.

Walt 7

Attachment

Washington, October 6, 1966.

Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 8

SUBJECT

Your Appointment with Minister of National Development Pote Sarasin and Minister of Foreign Affairs Thanat Khoman of Thailand

The following information is supplementary to that contained in the memorandum of October 4, 1966, on the foregoing subject transmitted to you by Secretary Rusk.9

Alexis Johnson had a long talk on Wednesday10 with Pote Sarasin on the desire that Foreign Minister Thanat has been expressing for a bilateral defense treaty with the United States, and a shorter talk with Thanat Khoman. Pote Sarasin, who is a very responsible and influential figure in the Government, told Alex that the Thai Government fully recognizes that to attempt to negotiate and obtain ratification of a bilateral treaty at this time would not be in the interest of either Government. It was his feeling that the necessities of the internal Thai political situation could be met by a confidential statement from you to the Prime Minister. He felt that the content of such a statement could be similar to things that we have previously said to the Thai Government in such a form as to enable Prime Minister Thanom to interpret the statement as a commitment to protect Thailand against Chinese Communist retaliation for U.S. use of Thai bases even if there should be a change in administration and in U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia. Alex pointed out that, to give such a statement a balanced character and the U.S. some assurance against a change in Thai Government policy with respect to Thai bases, in which we were investing so heavily, it would be desirable that something on this be said from the Thai side. Pote Sarasin felt that this was entirely reasonable. Johnson told him that he would see what could be worked out, perhaps for use at the time that you meet Prime Minister Thanom in Manila.

Subsequently, Johnson confirmed with Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman that Thanat was reconciled to something less than a bilateral treaty but there was no discussion of details.

It is suggested that you not take the initiative in any detailed discussion of this subject with the two Ministers but, if it is raised by them, you simply indicate that you will be willing to consider something that could be discussed between you and the Prime Minister at the time of your meeting in Manila. We will submit a detailed recommendation to you in this regard.

Pote Sarasin also said that he did not think that the Thai Government would in the near future be willing to change its policy toward agreeing to more specific formal statements on our use of Thai bases for our air action against North Viet-Nam.

Pote Sarasin told Johnson that, while sophisticated Thais were well aware that Senator Fulbright did not represent a significant body of U.S. opinion, because of the Senatorʼs position as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and the fact that his name is so well known in Thailand because of the Fulbright scholarship program, his statements deeply wounded and disturbed most Thais. He felt that, without directly engaging in a debate with Fulbright, it would be very helpful if the U.S. Government could make some statement which would in effect be a repudiation of Fulbrightʼs recent speech. We feel that this is reasonable and that the call of the two Ministers on you offers a good opportunity for making such a statement. We therefore suggest that, following their call, the White House Press Secretary issue a statement along the lines of the attached draft. It would be an appreciated and useful gesture if you would show this draft to the two Ministers.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. IV, Memos, 1/66–10/66. Secret. There is an indication on the source text that the President saw it.

2 President Johnson met with Thanat Khomen and Pote Sarasin at 10:50 a.m. on October 7. William Bundy, William Jorden, and Thai Ambassador Sukich Nimmanheminda also were present. The meeting lasted until 11:05 a.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other record of this brief meeting has been found.

3 Dated October 6. (Ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, W.W. Rostow, Vol. XIV, October 1–31, 1966)

4 Apparent reference to an October 4 memorandum from Rusk to the President. (Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US)

5  Rostow added by hand the following at this point: “(in Bangkok.)”.

6 Printed in Department of State Bulletin, October 7, 1966, p. 669.

7  Rostow hand wrote the following comment after his signature: “This would help, sir.”

8 Secret; Nodis.

9 See footnote 3 above.

10 A summary of these discussions, Wednesday, October 5, was sent to Bangkok in telegram 61306, October 6. (Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US)

327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, October 10, 1966, 8:49 p.m.

63401. 1. Following is report of main points of bilateral discussion October 10 between Secretary and Minister Pote Sarasin held prior to Secretaryʼs luncheon for Pote. They are uncleared, FYI only, Noforn, subject to revision upon review.

2. Pote said Fulbright was such a well-known name in Thailand because of the Fulbright Scholarships and his Chairmanship of the Foreign Relations Committee that his statements about Thailand took on special importance. He felt strongly that the President or the Secretary should during their visit to Bangkok make a statement explicitly divorcing the US Government from the Fulbright position on Thailand. Secretary said he thought Manila conference and Presidentʼs visit to Thailand would be facts which would make this completely clear. Pote agreed but said they badly need something on the record directly addressed to the point. Secretary cautioned that such a statement might simply build up the importance of original Fulbright statements and could result in his making new ones. Pote said he hoped some formula could be worked out which made it clear that, while the Senator was of course entitled to hold dissenting views, the US Government did not share them. The Secretary said we would think about possible ways to deal with this one.

3. Pote asked why Fulbright had singled Thailand out. The Secretary said that Fulbright was a born dissenter, and that his remarks on Thailand should be viewed as part of his general objection to our Vietnam policy.

4. Pote then turned to question of some restatement of our commitment. Such restatement should a) note that Thailand would continue to provide facilities and support to meet aggression, and that while this entailed some additional risks for Thailand of a Chinese Communist attack, the US would in that case come to Thailandʼs support, and b) make it clear that the commitment would apply even in the unlikely event of a change some years hence to an administration which wanted to pull out of Southeast Asia. He said no treaty or formal agreement was needed, but some written reassurance was.

5. The Secretary said he wished to be very frank on two points. First, he said he simply could not understand how anyone could question the American commitment when we had not failed to fill any commitment since 1945 and when we are suffering 100 casualties per week in Southeast Asia and had suffered 180 thousand casualties keeping commitments since the end of World War II. Secondly, he said that the Thai should not try to use an international instrument to solve a US domestic problem. They should leave that to us.

6. The Secretary then said that the SEATO Treaty and the joint resolution of August 1964 said more than any document which we could possibly add to the record at this time. He emphasized that the Treaty commitment was a national commitment, entered into by the Eisenhower administration and observed by the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. With reference to the SEATO Treaty, Pote mentioned the difference between the commitment it contained and that in the NATO Treaty. The Secretary said that as Secretary Dulles had explained at the time the SEATO Treaty was ratified, the practical difference between these formulas was not substantial. Pote said that the SEATO Treaty did not require an automatic US reaction. The Secretary observed that the Thai, because of positions taken by the French and others, had sometimes shown a tendency to downgrade SEATO. He said this was a serious mistake since SEATO provides the Constitutional basis for what we are doing in Southeast Asia today. He said the undermining of SEATOʼs standing had been done by the Thai, not the US.

7. On the question of committing a successor government, the Secretary said that it was not possible to deal with this problem with a piece of paper, that if a successor government either in Thailand or in the United States took a different view of the situation, the paper would have no effect. Pote did not dispute this but continued to argue that if a future administration were to leave Thailand in the lurch the leadership of Thailand wanted to be sure that it could show it had done everything possible to commit the US to its defense. He said that unless this unlikely event transpired, the reiteration of the commitment need not ever be made public.

8. The Secretary said he was not saying “no” to Pote, but he did want to be sure that Pote understood all the implications of such a statement which could be regarded as certifying lack of confidence. Pote said there was absolutely no question about Thai confidence in the present administration. He felt that since the increased risks entailed by permitting US planes to use Thai bases had led to concern in Thailand that the US should be prepared to reiterate the commitment. He emphasized that no addition to the commitment was needed—merely a reiteration.

9. The Secretary asked whether the concern in Thailand would decrease if we reduced the level of our forces there. Pote said “no”, that on the contrary the more we have there the more secure they felt.

10. The Secretary concluded by saying that he understood Poteʼs point of view, that we would think about it further, but he wanted to be completely certain that we did not take an action showing lack of confidence. Pote said he understood and that he would regard the conversation as completely confidential between himself and the Secretary.

11. Conversation, while somewhat intense, was friendly and cordial throughout, as was luncheon which followed.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Pickering and approved by Bundy. Bundy prepared a briefing memorandum for Rusk for this meeting with Pote Sarasin, October 10. (Ibid., POL THAI–US)

328. Intelligence Memorandum 328. Intelligence Memorandum1

Washington, October 12, 1966.

THE SITUATION IN THAILAND

Summary

Thailand enjoys a variety of economic and political assets which augur well for its future stability and independence. Guided by skilled and resourceful economic leadership, Thailand has made rapid economic progress in recent years and the prospects are bright for even greater growth and development in the future. In the political sphere, the country has benefited from nine years of stable rule by an autocratic but benevolent military oligarchy.

The status quo is threatened by a nascent Communist insurgent movement inspired and assisted by Peking and Hanoi. Thailandʼs long history of independence, the absence of a colonial experience, and the actions of an aroused government, have so far kept the insurgents in check. There are, however, some soft spots in the internal situation that could prove troublesome over the long haul. In Bangkok, the Thanom-Praphat government is enjoying its third year of stable rule, but serious factional infighting, during which the fight against the Communists would almost certainly suffer, could flare up with little warning. The present governmentʼs greatest weakness in meeting the insurgent challenge, however, is simply the fact that it does not have substantial popular support.

[Here follows the body of the paper.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, Memos 10/66–2/67. Secret. A note at the bottom of the first page reads: “This is one of a series of memoranda produced by the CIA on those countries to be visited by President Johnson. It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence and coordinated with the Office of National Estimates and the Office of Research and Reports.”

329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 329. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 13, 1966.

SUBJECT

Attached Joint Memorandum from Secretary McNamara and myself on FY 1967 MAP Level for Thailand

The attached memorandum was signed by Secretary McNamara before he left for Vietnam last Saturday. The purpose of this Supplemental Memorandum is (1) to report in context on several developments since his departure, and (2) to indicate the feasibility of funding my recommendation of a $60 million MAP program in Thailand, despite the cut of $125 million in the MAP appropriation.

(1) Recent developments and their background. The original planning figures submitted to Congress for MAP included an item of $35 million for MAP in Thailand. Last yearʼs total was $44 million, a figure disclosed to the Thai. There have been a number of changes from the original planning figures in both directions, including an increase in ammunition requirements of $39 million for Laos. After the Thai item was prepared, a thorough review of the Thai situation was made by General Stilwell. His recommendations, approved by Ambassador Martin and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, would support a MAP effort of some $60 million, both for conventional and for counterinsurgency forces.

The Thai have become concerned about the firmness of our commitment to their defense, in the light of adverse comments by Senator Fulbright and others, and have expressed a desire to embody our present relationship in a bilateral treaty. The visits of the Thai in Washington this week have underscored the reality and urgency of their concern. It is reflected also in Mr. Moyersʼ telegram (111536Z) of October 11.2

I believe it vital on political grounds, and an important step in preparing for the Manila Conference, to assure the Thai before the Conference that we shall enlarge last yearʼs program, carrying out the Rusk-Thanat communiqué of 1962,3 and your letter to Prime Minister Thanom of June 1964,4 in which we agreed to engage in joint planning with the Thai against the possibility of a conventional threat. I enclose copies of both documents. I conclude that the Thai have earned this reiteration of our SEATO commitment. Such action is required to prevent them from pressing for a formal public bilateral agreement of support. It is justified by the real progress the Thai have made in their military effort and by their cooperation with us. And I believe that such a step taken now is the best possible insurance against the risk of Thailand degenerating into another Vietnam, if various adverse contingencies occur.

(2) Ways to pay for the revised MAP programs. The source of funds for the increase of $25 million for Thailand must be considered in connection with other increases in requirements for military and economic aid for Southeast Asia and other areas. There is already a requirement for an additional $39 million MAP for ammunition for Laos, and new economic aid requirements have arisen for the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Panama as well as Southeast Asia.

The high priority MAP increases for Thailand and Laos should be funded in a way that will not undercut the effectiveness of other MAP and AID programs.

The options are: A. New Legislation 1. Following the Manila Conference, seek a supplemental appropriation package including elements of economic and military aid for South Vietnam, Thailand, Laos, Korea, Indonesia, and the Philippines, in the light of the situation in Asia as it develops.

2. Seek Congressional authority to transfer the Laos MAP program of $109 million for FY 1967 to the Military Services budgets, just as military assistance to South Vietnam and war-related costs for South Korea are now authorized to be funded.

B. Current Authority 1. The law permits the transfer of some funds from economic to military assistance. However, the Foreign Assistance Contingency Fund was cut by Congress to a total of $70 million. At the same time, Congress cut Supporting Assistance requests by $57 million. Economic aid requirements for Southeast Asia and other politically sensitive countries, such as the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Panama, require that the entire Supporting Assistance and Contingency Fund Appropriations be used for economic assistance. Alternatively, to transfer Contingency Fund or Supporting Assistance monies to MAP would mean that we should have to seek a supplemental appropriation for economic assistance. Other economic aid funds cannot legally be transferred to MAP.

2. The law also permits you to authorize the use of up to $300 million of U.S. military service stocks to be repaid from future MAP appropriations, an authority the Secretary of Defense has told the Congress would be exercised only in cases vital to the security of the U.S. It has been used twice for South Vietnam.

3. Political and programming developments in the ensuing two or three months might let us find the funds for Thailand ($25 million) and perhaps Laos as well ($39 million) by transfer from such current MAP programs as the $48 million India/Pakistan pipeline, currently being held in suspense, combined with some marginal contributions from the planned programs for Korea, China and Latin America. Cuts in these MAP programs would, of course, raise problems in each of the cases mentioned.

In view of the availability of these alternatives, I believe you can safely make the decision called for by the attached memorandum, and delay a final choice of means until sometime after your return.

Dean Rusk

Attachment

Washington, October 13, 1966.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

SUBJECT

FY 1967 MAP Level for Thailand

The Departments of State and Defense have been unable to agree on this matter, and have thus been forced to seek your decision.

Recommendations

A. Secretary Rusk recommends that you authorize informing the Thai Government at once that we will furnish from FY 1967 funds designated MAP items totaling approximately $60 million. The precise dollar amount would not be used, except in the general sense of informing the Thai that the program was significantly greater than last yearʼs total (which they know to have been $44 million). Ambassador Martin would be instructed in the strongest terms that we expect him to use this commitment to persuade the Thai to undertake substantial further improvement in their counterinsurgency performance.

B. Secretary McNamara believes that the proper MAP level from a military standpoint is the currently programmed $35 million, (although he is prepared to recognize some military justification for a program totaling approximately $44 million) and that because the Congress cut the Military Assistance Program so substantially, we simply donʼt have the funds to finance higher levels—if the Thai program is held to $35 million, the Congressional cuts will still force reductions of approximately $85 million in the programs of other countries which were already at austere levels. It is Secretary McNamaraʼs view that any additional funds for Thailand would be pure political pay-off taken from military assistance funds badly needed for military purposes elsewhere. Approve $60 million

Approve $35 million

Approve $44 million5

Discussion

1. There is no disagreement on the significance of Thailand to our Asian policy. Its role in relation to the war in Laos and Vietnam, its longer term strategic importance, and its active support of Asian regional cooperation are all matters of the first importance. Our Asian policy requires a continuing strong relationship with Thailand.

2. It is also agreed that the immediate although currently limited threat to Thailandʼs continued ability to play its important role in Southeast Asia is Communist subversion and insurgency.

3. Further, it is agreed that the Thai have been very forthcoming in response to numerous U.S. requests made on them, giving us invaluable support in both the military and political fields. It is also agreed that the resulting U.S. construction program in Thailand will provide the Thais a new deep water port, a country-wide communications system, new and improved roads, POL pipelines and new and improved airfields, all costing more than $250 million over the last four years. Although U.S. operations out of Thailand are as much in Thai as in U.S. interest, it is an agreed fact that the Thai role beside us in the war leads them to expect us to be forthcoming in response to their needs and requests.

4. Disagreement emerges in connection with the role of our Military Assistance Program in dealing with the Thais and with the threat. The disagreement about the level of the program reflects differing assessments of the proper military structure for Thailand and of Thai performance in making proper use of equipment provided. Finally, there are important political factors which Secretary Rusk believes must be given great weight in making the decision on the level.

5. Basic Facts a. The MAP program in Thailand was $51.9 million in FY 1961, $81 million in FY 1962, and $73.5 million in FY 1963. The figures were considerably lower for FY 1964–66, $42 million, $38 million, and $44 million, respectively.

b. In August of 1965, Major General Richard Stilwell was assigned as COMUSMACTHAI and instructed to review the MAP program fully. In February, he recommended, with the full support of Ambassador Martin, that the program be set at a level of $70 million for FY 1967, and that similar figures be envisaged for further years. Secretary McNamara points out that this program, with which the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurred, is based upon the premise that there should be a major improvement in the capability of the Thai to deal with a conventional threat from land, sea and air; this to be accomplished by increasing the size and equipment of Thai forces. Secretary McNamara does not agree with this premise. He believes the size and capabilities of the Thai forces should be directed toward internal security, with only limited emphasis placed on Thai ability to stand alone against external aggression. Ambassador Martin has for a long time recommended a $70.7 million program for FY 1967, together with a firm commitment that a program of this magnitude would be maintained for three years.

6. Summary of Positions

It is Secretary Ruskʼs judgment that there is substantial over-all military justification for a program at the $60 million level, and that overriding political factors dictate a commitment of at least this magnitude. Although Secretary Rusk would see much political advantage in committing ourselves to a similar figure for three years, he believes that the uncertain prospects of the MAP account make such a commitment undesirable. He would thus limit the commitment to items totaling $60 million, covering FY 1967 funding only. Secretary McNamara, as indicated above, believes $35 million would, from a purely military standpoint, provide adequate resources to meet likely threats and would provide the Thais with as much as their record shows they can properly use. He believes that Ambassador Martin, especially in view of the recent drastic cut in MAP funds, can handle the political problem.

7. Proper Military Structure for Thailand a. Secretary McNamara believes that, from a purely military standpoint, the Thai forces should be directed primarily to counterinsurgency missions with provisions made for only limited conventional capabilities. And, in connection with conventional capabilities, he believes we should provide equipment only as the Thais demonstrate that they will meet minimum maintenance and usage standards. In his judgment, the $35 million is adequate for these purposes.

b. Secretary Rusk, while concurring that the principal current mission of the Thai forces is to combat insurgency, believes that emphasis must be placed upon our SEATO commitment to Thailand to assist in its defense against conventional attack, with the related undertaking to assist in developing Thai conventional capabilities. Secretary Rusk stresses that great weight must be given to the Rusk-Thanat communique of 1962, reaffirming our commitment in effect on a bilateral basis, and to the letter from President Johnson to Prime Minister Thanom of June 1964, in which we specifically agreed to engage in joint planning with the Thai against the possibility of a conventional threat. This essentially bilateral relationship with Thailand is at the heart of our whole position there today. Because of these commitments, and solid evidence of Thai reliance upon them, Secretary Rusk believes that our MAP program must provide Thai forces the support for the level of conventional capability believed necessary by the Thai and by Ambassador Martin. He believes this requirement points to the $60 million figure.

8. Thai Performance and Necessary Improvements a. Secretary Rusk agrees that past performance of the Thai military force has been defective in some respects. He notes that the U.S. support effort has also had its weaknesses, and that there has been substantial improvement by the Thai over the past year. This improvement is attributed by Ambassador Martin and General Stilwell in large part to the fact that the U.S. gave the Thai a general MAP commitment of $39 million for FY 1966 in August of 1965, and this experience of improvement is a major reason for Ambassador Martinʼs recommendation that a firm commitment be made currently. This improvement is not confined to conventional military forces but encompasses such things as basic reorganization of the government efforts against insurgency, and fundamental reforms in the collection, collation, and exploitation of intelligence.

b. Secretary McNamara points out that the 1961–63 MAP programs were excessive and led to a serious deficiency in maintenance by the Thai forces, which was highlighted by a 1965 GAO report covering the 1963 period. He notes some improvement in maintenance and utilization rates, but he points to continuing seriously inadequate utilization rates in current Thai performance.

9. Political Factors

While not able to take issue with the purely military judgment of the Secretary of Defense, Secretary Rusk believes that the following political factors make the $60 million level imperative: a. Above all, the great importance of nurturing and preserving our valuable relationship with them.

b. The importance of erring on the side of ample resources to enable and to encourage the Thai to deal effectively with the present level of insurgency.

c. Failure to supply the additional items, largely of a conventional nature, represented by the difference between $35 million and $60 million, will result in substantial dissatisfaction in the Thai Armed Forces, who represent the controlling element in the Thai Government. Hence, failure to provide the $60 million level could result in significant general damage to our relations with the Thai.

d. More specifically, our current relations with the Thai have been significantly soured by adverse comment in the United States, particularly statements by Senator Fulbright about the “shaky” foundation of our military commitment and presence there. As a result, the Thai have recently insisted on the early negotiation of a status of forces agreement and—far more significant—Foreign Minister Thanat has formally requested a bilateral treaty with the United States. We have told Thanat frankly that this is out of the question, and for the time being Prime Minister Thanom is letting the matter lie. However, if we were to come forward with a MAP program that appeared to the Thai to short-change their forces, it is Secretary Ruskʼs judgment that we would have a major possibility that the Thai would press seriously for a bilateral, and also take action which would impede our Vietnamese operations from Thailand, for example by requiring specific prior Thai concurrence in the target of every air mission carried out from Thailand. Basically, Secretary Rusk believes that failure to provide the necessary MAP items would give the Thai the impression that we did not really expect Thai forces to participate fully in the event of a conventional threat, and would redouble Thai insistence that the U.S. commitment be made even more specific and precise than it is at present. Needless to say, any deepening of our commitment—by a treaty or otherwise—would set off a most harmful debate in the United States.

e. While agreeing that the primary Thai emphasis should be on combatting insurgency, Secretary Rusk believes that a $60 million level would provide significantly increased leverage for U.S. influence in a number of areas still requiring improvement, as compared to a $35 million level, thus materially improving the prospects for a successful all-out effort against the insurgency while it is still manageable. Moreover, Secretary Rusk notes that, if the Thai should feel that their conventional capabilities were being neglected under our MAP program, there is the clear possibility that they would use resources of their own to purchase military equipment, perhaps outside the United States, and would thus divert the heavy (60%) proportion of their budget that they have been devoting, with our support, to economic and social development measures which, in the long run, will more effectively insure Thailandʼs security against subversion.

10. MAP Fund Program

Both Secretaries agree that there is a serious problem in funding any MAP sum greater than the present planning figure of $35 million. (This figure dates from last fall, prior to General Stilwellʼs review.) The Conference has approved a total MAP appropriation of $792 million. This is a cut of $125 million from the Administration request of $917 million. There have been a large number of changes in both directions from the original planning figures. The India/Pakistan program should be substantially reduced. However, increases for Laos, Korea and NATO (the increases now estimated at $58 million) have produced a net shortfall on the order of $85 million before any addition for Thailand. Thus, it is agreed that the allocation of an additional $25 million for Thailand, bringing the shortage to $110 million, would require significant large reductions in the planned programs, over and above the reductions that already appear to be required.

11. In the light of these factors, Secretary McNamara would include the funding problem as a major reason for not going above $35 million. Secretary Rusk, however, believes that despite the serious over-all funding situation, Thailand must be accepted as having such a high priority that its needs should be met even at the expense of additional reductions in other major programs.

Dean Rusk

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret; Exdis.

2 This telegram from Moyers to the President and Bundy, which was attached to the Department of State copy of this memorandum, October 11, previewed the Presidentʼs trip to Thailand and stated that the issue to be decided was whether it should be a state visit or just an official visit. Moyers suggested that the “advantage a State visit to us is opportunity to provide tender loving care at time we are unable provide much more.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI)

3 Printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

4 See Document 277.

5 None of these options is checked.

330. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to William Jorden of the National Security Council Staff 330. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Martin) to William Jorden of the National Security Council Staff1

Bangkok, October 14, 1966, 1303Z.

733. Literally Eyes Only for Bill Jorden. Subject: Joint Rusk-McNamara memorandum on FY 1967 MAP level for Thailand.

1. When Bill Moyers sent you Bangkok 0654,2 he also asked that I forward my comments on any factors, additional to those covered in Rusk-McNamara memorandum and covering Rusk memorandum,3 which in my judgment should be considered by the President in reaching a decision.

2. I have only a few comments on the joint memorandum. I make these in the interests of factual accuracy. The agreed statement in para 3 under discussion that “the resulting U.S. construction program in Thailand will provide the Thais a new deep water port, a countrywide communications system, new and improved roads, POL pipelines and new and improved airfields, all costing more than $250 million over the last four years is misleading. I am told funds for 1965 and 1966 total $210 million. But even under the cited $250 million U.S. military construction program, the Sattahip port will not be developed to point where it will be useful to Thai in the medium-range future as commercial port due to its distance from Bangkok. The U.S. countrywide communications system is Tropo, not compatible with Thai microwave system and not adaptable for future commercial use without great cost to Thai. Thai are now using World Bank loan at commercial interest rates to finance their own countrywide system. The POL pipeline has been eliminated from current funding. The new and improved airfields, with one exception, will be of minimal use to Thai. It is true that the highways will be of great use. In sum, it is just not credible to argue that the expenditure of this $250 million is of much more permanent use to the Thai than the $500 million of airfields in Morocco which now provide acres of concrete which cannot be farmed and on which sheep cannot graze. We needed them for our purposes. And with exception of one airfield and the highways, the $250 million military construction program is similarly of minimal long-range economic benefit to Thai. They are under construction because we need them now. Similarly, in para 5 b, it is said that program recommended by Stilwell, endorsed by CINCPAC and the JCS, called for increase in “size and equipment of Thai forces.” This is accurate on “equipment.” It is inaccurate on “size.” Program only recommended Thai bring forces up to present authorized strength—a recommendation consistently made by DOD. Finally, with respect to the last sentence of para 6, I am quite genuinely appreciative of Secretary McNamaraʼs confidence. However, as I have previously stated, I do not believe the most imaginative and resourceful diplomacy will be able to prevent a cost to the U.S. far greater than the amount in question if the $35 million level is approved.

3. Bill Bundy has been consistently opposed to my “rehashing the past.” During part of this period he was in ISA and he may well be right. I do think the following has a relevance and pertinence to the decision the President is now asked to make. The principal factor, touched upon only obliquely in para 8b, that should be added is feeling the Thai have of an intense personal identification of President Johnson with Thailand, with Thai affairs generally but very specifically with MAP level for Thailand.

4. Over and over I have heard the refrain that President Johnson, during his 1961 visit, was the only senior American visitor who ever took time to explore Thai problems deeply and understand them. Moreover, he was the only one who after such close and detailed action, actually followed through, kept his promises, and secured the raising of the military assistance level.

5. As I have been able to reconstruct this visit, the President did conduct a searching review of the needs of the military establishment. He accepted the political realism of the absolute necessity here of a small, highly efficient, conventional military force structure, with maximum emphasis on mobility and a counterinsurgency capability. He examined the uses to which the Thai internal resources were being devoted, and concluded that the incredibly high concentration of more than 60 percent on the social and economic infrastructure was right and that it was very much in our interest that it be continued. He then obtained a very large increase in the MAP level to achieve the required modernization of the military force structure.

6. The following year, 1962, the aid level rose to $81 million. Had we been able to continue at a somewhat lower level for the next five years, we could not accept a $35 million level, and look forward to progressively reducing that figure. Instead, the bureaucratic mattress mice had a field day in nibbling away at a soundly conceived program until it was so distorted that Thai ability to plan commitment of their own resources, including training programs, in tandem with expected deliveries, was almost destroyed. Then, in a weird inversion of logic, American investigators of various sorts, turned in critical reports on “lack of Thai performance” (inevitable under the circumstances of our own performance) which are now cited by those who opposed the Johnson program, as reasons for cutting the program further (para 8b last phrase penultimate sentence para 7a, etc.).

7. The aid levels for years after 1962 are cited in the joint memorandum. Usually we were never able to tell the Thai until the last month or two in any fiscal year the details of the program for that year. Constant shifting, arbitrary cancellations of items by DOD, substitutions of others, cancellation of agreed programs on which Thai had spent considerable sums to put in their share of resources—all these factors had gone a long way to degrading Thai confidence in the performance of promises of the U.S. military establishment in Thailand. The fact remains that my ability in August of 1965 to inform Thai for first time of level in advance of their budget year, commencing October 1, resulted in “dramatic improvements.)

8. Some of these Thai attitudes I have been able to change. We at least make no more promises until funds have been approved. And when we do make a promise, I insist the commitment be fulfilled, unless we negotiate our way out of it. Gradually, some respect for the integrity of our given word is returning. I have personally kept control of matters affecting actual U.S. military operations conducted from Thailand. And I have meticulously cleared in advance each new operational phase. Therefore, on the basis of the actual record of performance, we have been able to contain Thanatʼs recent attempts to exert a larger control over our operations. Our only remaining serious vulnerability is the present inadequacy in level and the prior erratic administration of the military aid program. Thanat will use this on his return, as he did before his departure, to attack the credibility of our commitment.

9. And, intuitively sensitive to American thinking, he may be right in doing so from the point of view of his responsibilities for the future safety of his nation. No Thai will accept the premise on which the $35 million level is based—that only a light constabulary force is needed for counterinsurgency and internal security—that if more is needed the U.S. will automatically be there with the additional force needed. The Thai have never placed their future that completely in the hands of any foreign power. And they never will. They fully intend to have a modern though small military force structure capable of giving a potential aggressor at least cause to hesitate. When Thanat talks of Fulbright, Morse, John Oakes, et al., he is also talking about senior level people on both sides of the Potomac who, he senses, would be delighted to seize the first faintly plausible pretext to disengage from Southeast Asia. He develops this theme from the inordinate delay in answering the request of February to the Vice President for the temporary rotary airlift assistance until they could provide a part of what they need in January 1967.

10. The “terrible reluctance” to risk becoming “engaged” was not lost on Thanat. Nor the fact that this reluctance came at a time when I was asking them daily to permit us to do more things that enormously increased their own “engagement”. That is why Wayne Morseʼs savage indictment that Thai insurgency is automatic outcome of their assistance to us (particularly validated incidentally by documents captured by Thai intelligence) can be used by Thanat with devastating effect when he returns.

11. Now, the monumental irony in all this is that the Thai desperately wish to avoid any American troop engagement whatever in their handling of their own insurgency problem. Their desire to avoid this is far greater than the similar desire in either the Pentagon or the Department of State. It would, therefore, seem highly desirable to assist them as rapidly as possible to gain the capability to do this with their own manpower. This can only be achieved by two courses. Get back to the program the President outlined in 1961, which will require $60–$70 million for next two years at least. The second is to tell them plainly that we cannot do this and tell them now what we will do, so they can begin to cut back their “nation-building” program to provide the difference. I think if we encourage the latter course, future historians will record it as a monumental error. So much of what is constructive in Asian development has bubbled up out of Bangkok in the last two years, it seems a pity to risk the arresting of this progress for an amount which, relatively, would gain enormous returns on the investment. I do not believe Thai will cease cooperation with us if this is not done. They are not that kind of people. Having always been free, they have not acquired the habit of other Asians of psychologically substituting the U.S. for the former colonial power who was supposed to be blackmailed or cheated at every opportunity. Never once in my three years here has there been an association between the countless requests I have made of them and their requests for our assistance. The granting of our requests was their contribution, as equal partners in meeting their SEATO obligations. Their requests to us are for what they wish to get them over the gap between their resources and their current requirements. What will happen is the end of the unlimited freedom we have had to use this real estate as we please.

12. If, rather than my usual relaxed posture, I seem intense about this, it is because I deeply believe that the surge of events in Asia, and the catalytic interaction of these events, is creating a momentum which most Asians obviously believe has almost assured the achievement of the immediate objective of the denial of Southeast Asia to Chinese hegemony.

13. But it can also accelerate the increasing cohesion of the free nations of Asia into an interdependent grouping which will be politically viable, largely economically self-sufficient, with indigenous military forces evolving patterns of association and interchange that can insure region against all threats except overt aggression from a major power. As I think you will discover at Manila, this process is moving faster than is realized in Washington. In short, we are on the verge of a major achievement, historically no less important than our European success in the fifties. I want this administration and this President to be credited with this achievement which is well within our capabilities. And continued full cooperation of Thai can make task vastly easier to accomplish.

14. I apologize for the length but I do believe these comments to be relevant.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, Cables, 10/66–2/67. Secret. [text not declassified]

2 Not found.

3 See Document 329 and the attachment thereto.

4 Printed from an unsigned copy.

331. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 331. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 15, 1966.

SUBJECT

Military Assistance for Thailand

Secretaries Rusk and McNamara have been unable to reach agreement on the level of our MAP assistance to Thailand for FY 1967. In the accompanying joint memorandum2 they present their positions and ask for your decision. Both consider it important that the Thai be advised of the decision during your forthcoming trip. I agree.

The Issue

The MAP level for FY 1967 is currently programmed at $35 million. The Embassy, Secretary Rusk and Joint Chiefs urge a minimum level of $60 million. Secretary McNamara sees possible military justification for no more than $44 million. The disagreement reflects differing assessments of the proper military structure for Thailand, of their performance in using equipment provided, and of political factors.

Stateʼs Position

We face a crisis of confidence in our relations with the Thai Government. The Thais have aligned their policies with ours in containing Communist aggression and have been highly cooperative in permitting our use of their bases and facilities. They want to strengthen their own defenses by bringing their conventional forces up to authorized strength. This would mean a FY 1967 program $16 million larger than in FY 1966, and $25 million more than currently programmed.

Congressional criticism of our commitment and presence in Thailand have soured our relations to the point where Thai leaders are beginning to question our resolve. Our failure to help strengthen their defenses by approving a MAP level of $60 million would further erode the stability of our alliance. They would likely press for a bilateral defense treaty and impede our Vietnamese operations from Thailand by establishing greater controls over each air mission as well as any future utilization of their facilities that we contemplate.

While MAP assistance should stress combatting insurgency, the Thai do not accept the view that their military forces should be limited to a constabulary while they rely on outside powers to provide conventional defense capabilities as needed.

Defense Position

The proper MAP level from a military standpoint is the currently programmed $35 million. There could be some justification for a level of $44 million. Thai forces should be directed primarily to counterinsurgency missions and internal security, with provision for only limited conventional capabilities. We should provide support only as the Thais demonstrate they can meet minimum maintenance and usage standards. The $35 million level is adequate for these purposes. There are, as well, serious inadequacies in past Thai performance.

Substantial Congressional cuts in the Military Assistance Program would make it difficult to increase the Thai program above $35 million. If the Thai program is held to this level, the Congressional cuts will still force reductions of nearly $85 million in programs of other countries already at austere levels.

Additional funds for Thailand would constitute a political pay-off taken from MAP funds badly needed elsewhere.

Funding Options

If the level is raised to $60 million, these would be the funding options:

New Legislation —A supplemental appropriations request to include economic and military aid to Viet-Nam and other Asian countries.

—Request Congressional authority to transfer the Laos MAP of $109 million for FY 1967 to military services budgets, freeing that amount for MAP elsewhere.

Current Authority —The law permits transfer of some funds from economic to military assistance in the Supporting Assistance and Contingency Funds. Given Congressional cuts and economic aid requirements, transfers would have to be compensated by supplemental appropriations for economic aid.

—Up to $300 million of U.S. military stocks can be used and repaid from future MAP appropriations.

—Transfers from other MAP programs (e.g. India/Pakistan pipeline, Greece, Turkey, Republic of China, Korea or Latin America).

Credit Sales —Instead of MAP grants, we could enter into credit sales on maximum concessionary terms of 14 years repayment without interest.

The positions of both Secretaries have merit.

In my judgement, critical political factors and important questions of our use of Thai facilities, argue persuasively for agreeing to a $60 million level for FY 1967.

The Thai have repeatedly noted that you, in your 1961 visit, were the only senior American visitor who ever took time to explore Thai problems deeply and to follow through by securing an increase in military assistance. The suggested action would underline your continuing concern with Thai security.

I am impressed also by the following: (1) Indications of improving Thai maintenance and usage capabilities.

(2) the fact that the Thai want to increase their conventional force to prevent any future heavy dependence on us or others.

(3) the clear determination by the Thai to achieve the desired military capacity, even if it means cutting back on their “nation building” program which has shown so much promise. Ambassador Martin feels certain that if we push them down that track, history will regard it as a monumental error. I think he is right.

(4) failure to help them meet the gap between their plans and their capacities will almost certainly mean an end to the virtually free hand we have had to date in use of Thai facilities.

The positions of Secretaries Rusk and McNamara are elaborated in the attached joint memorandum and a separate memorandum from Secretary Rusk with supporting documents.

Walt

Approve $60 million3

Approve $44 million

Approve $35 million

See Me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. V, 10/66–2/67. Secret.

2 See the attachment to Document 329.

3 In Joint Defense-State telegram 68658 to Bangkok, October 19, the Department informed the Embassy that the President had agreed to provide a fiscal year Military Assistance Program of $60 million to Thailand and that the Thai Government should be informed that despite a cut of $378 million in global MAP availabilities for fiscal year 1967 from 1966, their program would be “significantly greater than last year.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 19 US–THAI)

332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 332. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, October 17, 1966.

I–36200/66

SUBJECT

Military Aspects of US Policy for Thailand

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have asked that you review the military aspects of US policy for Thailand (JCSM 632–66, attached).

After review of US commitments to Thailand the Joint Chiefs have concluded that in support of the military aspects of these commitments the US should undertake to: 1. Assist Thailand in developing and maintaining armed forces capable of conducting effective military operations against major external aggression as well as against internal subversion.

2. Be prepared to assist Thailand to defeat communist aggression.

3. Develop in Thailand forward bases to include requisite logistic and communications-electronics base to support operations against internal subversion and external aggression.

The Joint Chiefs have asked that you endorse these military aspects of the US policy towards Thailand.

I believe the Joint Chiefs have forwarded this paper in order to obtain from you a clear definition of the military aspects of US policy for Thailand including your views on the make-up of Thai forces, the level of US support for such forces and the degree of planning and base construction which the US should undertake in preparation to meet possible contingencies covered by our broad commitments to Thailand.

I recommend you sign the attached memorandum to the Chiefs2 telling them that you will be prepared in the near future to discuss with them the military aspects of US policy for Thailand. For your possible use in these discussions, I will prepare a brief statement of my views on this subject if you want it.

John T. McNaughton

I want it3

I donʼt

Attachment

Washington, September 29, 1966.

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 4

JCSM–632–66

SUBJECT

Military Aspects of US Policy for Thailand (U)

1. (S) In view of the dynamic situation that exists throughout Southeast Asia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed US military policies and objectives in Thailand. They consider that an updated statement of military policy for Thailand would help to ensure a mutual understanding by all US agencies concerning the importance of Thailand to US strategy in Southeast Asia. At issue are. a. The seriousness of the subversion/insurgency threat and how far the United States should go to assist Thailand to cope with the problem.

b. The extent of preparations necessary for carrying out commitments and strategic requirements for the defense of Thailand.

2. (S) Importance of the Area. Thailand represents a special situation in terms of US interests in Asia. That countryʼs central location and the cooperation of the Thais have afforded the United States a complex of bases, the value of which is exemplified by their support of the current military effort in Vietnam and Laos. Thailand possesses the political, economic, and social stability, as well as the military potential, to be a focus of indigenous anticommunist strength in Southeast Asia. Thailand has demonstrated that it is determined to deal effectively with its own domestic insurgency. It has taken the lead in organizing free Asian states in several regional groupings, as early steps toward a security organization of free Asian states, able to bear an increasing share of Asian defense responsibilities—backed ultimately by US strength. Thailand has demonstrated, in the case of Vietnam and Laos, that it takes its regional responsibilities seriously and will act militarily against aggression outside its frontiers. The loss of Thailand to the Free World would facilitate further communist expansion, regardless of the outcome in South Vietnam. For these reasons, the United States has repeatedly pledged assistance to Thailand to resist communist aggression in any form, notably through. a. US membership in SEATO and the resultant multilateral contingency planning.

b. The Rusk-Thanat Communications of 1962.

c. The “Project-22” Agreement5 and resultant bilateral contingency planning.

d. The assurances of Vice President Humphrey during his visit to Asia.

3. (TS) The Internal Threat. The existence of subversion and insurgency, though regional in scope, is real and present; unless timely and effective measures are taken, they can be expected to continue to expand. At this juncture, a relatively small effort could make unnecessary a much larger effort later. Thailand offers excellent potential for successfully countering insurgency and is mounting an impressive program to deal with its own problems. However, fomentation and support of this insurgent threat by Hanoi and Peking have created a clear need for US support of the Thai effort without affronting the known Thai desire to minimize the US presence in counterinsurgency operations. Also, there is a need for our concurrence6 in the soundness of this principle. A program of early and adequate assistance should permit the Thais to deal with the insurgency problem on their own, and such indigenous action is the least expensive and most effective way to deter extensive insurgency and overt aggression.

4. (TS) The External Threat. While the primary current threat is a covert one, there remains the threat of overt aggression. Though the possibility of such aggression is slight at this time, it is a contingency of such importance that the United States and Thailand must make adequate preparations for this eventuality. For details relating to such preparations, see Appendix A, hereto.7

5. (TS) Meeting the Threat. Countries within Southeast Asia could selectively require continuing US political, economic, and military support at a substantial level, even after overt fighting, such as in the case of South Vietnam, were reduced or stopped. Thailand is a keystone of US security efforts in this area. Thailandʼs principal role should be to provide secure base facilities for projected use by US and SEATO forces and to conduct necessary operations to permit the deployment of allied forces.

6. (S) Objective, Tasks, and Policy. Based upon study of current US policy documents, commitments, and international agreements affect ing Thailand, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that the objective, military tasks, and policy are essentially as stated below. a. National Objective. To ensure that Thailand remains an independent, economically viable, noncommunist nation which is allied to the United States.

b. Military Tasks in Support of the Objective. (1) To assist Thailand in developing and maintaining effective internal security capabilities.

(2) To assist Thailand in developing and maintaining armed forces able to conduct effective military operations in the event of major external aggression.

(3) To be prepared, in accordance with our commitments, to assist Thailand to defeat communist aggression.

(4) To develop, in Thailand, forward bases for the projection of Free World power in Southeast Asia, to include the requisite logistic and communications-electronics base to support operations as required in subparagraphs 6b(1), (2), and (3), above.

c. Policy. Adequate and timely military assistance is essential to the retention of Thailand as a cooperative and effective member of the Free World community. As the threat to this key area is currently that of subversion and insurgency, emphasis should be placed on coordinated assistance calculated to strengthen the internal security of Thailand, including the security of air bases used by US forces against Vietnam and Laos. Because of US strategic requirements and arrangements to defend Thailand, it is also necessary to proceed with those preparations essential to the logistic support of forces—US, allied, and indigenous—which would be employed in the defense of Thailand against aggression. Additionally, the assistance given the Thai forces, apart from maximizing their capability to deal with insurgency, should be sufficient to afford them the capability to conduct effective military operations against external aggression until the requisite US/allied combat and supporting forces can be provided.

7. (U) Recommendations. In view of the foregoing and as a means of carrying out the tasks in support of the national objective set forth above, the Joint Chiefs of staff recommend that. a. The statement of policy as set forth above be approved.

b. A memorandum substantially the same as that contained in Appendix B, hereto,8 be forwarded to the Secretary of State. Since military policy is only one aspect of national policy for Thailand, it is necessary that it be integrated with other aspects of policy by the appropriate agency.

8. (U) Subsequent Action. Early approval of this statement of policy for Thailand will facilitate preparation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the necessary follow-on actions.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4662, Thailand 092, 1966. Top Secret.

2 Attached was a memorandum from McNamara to the JCS, October 20, in which the Secretary of Defense stated that he would discuss the military aspects of U.S. policy for Thailand after receiving the JCSʼs analysis of COMUSMACTHAIʼs report, “Developments in Thailand,” and their analysis of the U.S. construction program in Thailand.

3  McNamara indicated that he wanted to see McNaughtonʼs views, which were not attached and have not been found.

4 A note on the memorandum indicates McNamara “has seen brief.”

5 Presidentʼs letter of 22 June 1964 to Prime Minister of Thailand, and Terms of Reference on bilateral US-Thai military consultations submitted by CINCPAC on 10 July 1964 and approved by the Deputy Secretary of Defense on 24 August 1964. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 State-Defense msg to AMEmbassy Bangkok 2366, 16 June 1966; JCS IN 41524. [Footnote in the source text. Telegram 2366 to Bangkok is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–8 US–THAI.]

7 Attached, but not printed.

8 Attached, but not printed.

333. Memorandum of Conversation 333. Memorandum of Conversation1

Manila, October 23, 1966, 8:15–8:35 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn (Thailand)

MEMBERS OF PARTY

Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman; Chief of Staff of Armed Services Marshal Dawee; Minister of National Development Pote Sarasin; Lt. General Sawaeng, Secretary General of Government House

After an exchange of pleasantries, including the Presidentʼs recalling his trip to Thailand in 1961 and thanks to the Thais for their sturdy support, the President presented his view of the conference.2 It is neither a war council nor a peace council. We are anxious to have a peace conference as soon as possible (Thanom agreed); but we also wish Hanoi to know that we will stay as long as necessary and do everything necessary to defeat the aggression.

We should like the world to know that the nations nearest to the aggression are most concerned and most willing to make the sacrifices necessary.

It is bad for the people of the U.S. and the world to get the impression that this is a U.S. war.

It is also important that the world know that there is an Asia; there are serious problems in Asia; there are leaders prepared to face up to them; and the U.S. wishes to help those leaders, not to dominate them; a road of many miles is ahead, but we wish to begin here. (Thanom interjected: I agree; that is why I am here.)

The President then thanked the Thai Government—which, along with the Government of South Korea and the Philippines, had the wisdom to suggest that we all come together here in Manila.

The Communists and the press will be seeking to divide us. We must avoid leaks. We must present a solid front; and in unity there is strength.

Thanom fully agreed. We must let the Communists know we are together. The Thai delegation will do everything to let them know. And we must carry forward programs that would give happiness to the people.

The President then referred to the decision on Thai MAP aid. Thanom said that he had been informed Saturday3 by Ambassador Martin. He wished to express his deep gratitude to the President. The President said that Secretary Rusk was also to be thanked; and he spoke in the very highest terms of his reliance on Secretary Rusk and his judgment. Referring obliquely to Thai MAP aid he said, in fact, that only Secretary Rusk could override him, and urged the Foreign Minister to stay close to Secretary Rusk.

Summarizing, the President said that from his point of view the purpose of conference was to prove to the world: there is an Asia; there are urgent problems, but also men willing to face up to them; we are willing to negotiate—to substitute reason for rancor—but we shall stay until the two are ready.

The interview ended with a statement of appreciation by Thanom and gratitude for the Presidentʼs commitment to stay the course until Asians are assured that they can remain free.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, 7-Nation, POTUS, II, A. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting began at 8:12 and Johnsonʼs next meeting with Vietnamese leaders was at 9:05 p.m. (Ibid.) President Johnson left Washington on October 17 to visit six countries in East Asia and the Pacific and to attend the Conference in Manila on Vietnam October 24–25. Johnson stopped at Honolulu, Hawaii, October 17–19; visited New Zealand October 19–20; Australia October 20–23; arrived in Manila on October 23 and remained in the Philippines until October 27 when he traveled to Thailand where he stayed until October 30. The President then traveled to Malaysia, October 30–31, South Korea, October 31–November 2, returning to Washington via Alaska on November 2.

2 Regarding the discussions at Manila on Vietnam, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. IV, Documents 280 and 281.

3 October 22.

334. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State 334. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State 1

Manila, October 26, 1966, 0440Z.

Secto 20/5304. For Bundy. Reference: Manila 4556.2

1. It is quite true that the Thai have been considering for some time whether or not it would be in their interests to send additional combat forces to South Vietnam. Thanatʼs motivation is the same as that of his Korean colleague, i.e., to use such increased contribution as a gambit to have a larger voice in determining the composition of any future peace conference and related/actions, dealing with command structure, etc. On the Thai military side, consideration has been given only to offering a medical unit.

2. If somehow we could specifically suggest that a battalion or perhaps two battalions of Thai Marines could be made available to serve with U.S. Marines, it would be a not unuseful contribution. I use the preceding formulation because part of the Thai political tradition keeps their marines away from Bangkok and from the northeast. It is therefore unlikely that they will be used in either suppression or civic action operations in the northeast. My second reason for coming down on the marines is that in my opinion they are professionally better trained with a higher morale and esprit de corps and would fit in very quickly with our Marine Corps, who have been responsible for their training over the last decade and a half. I therefore think they would make a more effective purely military contribution as a fighting force.

3. I would not recommend an army unit for several reasons. Unless General Westmoreland has changed his mind, he is in full agreement with me that the Royal Thai Army should be deeply engaged in two primary tasks—modernizing its structure and actively engaging in counterinsurgency and related civic action and “nation-building” activities within Thailand. A corollary reason in Westmorelandʼs mind is that the Thai Army provides a deterrent action on the Mekong flank and accordingly should not be diverted to Vietnam but should be maintained in position in Thailand.

4. We of course have one additional problem. The Thai are fully aware through their intimate contacts with their ROK colleagues of the nature of our support arrangements for the two Korean divisions. They would expect equal treatment for any forces they sent to Vietnam if the political advantage to us is worth that cost, it is something that we well might bring forward. If on the other hand this were used as an argument to try to defray these costs out of the currently hard-won MAP ceiling, we would have lost far more than we would have gained.

5. If you decide to make this direct pitch to the Thai, I would like to be informed soonest of such a decision and I think I could very quickly engage in a few behind-the-scenes conversations that might facilitate affirmative action on such a request.

6. With relation to third para reftel,3 Thanatʼs comment is not at all surprising. He had previously used the increasing dissatisfaction among the junior officers as an attempt to build a power base among this group for this own political future. As I have previously reported, and as you have undoubtedly observed, there is more than a small bit of Don Quixote in Thanat. He is perfectly capable of convincing himself that he can fashion a domestic power base which may bring him to the prime ministership. A curious and ironic twist is that, although he has no chance of doing so, if it were possible he would be presiding over a regime still based on the power element of his new military partners. Pote, on the other hand, has quite explicitly said it is not in the best interest of Thailand to take on the military head-on. He believes they can be brought along to acceptance of a constitutional regime and elections in the very near future. I think he is right. With Poteʼs full approval, I have consistently taken the position that, given a millennium of independence, I did not believe Americans had very much capability to advise on the internal structure of the Thai Government; that while we, based on our own cultural tradition, had evolved a different governmental pattern which we thought suited us very well, we recognized that it was difficult to export our system successfully without building up a generally accepted system of cultural values which would permit our system to work. I have said that only the Thai could decide when that time has come should they choose to adopt a regime like our own. This posture of nonintervention has permitted me to intervene even more deeply in pushing programs and governmental changes which will lead toward a liberalization of the regime. I personally think it would be a mistake for the President to become involved in this. If he does, I would suggest that he content himself with a private observation in the course of the bilateral meeting on Saturday to the effect that he had noted with interest and anticipation Pote Sarasinʼs comments before the National Press Club in Washington, adding that of course this was an internal matter, which only the Thai people and Government could decide in their own way and in their own time.

7. I think you may be completely certain that, if the President makes even this mild observation, Thanat will see to it that it is converted into a sweeping public Presidential endorsement of the necessity to proceed immediately to general elections. I do not believe it is in our interest to have such a distortion in circulation because it would be almost impossible to correct it.

Martin

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 96. Secret; Exdis. Rusk was with the President at the Manila Conference to discuss Vietnam. Passed to the White House.

2 In telegram 4556 from Manila (Secto 21), October 26, Bundy stated that Thanat sought him out at Manila that day to say that he was strongly urging Prime Minister Thanom to send combat forces to South Vietnam. Bundy reported, however, when President Johnson made a “quiet plea” for other nations support on the previous day, the Thais made no discernible reaction. Telegram 4556 requested Martinʼs judgment. (Ibid.)

3 In the third paragraph of telegram 4456 from Manila, Bundy reported that Thanat expressed to him concern “that military elements in RTG were riding too high” and hoped that President Johnson could encourage Thai leaders at Manila to promulgate the new constitution and hold elections as soon as possible. (Ibid.)

335. Memorandum of Conversation 335. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bangkok, October 29, 1966, noon.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Prime Minister Thanom

Thai Council of Ministers

1. The meeting moved slowly because of the need for translation. It also was rather formal, given the normal style of the Thais—quite unlike the intimate give-and-take of the Cabinet meetings with the President in New Zealand and Australia.

2. The Prime Minister first expressed the honor and privilege felt by the Cabinet in receiving the President.

He first wished to place on record the gratitude of the government and the people of Thailand for the military and economic assistance to that country over many years. It has strengthened their capacity to defend themselves and to grow rapidly.

Second, the Prime Minister understood that the Presidentʼs program had been heavy and he therefore only wished to confine himself to the main questions.

As for defense, they faced a systematic effort by the Communists to infiltrate and start guerrilla operations, notably in the northeast, but elsewhere as well. A special suppression command was under the direction of the Deputy Prime Minister. All elements, military, police and civil, work together. Since the new command was set up, the number of incidents had decreased, and the number of surrenders and defections from the Communists has increased. A sustained rural development program is underway.

This success is all to the good, but it is limited. The Communists have not given up. Chinese Communist leaders have stated that Thailand is the next object of attack. Therefore, all military forces in Thailand must be ready to meet the challenge on a contingency basis.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, Asian Trip, Copies of Memos. No classification marking. The source text states that this was a partial draft prepared on November 2. No drafting information appears on the source text. Johnson traveled to Thailand on October 27, after the Manila conference, and stayed in Bang Saen and then Bangkok October 28–30. This meeting lasted until 12:58 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

2 In White House telegram CAP 66960, November 12, Rostow sent Johnson a repeat of Bangkok telegram 6185 which provided a glowing assessment of Johnson visit to Thailand which Rostow suggested was “worth the heat and ceremonials.” Martin reported that in this meeting, the Thai Prime Minister, “on his own initiative, raised once again his belief that Thai interest requires a new and firmer commitment from the United States. Secy Rusk seized the opportunity to argue the matter in the presence of the whole top level of the Thai govt. At the end of the rebuttal Thanat was happy to drop the issue having received not one word of support from his colleagues.” Martin reported that Johnson in a subsequent conversation assured the Thanat of U.S. support “in personal as well as policy terms.” Martin suggested that for the time being the Thaiʼs were satisfied, but this feeling would erode over time. (Ibid., National Security File, Memos to the President, W.W. Rostow, Vol. XV)

November 1966–November 1968: Thai Combat Troops to South Vietnam; Review of U.S. Programs in Thailand; Renewed Concern About the Northeast; U.S.-Thai Election PlanningNovember 1966–November 1968: Thai Combat Troops to South Vietnam; Review of U.S. Programs in Thailand; Renewed Concern About the Northeast; U.S.-Thai Election Planning

336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, November 10, 1966, 8:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared in substance by William E. Lang, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and approved by Rusk.

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, November 21, 1966, 1035Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department.

338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, November 22, 1966, 8:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Bundy and Pickering and approved by Bundy.

339. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (Acheson) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, December 7, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 11–5 US–THAI. Secret.

340. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Washington, January 16, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret. Attached to this memorandum was a memorandum to McNamara, January 13, from Assistant Secretary of State for Systems Analysis Enthoven who recommended that McNamara sign the memorandum to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

341. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 27, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 THAI–US. Secret. Drafted by Bundy.

342. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, March 22, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VI, Memos, 3/67–8/67. Confidential.

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, March 23, 1967, 1119Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI. Confidential.

344. Report of the Thai Working Group to the East Asia and Pacific Interdepartmental Regional Group

Washington, April 26, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–1 THAI. Secret. This report was passed to the Australian and New Zealand Governments on May 13. In an attached memorandum to Rusk suggesting this action, also May 13, Bundy noted that, “This was regarded by all IRG members and by Ambassador Martin as a good report.” Bundy noted that by providing an “unaltered document originally designed for our internal use” the United States would be demonstrating its openness to the Australians and New Zealanders.

345. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud)

Washington, May 31, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 10 THAI. Confidential. Drafted by Bundy.

346. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Hoopes) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 10, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 323.3. Secret.

347. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson

Washington, June 23, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret. There is no indication of a drafting officer on this memorandum. Pickering drafted a covering memorandum to Rusk recommending that he sign the memorandum to the President. King Bhumibol Adulyadej made a State visit to Washington, June 27–29.

348. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and the King of Thailand

Washington, June 27, 1967.

349. Memorandum From the Chief of Protocol of the Department of State (Symington) to President Johnson

Washington, June 29, 1967.

350. Editorial Note

351. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Coordination (Trueheart) to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes)

Washington, August 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, 1966–1967. Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent to Deputy Director George C. Denny, Jr. and Deputy Director for Research Allan Evans.

352. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailandʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency (de Silva) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Bangkok, August 18, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadorʼs Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret; Official-Informal.

353. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, September 12, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Folder 4. Secret. On another copy of this memorandum there is note that it was sent to the President on September 14 at 8:45 a.m. (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Memos, 8/67–7/68)

354. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 12, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret.

355. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Spear.

356. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 15, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, Lotus File, 1968–1969. Secret; Exdis.1

357. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 15, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Unger on September 19. Approved by the White House on September 23. For another account of this meeting, see Document 358.

358. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Assistant (Jones) to President Johnson

Washington, September 15, 1967, 7:27–8:05 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes Files, Folder 4. Top Secret.

359. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, September 19, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (2), Allies Troop Commitments and other Aid, 1967–1969. Secret; Exdis. A note by William Jorden on the source text indicates that he had read it.

360. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 21, 1967.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1966–1967. Secret. There was no drafting information on the source text.

361. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, September 25, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. The source text is a copy that was retyped in the White House. The Department of State copy, 1133Z, is not filed in the Central Files, but was sent to INR.

362. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 6, 1967, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. Drafted by Rostow. On October 4 Rusk sent the President a memorandum that included talking points, biographic sketches of Thanat and Pote, and a draft press release. (Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US) Clark Clifford had lunch with Pote Sarasin on October 5 and told him that there had been a significant drop in popular support for U.S. Vietnam policy, making the Thai troop contributions even more important. Pote stated that some in Thailand drew the opposite conclusion. Pote suggested that the President strongly urge Thanat to expedite Thai troop support. Clifford asked Bundy to pass the message to the President with his strong concurrence. (Memorandum from Bundy to Rostow, October 5; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68)

363. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 6, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret.

364. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 6, 1967, 3–3:35 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD: FRC 72 A 2468. Secret. Drafted by Steadman. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office at the Pentagon.

365. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Warnke)

Washington, October 17, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, Thailand 320–333. Secret.1

366. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 22, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadorʼs Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret; Eyes Only; Nodis.

367. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 28, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Secretary of Defense Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret.

369. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, November 6, 1967, 1247Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI. Confidential; Priority.

370. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, November 22, 1967, 1550Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Spear, cleared in draft with Habib, in substance with Steadman, and by Jorden of the White House; and approved by Bundy.

371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, December 2, 1967, 1915Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Confidential. Drafted by Salans; cleared with Colonel Ramundo of DOD/ISA, Eugene Herbert of L/EA, Spear, and Lawrence Hoover, Jr. of L/UNA; and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Seoul and Taipei.

372. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 8, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (2), Allies Troop Commitments and Other Aid, 1967–1969. Secret.

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, December 14, 1967, 1250Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

374. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman)

Washington, December 27, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Presidentʼs Trip to Holtʼs Funeral, Memos and Misc. Cables. Confidential. In an attached covering memorandum to Rostow, December 29, Wright stated that Steadman wanted this memorandum “as a weapon with which to reopen the whole question of training schedules for Thai troops.” Wright also stated that he checked with Bundy, “who agrees that this summation of the Presidentʼs conversation with Thanom is accurate.” (Ibid.)

375. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, January 12, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Admin Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Thailand 370. Secret.

376. Research Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 19, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 THAI. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

377. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, January 20, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Spear and sent to Rusk under cover of a memorandum by Bundy, January 18, which recommended that the Secretary sign the memorandum.

378. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 22, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret.

379. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, January 27, 1968, 0435Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret: Priority; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Bundy and cleared by Harriman.

380. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, February 12, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by J.B. Devine of ISA. Copies were sent to McNamara, Wheeler, and Bundy.

381. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, March 22, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 14 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Hannah, Jantzen, Hamilton, and Bundy.

382. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 25, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Confidential. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it and the attachment were drafted by Claus Ruser of Katzenbachʼs staff on March 16. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI)

383. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)

Bangkok, April 16, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret; Eyes Only. Copies were sent to Godley and Spear.

384. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, May 3, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, PM Than-om Kittikachorn Visit Briefing Book, 5/8–9/68. Secret. Drafted by Spear, cleared by Aldrich, Devine of DOD/ISA, John R. Burke of EA/VN, Louis A. Cohen of EA/RA, and William W. Thomas, Jr. of EA.

385. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, May 6, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Spear. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI)

386. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Marks) to President Johnson

Washington, May 6, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Thanom Kittikachorn Visit, 5/8–9/68. Confidential

387. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, May 8, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, President-Thanom meeting, May, 8, 1968. Secret; Eyes Only. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted from 12:14 to 1 p.m. (Ibid.) Transmitted to the White House on May 20.

388. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 8, 1968, 3:30–5:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Clifford Papers, Memorandum of Conversation. Secret. Drafted by Devine and approved by Warnke on May 13. The meeting was held in Cliffordʼs office at the Pentagon.

389. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, May 8, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Vol. 4, 36th meeting. No classification marking.

390. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 9, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, 52, Thailand. Secret. The CIA, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with its release except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map entitled “Thailand Communist Insurgency Regions” are not printed.

391. Editorial Note

392. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 9, 1968, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68. Secret. Drafted by Spear and cleared by Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House from 5:11 to 5:36 p.m., according to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary. (Ibid.) Part II, a separate memorandum, was an account of the President congratulating Thanat on his birthday; Part III concerned the increased Thai use of fertilizer and the need for sulphur that Johnson promised to obtain for Thailand from major U.S. producers. (Ibid.) Part IV is Document 393.

393. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 9, 1968, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Spear and cleared by Bundy.

394. Summary of Discussion and Decisions at the 36th Meeting of the Senior Interdepartmental Group

Washington, May 13, 1968.

395. Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, July 10, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Vol. 4, 36th meeting. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A covering note from Hartman to SIG members, July 16, indicated that at the May 9 meeting of the SIG, the Chairman asked Helms for this assessment. It was given to the members of the SIG on a limited distribution basis. (Ibid.)

396. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, July 18, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Unger, Hamilton, Jantzen, and Hannah. The meeting took place in [text not declassified].1

397. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley)

Bangkok, July 24, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret; Eyes Only.

398. Memorandum From the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Refugee and Migration Affairs (Martin) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown)

Washington, July 30, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, Lotus File, 1968–1969. Secret; Eyes Only.

399. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, July 31, 1968, 1126Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–1 THAI. Secret.

400. Memorandum for the Files

Washington, August 5, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret.

401. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, August 9, 1968, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Hannah, Hamilton, Jantzen, and Godley. A report of a preliminary conversation is in an August 8 memorandum of conversation. (Ibid.)

402. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 10, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret. [text not declassified] A note on the telegram indicates that Bundy saw it.

403. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 15, 1968, 1041Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 ASIA SE-US. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral McCain and Vientiane for Ambassador only.

404. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, August 20, 1968.

Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Lotus File, 1968–69. Secret; Eyes Only.

405. Telegram 3329 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 23, 1968.

406. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, October 16, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VIII, Memos 7/68–12/68. Top Secret. Drafted by Chief of Staff of the Army, General William Westmoreland.

407. Special Report by the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, October 18, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VIII, Memos 7/68–12/68. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. This was a “Weekly Review.” A photograph on p. 3 of the source text showing Prime Minister Thanom casting his ballot in the Bangkok municipal elections and a photograph of Deputy Prime Minister Praphat are not reproduced.

408. Memorandum of Conversation

Bangkok, November 16, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 THAI. Secret. Copies were sent to Hannah, Hamilton, Jantzen, Godley, and Spear. Drafted by Unger. The meeting was held at Poteʼs residence.

336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 336. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, November 10, 1966, 8:09 p.m.

83260. For Ambassador from Secretary. SOFA Agreement.

1. I have reviewed this problem in the light of all the recent exchanges of messages, and have reached the clear conclusion that we should not put forward a draft agreement on this subject with Thailand that is fully reciprocal in the sense that it applies to Thai forces in the US or to anything other than US forces in Thailand. At the same time, we are prepared to put forward significant wording changes along the lines of some of your recent recommendations—for example specifically the use of the terms “sending state” and “receiving state” throughout the agreement—designed to give the agreement the appearance of reciprocity to the maximum possible degre.

2. Our basic problem with a SOFA that is reciprocal in substance is that such an agreement would have to be placed before the Senate for its advice and consent. Three elements would then be involved. a. The agreement would be inconsistent with the entire previous pattern of SOFA agreements worldwide, in which they have been placed on a reciprocal basis solely where substantial forces of the other government would be present in the US on a continuing or recurrent basis. This aspect alone would almost certainly cause the Senate to question and quite possibly to reject the agreement.

b. In explaining why we had accorded the Thai a reciprocal agreement, we could hardly refrain from mentioning specific sensitivities on their part for which members of the Senate would have little or no sympathy. Arguments about the “multilateral” nature of our commitment in Thailand and about the precise legal ownership of the bases—whether or not persuasive to us—would have little or no effect on the views of these Senators, who are by no means limited to those habitually regarded as unfriendly to our Thai policy.

c. Quite possibly criticism of the agreement in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee—which would have to be the one considering it—would expand into a Floor debate most damaging to US and RTG interests.

3. Moreover, all of our other SOFA agreements in Asia, which are now non-reciprocal, would immediately be reopened by the several governments, with almost unpredictable complications and results. In several of these cases, the matter might well become a political football, with really serious damage to the position of important governments. I can myself see no basis on which any of these governments would not feel that they had at least as strong a claim as the Thai to a reciprocal agreement.

4. I recognize that only 2a and 3 of the above arguments can readily be used with Thanat and other Thai. But they could be well amplified by one further factor, that a requirement of Senate ratification, in the nature of the upcoming Congress and its heavy load of business, would almost certainly mean that ratification and the coming into force of the agreement would be delayed until late next summer even if it could be achieved. I would go further and give at least a 50–50 bet that it simply would not reach the Floor or would be lost in some last-minute shuffle, as happened this year with the Thai tax treaty.

5. This position is my considered judgment. It could be changed only in the most extraordinary circumstances, which I believe you should be able to avoid. In the accompanying cable giving you textual changes in the current draft, the State and DOD staffs have gone as far as we now think we can. We would be prepared to consider further changes or adaptations, but categorically subject to the basic position stated earlier.

6. The draft you are hereby authorized to table (State 83098)2 will speak for itself, and I of course leave to you at what stage to make it clear to the Thai why we cannot accept a truly reciprocal agreement. However, I would see some advantage in facing the issue frontally at the outset, perhaps privately with Thanat.

7. I see one other problem with possible serious policy implications that may confront you in the course of this negotiation. This relates to descriptions of the nature and basis of our force presence in Thailand. On the one hand, the Thai from a political standpoint may see advantage in language indicating that the present US force presence in Thailand is temporary in nature. On the other hand, if this were baldly stated it might cause Thanat personally, and perhaps some elements in Thai political public opinion, to argue that we were excluding the possibility of US forces entering Thailand at some point under the SEATO Treaty obligations specifically as they relate to armed attack involving Thailand itself, or as in 1962 to meet a threat to Laos and hence a threat to Thailand. We do not here see the answer on this point, and I think it is one on which you will wish to sound Thanat out with some care. However, you must also recognize that any language referring to possible introduction of US forces at some future date will be scrutinized with the utmost care in the Congress here to see whether it involves any change in our Treaty commitment. Thus, if your soundings should indicate a clear and strong Thai desire that references to the presence of US forces be in the direction of the second alternative stated at the outset of this paragraph, you should in no circumstances table any language to cover this point without precise and full clearance here.

8. A further complicating element is that, if any situation should ever arise where our forces were engaged in actual combat on Thai soil, the SOFA agreement would probably be suspended in any event. In other words, we would probably be dealing under the second alternative with a preventive deployment. The complications on this aspect are obviously serious and difficult to foresee.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Bundy, cleared in substance by William E. Lang, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, and approved by Rusk.

2 Telegram 83098 to Bangkok, November 10, contained revisions to the Embassyʼs draft SOFA and approval to table it once the revisions were made. (Ibid.)

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 337. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, November 21, 1966, 1035Z.

6625. For Bundy. Ref: A. State 259 Aug 1965;2 B. State 88130.3

1. I suppose I should be grateful we are not ducking the issue this year until the last possible moment. But I must confess to a feeling of profound discouragement that again it is felt necessary to start off consider ation of the FY 68 Table 36 level and future year planning with a compromise position which at the beginning negates a position the Secretary has already taken—that only the uncertainty of future appropriations restrained him from endorsing my recommendation for Presidential approval of a $60 million level for three years. I still think this level for the next two years is essential to achievement of U.S. policy objectives. I therefore must insist that we maintain this position.

2. As you well know, I have never advocated intervention of U.S. armed helicopters in combatting Thai insurgency, have been adamantly opposed to other troop participation, and have overruled attempts of DOD in-country personnel to get American “advisors” involved in combat situation; nevertheless, I did not complain that no one in the Department bothered to correct these recent leaked distortions. I am human enough to wince a bit at the clippings which have flowed in from all over the world about McNamaraʼs defeat of the “bloodthirsty Ambassador.” I have exerted what I had thought to be a strict discipline (until AP story today based on military leak) on all elements of a loyal mission to prevent their telling the truth to some perceptive and persistent American reporters and legislators. I have done so on the theory that any further widening of the “credibility gap” regarding senior officials of DOD is a disservice to the President and to the nation. I had, therefore, resisted the temptation to set the record straight, which could so easily be done with devastating effect, in the hope that, with honor sufficiently assuaged in the Pentagon, we might be able to approach consideration of FY 68 MAP level strictly on the merits of the case, which are compelling if anyone will only take the trouble to examine them. I really think this time I am entitled to your full backing all the way through. If you cannot do this, then at the very least, I think I am most certainly entitled to not have our position compromised at this stage of the year.

3. My comments on your four points in your first para will have more relevance perhaps if they follow comments on your para 2. If the heart of the matter is, as you say, “the question of the optimum size of the RTA, taking account of the implications for future Thai budgets as well as future MAP levels,” I can only say, “welcome aboard, my friend. This was where I came in three years ago.” There is, I think, no need to recall to you the reception of my attempts to get recognition of the necessity to retool the entire structure for the inevitably growing insurgency.

4. Daweeʼs visit to Secretary McNamara in May 19654 received almost total emphasis on manning levels. To quote from a DOD summary of official record: “Low manning levels. Secretary/Defense told Dawee to bring Thai forces up to 80 percent manning level. He stated also that he (Dawee) should either go out and recruit or else fire useless ones. Dawee said it wasnʼt as easy as that—that it was somewhat akin to the railroad fireman problem in the U.S. Secretary/Defense snapped back that the U.S. had solved the ʼfiremanʼ problem and suggested Thais solve the problem of low manning levels, and ineffective personnel. At this point Ambassador Martin said that Dawee had made a commitment to bring Project 22 forces up to 80 percent strength. Dawee confirmed that this was so.” And Dawee faithfully began to push for these goals when he returned to Thailand.

5. Then in August joint State/Defense message (Dept 259 to Bangkok, Aug 6) asked that we put all possible pressure on Thai to do many specific things. On manning levels, in para 3, after asking that Thai units which do not make sense be reduced or disbanded, we were told: “The balance of forces which make a real military contribution—not just Project 22 forces (although they may be given first priority) and not just MAP supported forces—must be brought up to 80 percent of table of organization manning level.” We have consistently kept Thai under pressure to do this and are well on way to reach this goal.

6. In same message, we were required to put on pressure to increase in-commission rates, press for increased intensive field training; and finally in para 3d to press for increase in Thai military budget, stating that double the $15 million increase would be needed in Thai FY67 military budget. Actual increase in FY66 Thai military budget was $13.6 million. In Thai FY67 military budget further increase over FY66 will be $14.5 million, not including a forthcoming supplemental which exceeds joint State/Defense request. I have now, most reluctantly, advised senior Thai that FY 68 Thai military budget must be increased by additional $50 million (see para 10 below).

7. I do not know precisely what you mean by “expansion of RTA foreseen in MACTHAIʼs plans.” Some of the so-called “expansion” is conversion of old units, not creation of new ones, although if Thai are to accomplish “in-utilization” rates, appropriate maintenance units now lacking must be activated. Increase of Psy-Ops unit is in response to 2C, re A. Increased engineer and medical units are in direct response to 2D of same message. Almost all will be within present authorized personnel ceiling for RTA and total personnel strength will not exceed this numerical level in any realistic projection. Certainly the additional rotary airlift is essential. I would be glad to re-examine any particular unit about which you may have questions.

8. I find your statement that “everyone is appalled by the projection of $37 million in operating costs by 1972” somewhat appalling in itself since I had assumed you had available when ref A was drafted last year, the calculation of increased operating costs automatically required to carry out the increases demanded of the Thai in the joint State/Defense message of Aug 1965. Our calculations projected at that time were closer to $42 million by 1972. I must confess I did not give it too much thought because I hoped by 1972 our MILADI program would be fading away.

9. And this brings me back to your first paragraph. (A) On your point A, unless we wish to close our eyes to what is happening in Laos, I would give equal billing to Project 22 forces along with internal security problem.

(B) I completely and wholeheartedly agree with the restatement of the principle of avoiding U.S. involvement in combat operations. This is why I so desperately want to accelerate in every way possible Thai capability to do internal job and, if possible, to quietly carry initial brunt of any assistance within Laos. It will be very great tragedy, in my opinion, if we ever have to respond to Thai request to invoke Plan 8, or we decide it necessary to invoke COMUSTAF OPLAN 1–65 (Project 22). And a wholly unnecessary tragedy in case of Plan 8.5

(C) On your Point C, if I follow you, I would never begin there. Using your 45–50 million range as “normal” over five-year projection would total $225–250 million. I would be perfectly happy to settle for that total spread this way: $60 million for FY68; $60 million for FY69; $45 million for FY70; $35 million for FY71; and $25 million for FY72. This is total of $225 million—the lower part of your range.

(D) If your D would be acceptable, I see no reason why sequence I have outlined above would not be equally acceptable. To get it fixed now would save literally thousands of dollars in unnecessary rejuggling of program.

10. I make this recommendation on the spread in 9 (C) above because, although the stories about my defeat were wrong, they were wrong only about the issue. I have previously informed you Thai were going to have very small modernized conventional force structure with or without our help. You may care to take a look at Bangkok 282 (Aug 65),6 which was response to Deptel 259. In para 5, I told Praphat I very much hoped that Thai would not change priorities in the use of their resources, which accord first priority to economic and social infrastructure. I have changed that recommendation, because we have too much at stake here to risk basing policy on the incredible vagaries and vanities which are substituted for judgment in determining Thai MAP level. I could not be sure my arguments sent directly to the President before he left Washington would supplement yours sufficiently to get a favorable decision. I had to anticipate an unfavorable one. Therefore, I have been pushing Thai hard to recognize inevitability of their having to stand on their own feet, and have pushed hard to add another $50 million to Thai FY68 military budget. The NSC has now recommended this increase to Cabinet. With the additional $50 million coming into Thai military budget in FY68 from their own resources (partly from reserves), I think we can keep the momentum accelerating—as it must—and at the same time conditioning them to necessity of progressively bearing more of the load themselves. I hope I can discover way to minimize any damage from this diversion from economic and social infrastructure investment.

11. But we do need the $60 million for FY68 and FY69.

12. A final word. These comments are rushed to meet your deadline. If the plain language is abrasive, please attribute it partly to frustration or fatigue—but not to anger. I think I lost the capacity for anger in Chu Lai a year ago this week.7 But not the capacity for persistence in insisting on decisions which can hasten an end to this war.

13. Good luck, and may you be at the peak of your persuasiveness.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department.

2 See footnote 4, Document 302.

3 In telegram 88130, November 19, the Department informed Martin of its thinking on future military assistance for Thailand. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US) Martin answered the points raised in that telegram in the text below.

4 See Document 293.

5 For information on O PLAN 1–65 (Project 22), see footnote 2, Document 291. Plan 8 is an apparent reference to SEATO Plan 8, not further identified.

6 See footnote 5, Document 302.

7 A reference to Martinʼs son, a U.S. soldier in South Vietnam, who was killed a year earlier.

338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, November 22, 1966, 8:39 p.m.

89594. For Ambassador from Bundy. Ref: A. Bangkok 6625; B. State 88130.2

1. On our press handling of stories alleging division between you and others, we have simply taken the position that there is no difference of view at either end on the question of U.S. involvement in combat in Thailand. Naturally, the press has not found this to be newsworthy. However, it is my long experience that if one protests too much on these matters it only builds up the story. I have therefore always taken a position (at some variance with immediately previous practice) of not commenting other than in the sense of unity on stories of division. I am sure that this attitude is shared at senior levels in other agencies, and that they are equally irate at whoever is leaking these stories. The only thing you and we can do is to sit tight and not let it bother us unduly.

2. Now let me clarify a bit what we are proposing to do re Thailand MAP and to reply to some of your specific points.

3. No one questions that in August 1965 we instructed you (a) to identify units of the Thai forces which do not make military sense and to extent politically feasible get them reduced or disbanded (still a priority goal with us, but one on which I gather little or no progress has been made); and (b) to get units which make a real military contribution up to at least 80% manning levels. On this basis, Stilwellʼs restudy of force levels was undertaken. What we are now saying is that, with the implications of the restudy in hand, and the first subsequent-year item content being formulated, we think a second look is indicated.

4. As we understand it from DOD, if the present MAP-supported units were all to be brought up to 80% manning and the planned new units activated, the RTA would be enlarged from the present 90,000 to nearly 120,000. Working within such a planning context, there is a grave risk that we will emerge at the end of the planning period with an RTA which cannot function either because of manning level or budgetary shortages. It is simply not realistic to plan on US funding of local currency budgetary costs to cure this dilemma. The only answer would seem to be a revised force structure.

5. It is for this reason that we think that budgetary and MAP implications of MACTHAI planning need another look before the FY 67 item content is finalized and the FY 68 and future year planning figures are established. As I said in Ref B, we are not prepared to accept the $37 million “O” costs foreseen in FY 72. We could not of course have known the “O” cost implications of the Stilwell restudy when Deptel 2593 was drafted since the study had at that time not yet been undertaken.

6. We are inclined to think that the new look at the force structure should be made on the assumption of MAP availabilities of about $45 million per year for what might be called, in an oversimplification, the “Project 22” element (although we of course recognize that this element has relevance to the CI problem which will increase as the Special Forces training and other projects go forward). As indicated in Ref B, this does not mean we are imposing MAP ceilings for FY 68 (we are holding to $60 million) or even FY 69, although it does not seem to me that at this point in time a planning level of $45 million for FY 69 would be too serious.

7. As for your 60–60–45–35–25 formula, this simply will not square with existing MACTHAI planning since it would barely cover “O” costs in FY 71 and would not cover them at all in FY 72. Frankly, it seems to me that this formula could only fit if planning guidelines something like those laid out above were enforced.

8. I wish you had let us know sooner that there was any active discussion on the Thai side of their FY 1968 military budget, and we could then have discussed whether a position should now be taken on our side. You may well turn out to be right in pressing them to go $50 million higher at that time, but I would have been happier if we had reflected together on this, in the light of the kind of thoughts we are now developing, before we took a position that might turn out to cut across the final kind of advice we all decide should be given to the Thai. We had of course noted your 5227 of October 234 indicating that you had mentioned the possible necessity of an increase to Thanom, but I repeat that it would be useful to review these matters before hitting precise figures. As it stands, it would help us to have your best reading of Thai thinking on their FY 1968 budget in all its aspects, including the military. We have virtually nothing on that now.

9. I of course delayed my meeting with McNaughton when Ref A received. However, both they and we are anxious to move ahead on this now.

10. As to your paragraph 12, I fully appreciate the strain you are under, particularly at this sad anniversary. But we must think this one through if we are to have a solid basis for better decisions.5

11. Warm regards.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis; No Distribution Outside Department. Drafted by Bundy and Pickering and approved by Bundy.

2 See Document 337 and footnote 3, thereto.

3 See footnote 4, Document 302.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–THAI)

5 In telegram 6817, November 25, Martin sought to explain why he believed he could not yield on a MAP level of $60 for Thailand in FY 68 and 69. He concluded, “we have thought through this problem of MAP thoroughly here. We have reviewed it again and are completely convinced the recommendations we made are reasonable, sound and in U.S. interests. It is only for this reason that I cannot again agree to a compromise which is not supportable by the facts that are clearly so evident.” (Ibid.)

339. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (Acheson) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 339. Memorandum From the Special Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury (Acheson) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, December 7, 1966.

RE

North Thailand Opium Cultivation, Traffic, and KMT Irregulars

This supplements our telephone conversation of yesterday2 on the cultivation of, and traffic in, opium in the North Thailand area occupied by the KMT irregulars. There is a very clear and informative account of this situation in AmEmbassy Bangkok Secret Airgram A–629 dated January 21, 1966.3

Much of that opium production is moved down to Bangkok, where illegal heroin conversion facilities have been established. A small portion of that heroin finds its way into the illegal U.S. import traffic, but at the present time it is not a large factor in our own domestic narcotics picture. Most of it is probably consumed in Bangkok, Hong Kong and Singapore. If, however, the present negotiations with the Government of Turkey for the eradication of opium production there should prove successful, and if the representations now being initiated by Ambassador Bohlen to the Government of France should be successful, for the elimination of the illegal French heroin laboratories, I would think the inevitable result would be that the French heroin operators would move their conversion operation to Bangkok, so as to be close to the next largest available source of supply of raw material. In this event, a great deal of the Thai opium production would then be converted to heroin at Bangkok specifically for the U.S. market and that production would become the dominant factor in the U.S. narcotics picture.

The Embassy at Bangkok has known about the opium production in the KMT area for a number of years. For the reasons I described over the telephone, and which airgram A–629 elaborates, the Embassy representations to the Thai government to clean up the traffic have never been particularly insistent or productive.

Presumably the counterinsurgency buildup under way in Thailand has as one of its objectives the strengthening of Thai border security. One would hope that Thailand may be able to diminish its reliance on the KMT forces for border security, and may have a stronger position to control the KMT trafficking in opium. In any event, it would seem timely to strengthen our representations to Thailand to clean the traffic up. I do not underestimate the obstacles.

Our hand should be considerably strengthened when we have, at the end of February 1967, the report of the U.N. Narcotics Commission survey team which is going to Northern Thailand in January for a two-month closeup study of the cultivation of opium and the traffic in opium and heroin.

Meanwhile, it would materially serve the long-range interest of the United States in suppressing the narcotics traffic, if the Thai opium problem were persistently kept out on the table, and if the Thai government were forcefully reminded from time to time that they have both a treaty obligation and a moral obligation (not to mention the practical obligation of a large donee of American aid) to move toward effective control of the opium and heroin traffic. The problem is bound to surface sooner or later in the U.S. press. As I have said, there is a substantial possibility that Thailand may, in the not too distant future, be a major source of narcotics supplies for the illegal traffic in the United States.

I will see that you are sent a copy of the U.N. survey teamʼs report when it is available and that you get any other information on this problem which may be helpful.

David C. Acheson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 11–5 US–THAI. Secret.

2 No record of this telephone call has been found.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 11–5 THAI)

340. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 340. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Washington, January 16, 1967.

SUBJECT

U.S. Deployments to Thailand

I am concerned over the steady growth in the number of U.S. personnel planned for deployment to Thailand. It is essential that we pro vide the forces necessary to support U.S. combat operations, to provide adequate counterinsurgency training for the Thailand Armed Forces, and to meet certain other specific commitments we have undertaken (e.g., improvement of certain key lines of communications). It appears, however, that we should be able to meet these commitments and support adequately our air operations without deploying forces in excess of the personnel that are currently approved. You are aware of the very serious implications that a large and growing American presence has for a small and underdeveloped nation such as Thailand. As experience in Vietnam has shown, economic dislocation can seriously weaken the social fabric of the country and undo much that military actions accomplish. Also, large numbers of Americans provide a very fertile propaganda target for Communist and other dissident forces.

Therefore, I believe we must make a continued effort to keep the numbers of U.S. forces in Thailand to a minimum.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret. Attached to this memorandum was a memorandum to McNamara, January 13, from Assistant Secretary of State for Systems Analysis Enthoven who recommended that McNamara sign the memorandum to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

341. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 341. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 27, 1967.

SUBJECT

Thailand: Getting Concurrence for B–52 Operations and a Formal Understanding on Occupancy of U.S. Bases and Land Costs

Mr. McNaughton and I have reviewed these problems in detail with Ambassador Martin. We have agreed on two basic recommendations, more fully spelled out in the discussion below: a. That we instruct Ambassador Martin to seek Thai concurrence for B–52 operations from U Tapao at once, with the package defined below.

b. That we await the outcome of this discussion before instructing Ambassador Martin to take up the question of a formal agreement on base occupancy and an undertaking by the Thai to handle land costs. As the discussion below indicates, this problem is inherently more complicated and difficult. We outline below possible avenues of approach, with an indicated course of action subject to judgment of the climate at the time.

Mr. McNaughton is presenting these recommendations separately and concurrently to Secretary McNamara.

I. Concurrence in U Tapao Operations

Status

In December, Ambassador Martin believed that this could be obtained without any significant undertakings on our part. Unfortunately, subsequent publicity, which the Thai interpreted as a virtual U.S. decision assuming Thai concurrence which of course was not yet given, disturbed the atmosphere. Moreover, our request was finally submitted in late January on a contingency basis, which led the Thai to feel there was plenty of time to explore the issue. Hence, they came forward with a series of general requests, largely in the MAP area.

We believe we must now go in with a firm request to begin B–52 operations from U Tapao.

Ambassador Martin believes that a decision to do that and to give him authority described below and incorporated in a telegram of instruction attached2 would put us in a good posture for seeking Thai concurrence in B–52 operations from U Tapao. Essentially, he would be authorized to convey to the Thai some selected delivery times for already approved FY 1967 MAP items, to give general assurances for air defense, and to reveal to the Thai certain items already tentatively approved in the FY 1968 program. In addition, he would be authorized to indicate to the Thai that our FY 1968 MAP planning level stood at $60 million, subject to the congressional process in the terms described below. In essence, we would not be making any undertakings to the Thai that go beyond what we already propose to do under the FY 1967 MAP program and the hard core of the FY 1968 program; we would be revealing to the Thai earlier than usual elements of the 1968 program, and this is the crucial timing element.

Proposed Responses to Thai Requests

1. Prompt Delivery of MAP Items—Ambassador Martin believes that it is essential that we do everything possible to ensure prompt delivery of key items in the FY 1967 program. This applies particularly to anti-aircraft guns, and he will work with Mr. Steadman to identify other categories, so that we can get good reading of what the possibilities are. In the proposed package for Ambassador Martinʼs use, the delivery date would be specified for the anti-aircraft weapons. Other delivery dates could probably be left to be handled through normal military assistance channels, but rapidly and concurrently with the Ambassadorʼs approach.

2. Air Defense—The Thai express a general need for some assurance in this area, although their military authorities recognize that North Vietnamese air capabilities in fact constitute no present threat to Bangkok. Unfortunately, the Thai are aware of certain rather grandiose military plans worked out by General Stilwell in the fall of 1965 (in the Ambassadorʼs absence), which included substantial numbers of U.S. Hawk deployments and even Nike Hercules. The Ambassador has walked this one back as hard as possible with the Thai, and believes they clearly understand that there is no present threat. Nonetheless, he believes it would be of great assistance if he were authorized to tell the Thai that we would keep the air threat under continuing review, that there were available air defense units in U.S. reserve forces, and that we would consider the deployment of such units to Thailand if the need ever arose.

3. Exact Statement of the FY 1968 $60 million MAP Planning Level—It is of course recognized that any statement on this subject would have to be subject to the appropriation process, and the Thai understand this. Ambassador Martin believes, however, that it would be of great importance to be able to say to the Thai that this was a firm plan unless there were a really disastrous cut in the DOD or MAP appropriations. All of us feel, as a practical matter, that unless there is such a disastrous cut, we would in fact wish to give Thailand a priority that would bring it up to that level.

4. Additional FY 1968 Item—The attached instruction includes authority to disclose plans for helicopter and light aircraft deliveries in the FY 1968 program. In addition, Ambassador Martin believes it would be of great importance to be able to convey one additional item in the FY 1968 program. This item, already in the tentatively outlined program, calls for $.6 million for a logistic support facility in Korat. This is a very small item, and carries no future burdens or implications. Mr. McNaughton believes that it could be properly included.

5. U.S. Public Statements—This is a more general matter, but Ambassador Martin has received repeated urging by the Thai that top U.S. officials say more in public about the Thai contribution and its importance. This is something we all agree should be done. In terms of what he is authorized to say, it would amount to no more than an assurance that we would seek appropriate occasions to do just this, taking advantage of the Thai relaxation of restrictions on news reporting.

6. Helicopters—We discussed this thoroughly with Ambassador Martin. In response to our question, he stated his belief that it would help the atmosphere for the request to begin B–52 operations, but would not be essential, to return to Thailand four of the helicopters withdrawn in January and to authorize use of U.S. helicopters for the kinds of training missions envisaged in the original assignment of the 606th ACS to Thailand. He points out that deployment of the four helicopters had in fact been approved prior to, and apart from, subsequent discussions on the loan of the U.S. helicopters during 1966. On this basis, Ambassador Martin believes that the authority suggested would in fact be enormously helpful to the over-all Thai atmosphere. However, he notes that in August 1966 he carried out our instructions to inform the Thai that all the 25 helicopters then loaned would be withdrawn in January 1967, and he notes that he himself has nailed this down publicly in Thailand in January. Thus, while there has been some ill feeling among the Thai on this issue, he concludes that it is not an essential element in any package we may now present.

In sum, the package we recommend would cover points 1–5 above. It does not include the return of the four helicopters or any authorization to employ U.S. helicopters for Thai missions.

II. Formal Agreement for Base Occupancy and Base Land Costs

Status

Going back to 1962, and at an accelerated pace from 1965 onward, we have operated—with full State and DOD concurrence—on the basis of informal oral acceptance by the Thai of our occupancy of bases in Thailand. Similarly, on the land question, we have accepted—again with full concurrence in both Departments—a practice under which the Thai furnished the land where it is already government-owned, but the U.S. pays the cost of land acquisition otherwise.

As a matter of practical fact, U.S. land acquisition for bases was never a major factor in construction costs in Thailand. Further, it now appears to be virtually at an end in terms of any needs presently foreseeable.

In Thailand, the practical fact is that the Thai view their whole base structure as Thai bases available for the use of SEATO members acting in conformity with their SEATO obligations. The Australians and British, for example, occupy Thai bases without formal understandings. In practice, the present arrangements are ideal; we have never had difficulty in getting Thai agreement to our proposed uses, while the lack of any formal understanding has made it equally possible for us to move or withdraw forces without going through further consultations with the Thai.

Nonetheless, the arrangements in Thailand have been less formal than the “life of NATO” agreements in force in Europe and the “term of years” arrangements in some other countries. A more formal arrangement with the Thai would probably not strengthen our tenure of the bases in fact, since this ultimately depends on basic Thai policy and on Thai belief in U.S. policy.

However, the lack of formal arrangements has now become a specific, and we gather acute, problem in Congress. Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler have been attacked on the subject in recent weeks by certain Members of Congress generally critical of our policies in the area, and these Congressmen have been using the issue against us. In view of this congressional factor, there is no doubt that it would be desirable to work out formal arrangements, and we have examined with care how this might be handled.

Possible Form of Understanding and Its Difficulties

The kind of understanding we might seek would be in essence a short piece of paper along the following lines: “The Government of Thailand confirms that the facilities and areas in Thailand currently used by U.S. forces, as well as such additional facilities and areas as may be agreed, will be available to those forces so long as necessary as both parties carry out their responsibilities and obligations under SEATO.”

Such a formula is in effect comparable to the “life of NATO” formula in use in Europe. Its difficulty, in the Thai case, arises from the attitude of Thanat in particular. We have all experienced his intense feeling that we make our SEATO obligation more binding or even bilateral. If we open up this issue with him, it is almost certain in Ambassador Martinʼs judgment that he will press at the very least for a formal reaffirmation of our SEATO obligation in the same document. While we could give him this, we definitely could not go any further.

A second difficulty that might arise would be Thai insistence that, even as we ask their concurrence for the introduction of our forces, so must we also seek their concurrence for the withdrawal of forces from Thailand. The logic is clear, and the practical impossibility of such an undertaking equally so.

Hence, we all agree that any formula that met the need for a formal undertaking might well run into a hornetʼs nest. It would at the very least put additional temporary strain on our relations with Thailand and would take very careful handling. Hence, our basic recommendation is that the issue be deferred in any event until after we have handled the Thai concurrence, which is a matter of operational necessity.

Possible Course of Action

In the light of this analysis, we see three possible courses of action that might be followed once we have obtained the U Tapao concurrence and in the light of further analysis and an assessment of the climate at the time.

a. We might go back to the Hill and explain frankly that we believe a formal understanding is undesirable since it would almost certainly lead to pressures to call for Thai concurrence on withdrawal of our forces. However we decide to move, if the heat is great, mention of these factors should be made in key quarters to explain why we are not able to act at once.

b. We might try to handle the matter in the context of the pending SOFA negotiations. The situation here is that we have tabled Article 10 of the basic SOFA, which would cover land costs, and we have prepared an agreed minute to this article that would cover base occupancy in very downright and possibly unacceptable terms going beyond the form of agreement set forth above. We could theoretically proceed to raise this issue and try to push it to conclusion as part of the SOFA. However, we all agree that it is basically in our interest that the SOFA negotiations be allowed to continue in their present idle state. Hence, we believe that in any circumstances this theoretical option should not be pursued.

c. A separate formal document. This would be along the lines set forth above, but presented separately from the SOFA negotiations. Its major difficulties are made clear above. In addition, we cannot exclude the possibility that it would in fact re-kindle the dormant SOFA negotiations which we wish to see remain dormant. However, it seems to us clear that—if we decide the congressional need is overriding—this is the way to move. If Thanat does insist on our strengthening our SEATO obligation, or on Thai concurrence for withdrawal of our forces, we see no alternative to our standing firm and rejecting these demands even if it means we fail to get the piece of paper.

In sum, our basic recommendation is that we hold on this issue until we have obtained the concurrence on U Tapao, work on the Hill as effectively as we can, and make up our minds in the two weeks-one month it may take to handle the U Tapao matter. If we then feel we have to act, option c seems the right approach.

General Note

In assessing the over-all Thai attitude, it is important to note the Thai decision of late December to send combat forces to Vietnam. Present indications are that the Thai will send a force of 2500 men rather than the 1100 men originally envisaged. This action will require only U.S. equipment support such as was given for the first Korean division, without any additional quid pro quo. It of course represents a major forward step in Thai thinking, and does lie beneath their feeling that they should have some degree of assurance from us as they undertake the U Tapao base agreement. We must reckon that, as a practical matter, both the Thai contribution of forces and the U Tapao agreement are already exposing, and will increasingly expose, the Thai to major propaganda attack by the Communist nations. Hence, their feeling about some degree of advance assurance of future plans is not in the circumstances unreasonable.

Recommendations:

1. That you approve the attached draft telegram of instructions to Ambassador Martin to seek Thai concurrence for B–52 operations from U Tapao.3

2. That we hold on the issue of occupancy of bases and land costs until we have obtained the Thai concurrence on U Tapao.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 THAI–US. Secret. Drafted by Bundy.

2 Attached, but not printed.

3  Rusk approved the draft telegram, which was sent to Bangkok as 145114, February 27. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15 THAI–US)

4  Rusk initialed his approval on February 27. In a February 10 letter to Rusk, McNamara suggested that it was important to obtain more formal arrangements than then existed. McNamara added the following handwritten postscript: “I do not believe we can continue to buy Thai land for our bases. Nor can we continue to operate without written ʼoccupancyʼ agreements.” (Ibid.)

342. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 342. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 22, 1967.

SUBJECT

Thai Bases Announcement

Secretary Rusk wants to add to the luncheon agenda2 the matter of our acknowledgement of the Thai decision to permit U.S. use of the U-Tapao base.

Facts:

The Thai have made the basic announcement this morning; it has moved on all wires and been carried on the radio;

Our announcement would simply be a follow-up acknowledgement; its purpose is mainly to express our gratitude for the cooperation the Thai are offering in the Viet-Nam effort;

The Thai dropped their suggestion that a special Presidential emissary be sent to Bangkok for this purpose on the understanding that the White House would be making a statement after the Thai announcement.

My own feeling is that the U-Tapao decision was not an easy one for the Thai. It is going to open them up to strong attack from the Communists. The kind of warm reception by us of their decision that has been proposed is not out of order. If we handle the matter otherwise, we can expect trouble from Foreign Minister Thanat at the Troop Contributors meeting here next month.

We may want to take another look at the proposed full text. But I see no overwhelming reason for us to back away from the understanding Ambassador Martin reached with the Thai Prime Minister and his Government. I suggest that George Christian make the statement this afternoon along the general lines proposed.3

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VI, Memos, 3/67–8/67. Confidential.

2 Apparently the agenda for the Presidentʼs weekly lunch with Rusk, McNamara, Rostow, and Christian, March 22, 12:43 to 2 p.m. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary) No other record has been found.

3  Rusk, not Christian, made a long and effusive statement on March 22; the text is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 809–810.

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 343. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, March 23, 1967, 1119Z.

12316. For Gaud and Poats.

1. When I testify next month before the HFAC, I fully expect to cover the economic and security justifications of aid from the US—with that from the 18 other contributors to Thailandʼs development. It is important that the US presentations on Thailand should be consistent with the facts—facts which, of course, I will have to lay on the table.

2. I am mildly disturbed by what I have heard in the past week about a DOD paper for unspecified “use on the Hill” which reportedly says that is “no economic justification” for aid to Thailand.2 We gather that AID staff have supported that statement. This is disturbing in its conflict with the facts. I find it doubly disturbing when we also receive requests from Washington questioning the MAP level because of grave questions as to the ability of the Thai budget and economy to bear the burden of the proposed MAP. I just donʼt think you can have it both ways.

3. I plan to make quite clear to the HFAC that the Thai economy is strained in meeting its development and security requirements and that, with our and other help combined with sound Thai management, Thailand can achieve the necessary goals. I shall make clear also that we have, frankly, been fortunate in seeing Thailand put its main emphasis on economic development while doing its utmost on its own “security”. For that matter, economic and social development is demonstrably a vital part of security as we see hour-by-hour in Vietnam. Thailandʼs $125 per capita GNP does not make it easy to sustain the growth rate needed for accelerated development and security. Per capita GNP is less than half what it is in Malaysia and even less than that when compared to Singapore albeit a bit more in India for example. Even in this situation, I would say that the US could relax in its help to Thailand if Thailand were a mid-Pacific island. However, we cannot relax because Thailand is vitally involved in SEA, vitally involved geographically in Thailandʼs as well as US interests in Asia.

4. The key point here, however, is that we have been fortunate in having generally effective policy lines, with determination and pride on the part of the Thai, we have not been forced to pour in vast sums in order to keep Thailand from “going under.” We have not had to justify our programs on the basis of poverty and hopelessness. Rather our aid to Thailand is economically justified as a means of accomplishments which prevent relapse into a US “salvage” aid program. Our aid is justified because of the short time fuse which Communist aggression imposes upon Thai efforts to produce unity and economic stability. Above all, our aid is justified because it has worked. It is one of your real success stories—up to this point.

5. Our relatively small present effort promises to be effective in a classical sense because the Thai are willing and able to make their own great budgetary effort (a record-sized budget with an unprecedented 26 percent deficit this year). They are willing and able to press their effort with deficit finance through the use of their foreign exchange reserves, even though the IBRD is deeply concerned about inflation and too much use of those reserves. They have built reserves by borrowing and attracting investment. They have responded to the call we issue to all US aid recipients—to manage well, to diversify agriculture, to stimulate private initiative, to increase tax revenues to effect some redistribution of income to the farmer, and the like. The vast bulk of second plan development is aimed at the rural areas. The economics of continuing this momentum require and justify US aid.

6. Recently, I heard of an AID/W memorandum3 which commendably noted that Thailandʼs foreign exchange reserves were not the equivalent of budgetary resources. We were amazed, however, to read that there is no economic justification for aid to Thailand and that Thailand has no budgetary problem, because “the Thai Government enjoys an extremely comfortable budgetary cash position” which the memo goes on to describe as Treasury cash balances. Honest to Gaud! I am really tempted to suggest a pre-school seminar in economics. I suppose the IBRD and other able groups have always assumed most elementary economists are aware that cash balances can be built up or erased by simple actions of printing more money or by paying off government debt. If the RTG used its cash balances to redeem an equivalent amount of its debt, would your adviser then say that US aid to Thailand is economically justified? This could easily be done but of course we and the Thai policy makers would oppose such action because of the very inflationary effects which so much concern the IBRD. The simple facts are that while Thai cash balances in 1966 were rising by some 900 million baht (from 2,804 million baht in December 1965); the governmentʼs internal debt rose 2,250 million baht (to a level of 12,263 million baht). It was a calculated counterinflationary step, encouraged by us on the assumption that you had all the inflation you needed or could handle in Vietnam.

7. I would certainly agree that in the words of your adviser, “It is a dilemma.” Listen to him and you can have Vietnam all over again. I would rather not.

8. Quite seriously, we just must quit picking out isolated bits of statistics and spinning conclusions from them. If there are any serious problems in your minds or in DOD about the economic facts, I trust that they will be resolved before my testimony conflicts with yours, since I faithfully promised the Secretary in December I wouldnʼt argue with anybody until May.

Martin

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI. Confidential.

2 Not further identified.

3 Not further identified.

344. Report of the Thai Working Group to the East Asia and Pacific Interdepartmental Regional Group 344. Report of the Thai Working Group to the East Asia and Pacific Interdepartmental Regional Group1

Washington, April 26, 1967.

THE SITUATION IN THAILAND

This report is submitted at this time in order to provide the Interdepartmental Regional Group with the maximum of factual and evaluatory material prior to the Groupʼs meeting with Ambassador Graham Martin, presently scheduled for Thursday, April 27, 1967.2 In preparing it, the Group considered the Missionʼs recent reports of the Thai insurgency problem (Bangkok telegrams 13375 and 13376 of April 16, 1967, and Airgram A–879, April 10, 1967),3 which were circulated to the Group on April 24, and other Mission reporting.

The Insurgency

Evolution of Communist Strategy

When he met with the Special Group CI in January 1965,4 Ambassador Martin noted the increased terrorism and assassination of Thai officials in the Northeast at that time; the establishment of a National Front Organization; Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yiʼs statement to the French Ambassador in Peking that insurgency might break out in Thailand in 1965; and the increased Communist propaganda effort. These, he said, were indicators of “preliminary preparation for an all-out subversive movement in Thailand.”

Subsequent events proved that this was indeed the case. At that time, as Chen Yiʼs statement showed, the Communists sensed impending victory in Vietnam. They were moving to create, from what they hoped would be safehavens in Vietnam and Laos, a “war of national liberation” in Thailand.

The Presidentʼs decision to use American air and ground forces to check the deterioration in Vietnam upset this timetable. Thailand, recognizing that the outcome of the Vietnam struggle is vital to its security, gave the U.S. access to its bases. Our Vietnam strategy has required extensive and increasing use of Thai bases since February 1965.

In the late fall of 1965, both Communist propaganda and intelligence reports indicated a shift in their strategy toward Thailand with a much greater emphasis on terrorism and the creation of other outward manifestations of insurgency, with the greatest emphasis placed on the Lao border area of the Northeast. The decision to make this shift seemed clearly to have been made outside of Thailand, in Peking and Hanoi.

At that time, our assessment of the goals of this strategy, which risked longer-run possibilities of establishing a strong revolutionary base to achieve shorter-term objectives, was as follows: To apply pressure on the Thai Government to induce it to change its policy of close alliance with the United States; to shake U.S. faith in the stability of its ally; to develop a capability of striking at U.S. military installations in Thailand; and to protect the flank of the infiltration route through Laos and to provide an alternative route if necessary. In retrospect, we should have recognized this latter point more clearly than we did, i.e., that the Communists saw this Northeast border area not just in terms of their objectives in Thailand but as an area vital to their objectives in Vietnam.

Their principal weapon has been terrorism and armed propaganda. They have focussed great attention on recruitment of manpower and the establishment of village-based supporting structures. They have formed up in small armed groups in the mountainous, lightly populated areas, moving periodically into villages on the fringes of these areas. Their aim has been to break the links between the Thai Government and these remote but strategic areas and to replace the Governmentʼs authority with their own.

Present Situation

There has been a slow growth in the numbers of armed insurgents in the Northeast. Latest estimates put the figure at about 1300. Probably 25% of them have had guerrilla warfare training in North Vietnam.

Tables and graphs showing certain key statistics relating to the insurgency are attached.5 The key indicators of terrorist activity, i.e., assassinations, ambushes, and incidents of armed propaganda, show no major trends since the last Working Group report was submitted (September 2, 1966). Mr. deSilva appraised this level trend as indicating that the insurgent movement is encountering difficulty in its efforts to recruit or impress an adequate (and necessary) base of collaborators in the populated areas on the fringes of the base areas. He notes other intelligence bears out this view and also the appraisal that the insurgents are concentrating their efforts to consolidate their present organizations, to recruit more manpower, and to create the necessary village-based structures. He concludes that when an insurgent movement has not shown marked gains in resources or impact, this on balance seems favorable. He notes, however, that this does not equate with success, it simply gives further opportunity to persevere with the programs and doctrine which can bring success.

Outlook

The outlook then is for continued Communist pressures, the effect of which will depend on Thai Government countermeasures and developments in the region outside of Thailand. The latter are unlikely to bring significant relief unless truly cataclysmic in nature. Communist Chinaʼs problems appear to have resulted in some falling off in the quality of the propaganda emanating from the “Voice of the Thai People”, a clandestine radio station located near Kunming. There are so far no more notable effects, however. The increasing pressures on the Viet Cong in South Vietnam and along the standard infiltration routes could well result in more Communist focus on the Lao border areas of Northeast Thailand rather than less.

We would thus expect continued intensive Communist pressures in the Northeast, with lower-level efforts at recruitment and training of cadre and some terrorism in the mid-South, North, and other parts of the country. The remnant CTs in the Malaysian border area will continue to be a problem, but are likely to continue their separation from the Communist effort in other parts of Thailand.

Thai Government Countermeasures

In its report of September 2, 1966,6 the Working Group outlined the strengths of the Thai Government and society, the inadequacies in the traditional patterns which had not seemed critical before but which seriously impeded the counterinsurgency effort, and the progress made, especially after the more intensive Communist effort beginning in late 1965, toward correcting these inadequacies. The following up-dates that report without repeating the material contained in it.

Administration and Coordination of Thai Counterinsurgency Effort

The 09–10 Plan—The CSOC/CPM structure described in the earlier report has continued its evolution, showing considerable capacity to adapt its operations in light of experience gained. Its major achievement to date is the integrated 09–10 (i.e. 1966–67) security operation, which was launched on January 15, 1967 with the aim of denying population and resources to insurgents on a continuing basis in eleven key areas in seven CPM provinces selected on the basis of carefully collected intelligence. There are now security forces in position in some 180 villages around the target areas, and civil activities aimed at cementing the allegiance of the village people are underway.

The forces involved include for each village a 12–16 man team made up of Volunteer Defense Corps (villagers) reinforced by Provincial Police (in one province by Army). These in turn are backed up by a strike unit in each target area, usually an infantry platoon but in some cases a Border Patrol Police platoon or a Special Forces Commando unit. In one particularly bad area in Nakhon Phanom Province, a battalion of the 13th RCT (Udorn) has been deployed to provide both the village security and strike forces. Part of its mission will be to organize, train and equip local volunteers.

The pressure which this operation has brought to bear on the terrorists has resulted in a rise in encounters between Thai Government forces and the terrorists and an increase in the intensity of violence. Reports indicate that Communist patterns have been disrupted, especially in two key districts in Nong Khai and Sakhon Nakhon. Incidents of armed propaganda and harassment of security forces have declined in the target area but have increased in adjacent areas. This probably represents a net gain in that it requires the Communists to establish a new infrastructure, but it will also require the Government to extend continuing protection to new areas without again exposing existing 09–10 villages.

There have naturally been weaknesses in the 09–10 operation. Planning on the civil side was at first weak, so that the focus was too much on the insurgent rather than on the villager whose allegiance must be won. Our Mission directed a major effort at this problem and a considerable shift of focus was achieved although, not unexpectedly, the results in individual provinces vary with the quality and energy of the local officials involved.

In exposing this weakness on the civil planning side, the operation has brought a new focus of attention on the need to involve the old-line civilian functional ministries more deeply in the national counterinsurgency effort. But the greatest gain is in the shift away from the old pattern of large-scale, one-time sweeps through infected areas toward the provision of continuous benign government presence and protection.

The Accelerated Rural Development Program—To an increasing degree, the improvements in provincial administration and coordination are taking shape around the ARD. The emphasis on counterinsurgency needs noted in the previous Working Group report has continued, especially the emphasis on service tracks and pioneer roads to reach more villages. Improved planning and coordination of CD, health, agricultural and educational activities is receiving increased emphasis. As noted above, integration of security and developmental activities is at present in large part a function of the individual governors, although a more systematic approach is being pressed by our Mission through ARD programming and planning.

Thai Police

The gains reported in the last Working Group report have been consolidated and extended. The scheduled 6250-man increase in the police by June 1967 will be exceeded by a wide margin at the present rate of training. Of 250 township police stations agreed to, 97 have been completed, 87 are under construction, and contracts have been awarded for the rest. It is the Working Groupʼs view that the rapid completion of these stations and consideration of the further expansion of the program in the most threatened areas of the Northeast should be a first-priority matter.

Intelligence

The Joint Security Centers described in our previous report continue to contribute in a major way to the development, coordination and exploitation of intelligence. Since the previous report was written, a new JSC has been established at Chieng Mai to cover the northern provinces. The Thai are showing greatly increased appreciation that access to intelligence on insurgent activities requires good relations with the people of the villages. This is reflected particularly in programs such as the Border Patrol Police Civic Action Program among hill tribes and in other remote areas and in the Peoplesʼ Assistance Teams and Census Aspiration groups.

Modern interrogation techniques have been adopted and have greatly increased the yield from captives and defectors.

With a great assist from ARPA field unitʼs work with the Thai, modern scientific devices are being brought to bear on problems of detection and interdiction, including the difficult problem of Mekong River patrol.

Armed Forces

The contribution of Royal Thai Army units to the 09–10 Plan has been discussed above. Inclusive of units involved in that Plan two infantry battalions and five infantry companies have been deployed in the field in the CPM area during the period since the last Working Group report. In addition are the Special Forces Teams, the Airborne Company, and the RTAF helicopters regularly assigned to CPM-1.

RTA manning levels rose from 62% to 68% between September 30, 1966 and January 31, 1967, with MAP-supported forces showing a rise from 68% to 74.7% during the same period. Key Project 22 units were near or above the 80% level.

General Praphat has given tacit agreement to greater involvement of Royal Thai Army Forces, under CSOC control, in the task of bringing physical security to more of the villages of critical areas of the Northeast.

Mobility

The provision of additional helicopter lift capability, including pilot and maintenance training, to the armed forces and police remains a matter of the highest priority.

The withdrawal of all U.S. helicopter support for counterinsurgency operations on January 31 of this year had a seriously adverse effect on the ability of the government to respond to the needs of the situation, particularly as it came in the midst of the initiation of 09–10 Plan operations. The Royal Thai Air Force has performed creditably in its attempt to fill the gap, although the bulk of its force is still newly trained.

At present, sixteen helicopters have been deployed to the Northeast. They have flown the gamut of counterinsurgency missions since taking over, including limited night operations. During March 1967 the RTAF flew their H–34s at 28.6 hours per month rate, although only 42 of the 50 they now have were operable. This is an all time high. The five helicopters deployed to CPM-1 at Sakhon Nakhon achieved a utilization rate of over 54 hours per helicopter during February.

Psychological Operations

In addition to the Mobile Information Teams which have become a standard part of the provincial government operations in Thailand, a much greater emphasis on psychological operations is evident. Anti-Red China propaganda is being given heavy play; Vietnamese and Chinese language materials are beginning to be used; the Hanoi-trained Communist insurgents have been effectively exploited; a platoon of the Royal Thai Army Psy Ops Company has been attached to the CSOC, greatly increasing its leaflet and small poster production capability; extensive use is being made of tactical leaflet and airborne loudspeaker techniques; and a “white paper” is under preparation to describe the RTG struggle against Communist infiltration.

Political Development

In addition to the Accelerated Rural Development program, which is directed toward increasing the capacity of provincial governors to plan and execute local development projects, two efforts, the Developing Democracy and Village Leader Training programs, attempt to strengthen governmental institutions at the local level.

Essentially, the Developing Democracy Program is a systematic effort of the Thai Government to train members of councils in selected townships and, upon completion of the five-day training period, to furnish the council with a grant of funds to be used in carrying out rural development activity. Composed of the township chief, headmen and elected representatives of villages within the jurisdiction of the township, a doctor, and a teacher, the township council may achieve juristic status with limited power to levy and disburse taxes. Members of Councils in 61 townships were trained in 1966, the first year of the program, and coverage will be expanded in 1967 to 192 new townships.

The Village Leader Training Program provides similar training to members of the “village committee,” an institution which serves as the focal point for discussion and, hopefully, solution of problems in villages located in areas where a Thai Community Development Department is working. Members of the village committee are the headman, the school-teacher, and between five and nine representatives elected by the villages. If problems identified by the committee cannot be dealt with by the villagers themselves, a request for assistance may be made to the provincial governorʼs office, which has money set aside especially for these requests. Both the Developing Democracy Program and the Village Leader Training Program contain the seeds of ultimate self-government at the local level. In the short run they contribute to the flow of meaningful communication between the government and its rural citizens.

These activities supplement efforts of the Thai Government to increase its effectiveness and responsiveness at the district level by the training of officers at the District Officer Academy.

Village Security

In our previous report, the Working Group noted the launching of pilot projects in this field looking to the establishment of a simple program for an auxiliary to the civil police drawn from the villages. These projects (Volunteer Defense Corps, Village Security Organization, Peoplesʼ Assistance Teams) have gone through many vicissitudes in the ensuing six months. General Praphat has now agreed to the formation of a committee on village security which will develop out of the three pilot programs a unified concept for their operation, strengthen their relationship with the police, and accelerate their recruitment, training and deployment.

U.S. Supporting Role

The programs described are and must continue to be Thai programs. Our contribution of material and technical assistance and training must always be marginal to the total effort—but it remains nonetheless critical to its success.

Our effort has a vital catalytic role, and it gives us a degree of influence over the shape and direction of programs which could mean the difference between success and failure in some cases.

AID

With the shift in Communist strategy in late 1964 and 1965 and the accelerated Thai Government response came an accompanying increase in our AID support to Thailand. From a $12 million total grant program in FY 64 the grant program increased to $19 million in FY 65 and jumped to $43 million in FY 66. Present demands have increased further, with the Mission seeking a total of roughly $50 million for FY 67. Virtually all of the increases are in support of security-related programs.

Of the $36.3 million SA program requested for FY 67, $17 million is for civil police and $14 million for the Accelerated Rural Development program. Current fund availabilities limit the SA program approvals to $25.3 million for the present. AID/W is attempting to secure additional funds to meet the Missionʼs program. The FY 67 TC program, which is approximately $13.2 million, includes a number of activities which bear on the insurgency in the Northeast.

The Missionʼs FY 68 program calls for $49.1 million in grants, including $33.4 million SA.

MAP and U.S. Military Training Assistance

The level for FY 67 and 68 is set at $60 million, and the Thai have been informed of both.

The item content will emphasize to the maximum the counterinsurgency mission, although development of Thai forces toward Project 22 capabilities will also be given a high priority. The latter reflects the continuing Thai concern with potential threats to its security along the Lao border. Evidences of instability or increased Communist activity in Laos are the cause of immediate deep concern in Bangkok. The Thai continue to maintain artillery forces in the Plaine des Jarres area and to supply pilots and aircraft to the Lao Air Force. It has become increasingly clear that when the time comes to reach a settlement of the Vietnam crisis that the Thai will do everything possible to bring about a focus of attention on the Lao situation at the same time to assure that their security is not sacrificed in that direction. All this results in a high degree of continued interest on their part in the joint planning known as Project 22 to meet possible limited conventional threats in the Mekong Valley, and the development of their conventional forces required to permit them to fill the roles under these plans.

The Mission is presently engaged in the development of a five-year program covering the years 69–72. This program involves an effective $60 million level for each year, but in FY 70 there would be a $10 million sales program as part of the $60 million total, and in FY 71 and 72 a $20 million sales component. Thus the Thai budget would be picking up an increasing share of the foreign exchange costs (in addition to all local costs) while maintaining the full momentum of modernization of their forces.

Company D First Special Forces Group, U.S. Army, continued implementing CI training assistance programs for RTAF Special Forces and Thai National Police elements.

The RTA Infantry company CI training program by joint US/RTA Special Forces teams is continuing satisfactorily at Trang, Pak Chong, and Sakhon Nakhon. Six companies have completed the ten-week program, three companies are in the final operational phases, and two companies are in the initial training phases. Eight more companies are scheduled into this training.

A new program is being developed which will provide CI training for an additional 34 rifle companies during the period April–September 1967 in an abbreviated three-week course. Company D is providing assistance, also, in development of the training for the RTA volunteer regiment to South Vietnam.

There are five 606th Air Commando Squadron training teams operating, one at each of the RTAF Tactical Composite Squadrons at Kokethien, Chieng Mai, Ubon, Udorn and with the Transport Squadron at Don Muang. These teams are providing advice and training in CI techniques and tactics.

U.S. Navy Seabees are advising and assisting the Thai Border Patrol Police Construction Teams in the hill tribe areas with the principal objective of winning villager support for the RTG. The Seabees also provide medical aid to the remote villages to foster cooperation of the people with the RTG. This program holds much promise for success in the future.

The Ninth Logistical Command U.S. Army is providing on-the-job training in nineteen subjects for 488 trainees programmed over a 1-year period.

The U.S. Armed Forces have provided a catalytic role in advising and assisting the Thai Government activities in counterinsurgency and have strengthened the relationship between the Thai forces and the local populace in the remote areas.

USIA

Our information programs and capabilities were expanded during the year to reach primary audiences in especially sensitive areas of the Northeast and South with messages on the security and development of Thailand and on the dangers of Communist subversion. In the past year we opened an additional three branch posts, each staffed with an American USIS officer and Thai assistants, giving USIS Thailand eleven outlets throughout the country plus the headquarters in Bangkok. Just last week USIA authorized USIS Thailand to open still another three branches as soon as Bangkok believes the time is propitious; the resources have been set aside by Washington and the personnel to staff the branches are available almost immediately. VOAʼs Project TEAK which will be on the air by Christmas will provide the Thai with a capability to broadcast a stronger signal to their own people and as part of the TEAK agreement, USIA is providing a separate 100 KW transmitter to the Thai Government to reach Northern hill tribes in their own dialects.

Coordination of U.S. Effort

The Mission has continued to focus attention on this field. The assignment of Mr. deSilva, at the request of Ambassador Martin, to what came to be the position of Special Assistant/Counter Insurgency was noted in our previous report. It appears that the position has made progress toward better coordination on the U.S. side, and through its liaison with the CSOC, a more adequate communication with the Thai on counterinsurgency matters.

In Washington, the Working Group has met monthly since its establishment by the Interdepartmental Regional Group to review the Missionʼs periodic reporting on the situation and programs and to assure coordination of the backstopping effort. We will continue this practice, reporting to the IRG every six months or as the situation requires.

Conclusions

Communist pressures on Thailand will continue and may well increase. The Thai response has been encouraging. They have come a long way toward recognizing the need to provide continuous security at the village level and to win the villagersʼ positive support and allegiance. The U.S. Mission deserves considerable credit for this fact.

The achievement of these goals will require continued concentration of Thai Government effort. At the present level of support of the insurgency by Peking and Hanoi, the Thai will not need direct U.S. involvement, although our continued assistance will be required. Success of the effort is critical to U.S. interests in Asia. We will need great flexibility in programming in order to meet possible shifts in Communist strategy and to support new programs developed from experience such as that gained in the implementation of the 09–10 Plan. Priority for the Thai counterinsurgency programs and related activities should continue to be given, but after Vietnam in allocating assets of men, money and materiel, as directed by the Special Group (CI) on January 25, 1966.

For the Thai Working Group:
Laurence G. Pickering

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–1 THAI. Secret. This report was passed to the Australian and New Zealand Governments on May 13. In an attached memorandum to Rusk suggesting this action, also May 13, Bundy noted that, “This was regarded by all IRG members and by Ambassador Martin as a good report.” Bundy noted that by providing an “unaltered document originally designed for our internal use” the United States would be demonstrating its openness to the Australians and New Zealanders.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

3 None printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–7 THAI and POL 23–1 THAI)

4 See Document 286.

5 Attached, but not printed.

6 Not found.

345. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) 345. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud)1

Washington, May 31, 1967.

SUBJECT

Supporting Assistance Level for Thailand

Your memorandum of May 192 noted that you have now approved a Supporting Assistance Level of $25.3 million for Thailand and that the U.S. Ambassador and AID Mission in Bangkok have urgently and consistently recommended an additional $11 million. You ask for guidance and instructions as to whether it is necessary on political/security grounds to grant the additional $11 million, which you argue the Thai could finance on their own.

I do believe that the additional $11 million is required on political/security grounds. Despite the favorable elements to which you refer in the Thai financial situation, I believe it is simply not realistic or politically feasible to ask the Thai to pick up this clearly needed amount in the necessary time frame. We have to reckon that the favorable Thai economic and financial situation, on an over-all basis, is balanced against counter-insurgency requirements which must at this moment have a considerable claim for priority attention on their financial resources. We must further reckon that Thailand remains under a serious threat of more direct aggression, so that the maintenance of some financial cushion is desirable from that standpoint in the interests of confidence. Finally, there is the element of the Thai contribution to the Viet-Nam conflict in the form of bases and most recently a battalion; I mention these not because our supporting assistance should in any sense be considered a quid pro quo—being rather determined by clear and largely insurgency-related needs—but because it accentuates the practical judgment that Thailand needs some leeway before it can expect to pick up additional costs related to the insurgency, to the degree that we would all agree was financially theoretically possible.

Let me say that I accept the clear implication of your memorandum that we should be moving the Thai to pick up a greater proportion of these costs, and we shall certainly be doing so in the coming year.

As you know, the Mission requested some $35 million in SA in its original FY-1967 program nearly a year ago, and it has consistently maintained that a program of this size was needed. The $25.3 million figure represented, not a field submission but a Washington allocation of then-available funds. I do not believe we should get into the position, either to ourselves or before the Congress, that the $25.3 million and the $11 million have separate justifications—that one is “economic” and the other “political/security”. The total program was framed in accordance with the Missionʼs assessment of valid needs in order to achieve U.S. objectives in Thailand. In looking at the $11 million, we have concluded that the Thai could in theory finance it but that, for political and security reasons already noted, they cannot practicably be asked to take the necessary measures in this time frame. In a sense, our present reading of the Thai financial and political picture might in theory lead to an argument that some part, or even all, of the total $36.3 million program could be borne by the Thai. Regardless of where one might draw the line, the fact is that our over-all basis for the entire program is the economic, and particularly the insurgency-related, need of Thailand, and an over-all judgment that this is a fair contribution by the U.S. in light of all factors with stress on those of a political and security nature.

I trust that this gives you the guidance and comment that will enable you to go forward at once with the necessary actions.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 10 THAI. Confidential. Drafted by Bundy.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

346. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Hoopes) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 346. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Hoopes) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, June 10, 1967.

I–23519/67

SUBJECT

Status Report on SOFA Negotiations with Thailand

All US used military bases in Thailand are the property and under the command of the Royal Thai Government (RTG). US use of these facilities, including those constructed solely with US funds, is not covered by written agreements. Ambassador Martin has stated that, “there are no specific oral agreements (covering US use of Thai bases) other than the repeated assurances that the facilities now being used will continue to be made available for the duration of the necessity of both countries to carry out their obligations under the SEATO Treaty.” US operations from these bases technically require RTG clearance.

These arrangements have been operationally satisfactory: The Thai have permitted the staging of required missions from Thai bases, and they have permitted the construction of necessary facilities in Thailand.

You will recall that on several occasions individual Congressmen have questioned the wisdom of spending US funds on facilities in Thailand without having a written agreement regarding our rights to use these bases. With this in mind, we suggested to State that letters be exchanged between the USG and the RTG which would say that the US-used facilities in Thailand “would be available to our forces so long as both parties consider it necessary for the discharge of their responsibilities and obligations under SEATO.”

It is Stateʼs judgment (Bundy and Martin) that requesting such a written exchange might well create more problems than it would solve. They note that Foreign Minister Thanat seeks every opportunity to question our commitment to Thailand and to press his government into demanding a bilateral defense agreement with us, that he almost succeeded in this effort at the time of the B–52 request, and that he almost certainly would use a request for such an exchange of letters as an opportunity for taking up his fight once again. Moreover, State points out that there are base rights provisions in the draft SOFA now being negotiated with the Thai.

It is our judgment that these SOFA negotiations will continue for many months. We would actually prefer to let the negotiations drift because (1) if either side pressed for a near-term conclusion, negotiations might become sufficiently heated to disrupt our existing relationship, (2) present informal arrangements on the status and treatment of our forces in Thailand are satisfactory and (3) a formal SOFA might, unless we are highly successful in the negotiations, involve provisions that would cause Korea, Taiwan, or the Philippines to seek review of our arrangements with them. Since negotiations will probably continue for many months (and, indeed, may never be concluded), it will be possible for the foreseeable future to answer questions regarding US rights to bases in Thailand by stating that these and other rights of US forces in Thailand are under negotiation with the RTG.

We have talked to LA (Mr. Shumate and Colonel Outlaw), and it is their judgment that the majority of the Congress are not disturbed by the absence of formal base rights in Thailand (or in Vietnam) and that, while criticism from individual Congressmen is always possible, there probably will not arise from Congress as a whole, or its various committees, concerted pressure to conclude either a SOFA or a separate base rights agreement with the Thai.

Accordingly, I believe that we should not press further on the exchange of letters idea, and that we should continue to permit the SOFA negotiations to follow the course set by the Thai.2

Townsend Hoopes

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 323.3. Secret.

2  McNamara approved on June 13, but added the following handwritten postscript: “but I can not approve further facilities (land purchase or real property improvements) programs in Thailand w/o written agreement providing the US the right of occupancy for reasonable periods. RMcN.”

347. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 347. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Katzenbach to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 23, 1967.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the King of Thailand

We hope through this meeting to strengthen Thai conviction of our determination to see a just and stable peace established in Southeast Asia; to demonstrate our gratitude for Thai support of Free World interests in Southeast Asia; and to show our respect for and appreciation of the important role of the Monarchy in Thailand.

All of these objectives can be most effectively furthered through your direct communication with the King, who has many times reiterated (including during the present visit to the United States), his great personal respect and admiration for you as a man who understands well the problems of Asia and the sensitivities of Asians. The King has but a limited role in the government. However, his prestige, as a Monarch of a long and proud dynasty in a country where the Monarch is deeply revered and as a person highly admired for his exemplary personal life, makes him a significant political force. He frequently exerts a useful behind-the-scenes influence on events in Thailand. Finally, he can communicate perhaps more effectively than any other person with the people of Thailand.

Your sensitivity during your recent visit to Thailand in conveying your desire for a Thai troop contribution in Vietnam without making a direct request was greatly appreciated by the King and strengthened his ability to influence the decision of the Thai Government to contribute troops. Your personal emphasis of the following points, using the same low-key technique so effectively employed during your visit, would contribute greatly to the achievement of your objectives: A. The United States will persist in Vietnam until we are sure that South Vietnam is safe from aggression.

B. Our defense commitment to Thailand through SEATO is clear—and America keeps its commitments.

C. We deeply appreciate the contribution being made by Thai fighting men in Vietnam (where a volunteer regiment is soon to join the small Naval and Air units already there) and Laos (where clandestine support of the Lao forces through provision of pilots and artillerymen has contributed immeasurably to stabilizing the military situation). This is in keeping with the tradition of the Thai forces who fought in Korea, and is another illustration of Thai acceptance of responsibilities as well as the benefits of collective security.

D. The provision of access to Thai bases to our armed forces is in itself an invaluable contribution to our joint war effort.

E. We want to express our heartfelt thanks for the hospitality accorded the some 40,000 American servicemen now in Thailand. We know that our soldiers have customs that are different from those of the Thai. We know that our ways must sometimes seem strange to the Thai. But the Thai people have received our men with understanding and tolerance and grace, and the American people are grateful.

F. We are greatly impressed and encouraged by the magnificent over-all performance of the Thai economy, by the governmentʼs vigorous efforts to extend the benefits of economic and social development to the less developed areas of the country, and by Thailandʼs leadership in developing Asian regional cooperation.

G. We are encouraged by Thai actions to oppose Communist attempts to create insurgency in the Northeast. We will continue our unstinting support of these actions.

H. We are deeply conscious of and appreciative of the Kingʼs leadership in every field of life in Thailand.

You will also wish to reiterate your thanks for the reception which Their Majesties and the Thai people accorded you and Mrs. Johnson in Bangkok in October, 1966.

I enclose additional points which the King may raise together with suggested replies.2

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret. There is no indication of a drafting officer on this memorandum. Pickering drafted a covering memorandum to Rusk recommending that he sign the memorandum to the President. King Bhumibol Adulyadej made a State visit to Washington, June 27–29.

2 Attached, but not printed.

348. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and the King of Thailand 348. Memorandum of Conversation Between President Johnson and the King of Thailand

Washington, June 27, 1967.

[Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VI, Memos, 3/67–8/67. Secret. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

349. Memorandum From the Chief of Protocol of the Department of State (Symington) to President Johnson 349. Memorandum From the Chief of Protocol of the Department of State (Symington) to President Johnson

Washington, June 29, 1967.

[Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VI, Memos, 3/67–8/67. Confidential. 3 pages of source text not declassified.]

350. Editorial Note 350. Editorial Note

At President Johnsonʼs instruction, General Maxwell Taylor and Clark M. Clifford, both advisers to the President, undertook a mission to meet with the heads of government of the Republic of Vietnam, Thailand, New Zealand, and Korea to exchange views on the war in South Vietnam and to stress the need for greater allied effort, especially in contributions of allied ground forces. The mission lasted from July 22 to August 5, 1967. In an August 5 report to the President, Clifford and Taylor stated that they urged the Thais to add 10,000 men to their present commitment of 2,500. Cliffordʼs and Taylorʼs impression was that if the Thais were given time to raise these troops without disrupting other units in the army charged with the defense of Thailand, they would provide the additional 10,000 troops. Clifford and Taylor indicated that the Thai forces should receive the same kind of U.S. support already afforded Republic of Korea troops in South Vietnam to avoid a double standard. The full report is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (1), Allies: Troop Commitments. It is scheduled for publication in part in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume V.

351. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Coordination (Trueheart) to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) 351. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Coordination (Trueheart) to the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes)1

Washington, August 14, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundyʼs Meeting with Mr. Smith, August 10, 19672

PARTICIPANTS

Messrs. Bundy, Berger, and Habib for EA; [names not declassified]; Mr. Stuart for INR/DDC; and Mr. Underhill of EA for Indonesia item

Thailand

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reported briefly on the situation in northeastern Thailand, pointing out that the Thais were moving in the right direction, although perhaps not as fast as we would like. In order for us to encourage an expanded effort we would have to continue to cajole and exhort. Mr. Berger said that he had lunch with General Stilwell and the general felt that the Thai were not putting out enough effort and that they would probably fail to strengthen the governmentʼs position in the northeast in time to prevent successful Communist subversion. This view seemed quite different from [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Could [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] account for it?

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Gen. Stilwell, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the Embassy in the person of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had access to the same facts. The general tended to take a somewhat more pessimistic view because he reflected in part the pique of some of the top-ranking Thai military at having to turn over command of some of their troops to the joint Thai organization prosecuting the effort in the northeast. Gen. Stilwell also tended to believe that not enough pressure was being applied to the Thai. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] implied that he, and the Ambassador, believed that the Thai could not be driven, but must be coaxed to act in their own best interests.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that he felt that the situation in southern Thailand, along the Thai-Malaysian border was becoming critical. The Communists were telling the Thai that they were interested in going south, not north, and that they would not act against Thailand if they were left alone. There had never been any real Thai cooperation with the Malaysians. Only police were used by the Thai in the so-called joint Thai-Malaysian operations, and the Communists were always tipped-off before a drive. There was evidence, too, that some of the Thai military were selling arms to the Communists.

Mr. Bundy then asked [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for his forecast on the promulgation of a constitution and the holding of elections. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that Pote, Thanom, and Sawang were all of the firm opinion that a constitution would be adopted before the end of the year, and that elections would probably be held in late 1968. Mr. Bundy then asked if Ambassador Unger had been briefed on the 303 Committee authorization [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to provide support for the organization of political parties. Mr. Stuart replied that he had not because of his illness, but that on his return to duty both he and the new country director would be provided with the proposal and the minutes of the Committee. Mr. Bundy then said he would like to review the matter and might mention it to Ambassador Kohler. Mr. Stuart said he would prepare a briefing file on the proposal and authorization.

In the ensuing discussion it became clear that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] did not favor the proposal. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] no money had passed and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had not spoken to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] about it. He said, however, that the Ambassador had made a commitment to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], but speculated that no specific amount of money had been mentioned. (The authorization is for an amount up to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].)

Mr. Stuart reminded Mr. Bundy that Ambassador Martin had inspired the proposal and that Mr. Helms had presented it to the 303 Committee without arguing for it. However, Ambassador Martin, who had been present, had pushed for approval. The 303 Committee had apparently had some doubts about it, for it had gone to Higher Authority, where it had finally been approved.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, 1966–1967. Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent to Deputy Director George C. Denny, Jr. and Deputy Director for Research Allan Evans.

2 Agenda at Tab A. [Footnote in the source text. Tab A was not attached.]

352. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailandʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency (de Silva) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 352. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailandʼs Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency (de Silva) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Bangkok, August 18, 1967.

Dear Bill:

On the eve of Grahamʼs departure and Lenʼs arrival, I should like to make a few observations relating to the tasks I have been carrying out over the past 11 months.

I am more than ever convinced that the approach we are using here is the right one. The approach: to appoint a State Department officer to an Embassy position senior in rank to the heads of all other U.S. Diplomatic Mission elements, and to charge this person with the responsibility of carrying out successful counterinsurgency doctrine, to require support of and adherence to that doctrine, and to encourage, cajole, or otherwise cause the appropriate Thai authorities to adopt and follow the same doctrine through tactics and procedures in harmony with the Thai environment. Graham has gone to great lengths to arm me with his authority over all U.S. counterinsurgency activities, and has ranked me, in terms of protocol, above the other elements of the mission, including our military establishment here. This has proved itself very correct, and absolutely necessary. This kind of job could not have been seriously attempted, let alone accomplished, from any lesser stance.

We like to think ourselves, as a government, as being flexible, quick to respond, and wizards in the fields of organization and coordination of various efforts. I can tell you with assurance that, in the field of counterinsurgency work, this is simply untrue. Institutional jealousy, reluctance or even refusal to modify or depart from programs which are no longer relevant or which have been overtaken by hostile developments—these are only a few of the kinds of problems we face in trying to develop the light-footed and nimble ability quickly to divert resources or to shift priorities, as is required to deal effectively with a fast moving and rapidly changing insurgent movement. I think Graham has done a masterful job in shaping and molding the resources he had to deal with and priorities facing him. I like to think that, using the authority he vested in me, that I have been able further to bring internal flexibility to our use of resources in support of counterinsurgency efforts. This is a constant battle, however, one that is never won, and one which requires the knocking of American heads and generally just being unpleasant from time to time. In this field, believe me, we donʼt coordinate or cooperate instinctly or easily. I am not referring to individual personalities, but simply to the parochial natures of the bureaucracies involved.

To this general observation I shall add one in particular: the presence and conduct of Stilwell was more than a burden, it was a deliberate and positive danger to achieving our objectives. He is a walking disaster, and I hope he never gets near to a policy or political role again.

To sum up this point, itʼs clear that a senior point of concentrated authority, (a civilian and probably a State Department officer) needs to be put in charge of the American aspects of this kind of problem, not simply to adjudicate differences of opinion or interdepartmental problems, but to dominate and lead the composite effort, in a coordinated and cohesive way. I think it understandable that an ambassador himself, or his DCM, are probably not able to give this matter the kind of concentrated attention it requires; hence, a senior counselor or even a minister-counselor.

In this connection, Mac Godley made an interesting observation during his stay here as head of the Inspectorsʼ group. He recognized and endorsed the need for a senior person to perform this function, but despaired of ever getting the few qualified senior FSOs who might be available to accept such an assignment in times to come. His remark was: “FSOs of that caliber and seniority simply want to become ambassadors, and they wonʼt allow themselves to be diverted to a specialization such as this, however important.” He may be right, but if he is I think that we, all of us, are in trouble. I am ever more convinced that a civilian must sit at the head of the American counterinsurgency table, and in my opinion that civilian should come from the State Department. He must exercise control and direction, and be able to dispose of resources as among independent departments, establish or change priorities, influence or change on-going programs, and impose criteria and doctrine on the other elements of the diplomatic mission, military and civil alike. I am plagued by the conviction that had we established such relationships in Vietnam several years ago we would have had the chance of coming successfully to grip with the basic challenges of “peoplesʼ war” without having to go the military route in order to deal with a civilian rural problem that was ignored and allowed to get out of hand and become a full scale war. Key to this is that civil control and seniority over our military structure be established early, firmly, and without equivocation. This requires a strong ambassador who understands the problem, as Graham has, and a Department of State that is, in its turn, prepared and indeed determined in all ways to sit at the head of the counterinsurgency table at the Washington end, and to require and supervise the supporting roles to be played by the other agencies and departments, military and civil alike.

I think we have made much progress out here. We have defined and enunciated concept, doctrine and tactics. We have, in the American community, established a common understanding and acceptance of objectives and the basic means of getting to those objectives. We have also been able to bring about an adequate but broadening understanding and acceptance by our Thai colleagues of the essential tasks of counterinsurgency, and the detailed ways in which these tasks must be advanced. Both of these are significant accomplishments, essential to Thai success in dealing with their problem. I might add that they could not have been accomplished except for the support, understanding and indeed insistence that Graham has lavished on the effort. In my opinion, we have come to the point now where the Thai will really be able to get their arms around this insurgency, and contain it, even compress it. And thatʼs what our purpose here has been. There has been demonstrable progress in this direction in recent months; I believe the next six months will continue in the same favorable direction.

As you know, I wish to leave here by next May at the latest, and believe I can do so in good conscience, considering the reasons why I came here in the first place. Of course, matters here may develop in such a way as to make an earlier departure appropriate. I would be quite agreeable with this. I would imagine that early talks with Len will have a bearing on this, depending on how he wishes to dispose his mission, and the ways in which he wishes to approach the matters I have discussed in this letter. I remember our luncheon conversation just before I left Washington, at which you speculated even then that Len might indeed become Grahamʼs successor in 1967. You also remarked that we could review my status at that time, in terms of staying on or returning to my original organization. I assume this understanding still obtains.

I donʼt think that Graham necessarily agrees with everything I have said in this letter, but I donʼt believe that he would disagree strongly with the major outlines of it. He has of course seen the letter. In any event I offer it to you for whatever interest or value it may have.

Best regards.

Peer

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadorʼs Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret; Official-Informal.

353. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 353. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 12, 1967.

SUBJECT

Possible government shuffle in Thailand

General Praphat, Thailandʼs Deputy Prime Minister, is planning to push Prime Minister Thanom out of office and place himself at the head of the Thai government. The current rumor is that Praphat will move against Thanom shortly after the Thai constitution is promulgated on December 5.

Praphat is the “boodle boy” of Thai politics and his assumption of the leadership would probably involve corruption in Thailand on a scale not seen in recent years. Its effect upon constitutional development is uncertain, but Praphat is no friend of representative institutions and would surely go as slowly as he could, even if he found it impolitic to bring the movement toward constitutionalism to a total halt. On the other hand, Praphat is an able administrator and would certainly continue Thailandʼs military cooperation with us, albeit on a more hard-eyed, tit-for-tat, basis. Praphatʼs assumption of power would be unpopular with the international press and we would undoubtedly be criticized for supporting “another corrupt military dictator.”

It is by no means certain that Praphat can win the highest job, although he seems already to have organized some impressive supporters. Ambassador Graham Martin thinks the game is still in play and believes we should operate discreetly to discourage Praphatʼs efforts. As Martin sees it, this can be done through: 1. An October invitation to Thanom to pay a state visit to you in the spring of 1968.

2. Notably favorable treatment of Praphatʼs number one opponent, Minister of National Development Pote Sarasin, during Poteʼs October visit to Washington.

3. Prompt approval by Washington of an incoming package of assistance to Thailand keyed to their additional troop contribution in Viet-Nam.

4. In general, a more forthcoming and generous response to Thailandʼs military assistance requirements.

The first two of Martinʼs proposed courses of action seem to me relatively painless and I think we should go along with them. We will also make sure that the support package for additional troops is acted on promptly. As to military assistance in general, Thailand should continue to enjoy a priority claim, but specific action will have to await the details of Thai desires measured against what we have available.

Walt

Action:2 1. Invite Thanom

2. Arrange White House call for Pot.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, Folder 4. Secret. On another copy of this memorandum there is note that it was sent to the President on September 14 at 8:45 a.m. (Ibid., National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Memos, 8/67–7/68)

2 The following note appears on the source text: “Have meeting on this subject in the morning, Rusk, McNamara, Rostow.” The meeting took place at 7:27 p.m. on September 15, see Documents 357 and 358.

354. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 354. Memorandum From the Ambassador-Designate to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 12, 1967.

SUBJECT

Financial Implications of Thai Force Contributions to Vietnam

1. Virtually all of the significant financial arrangements have been made with respect to the current Thai contribution of 2300 troops to Vietnam and no serious problems are foreseen in this regard. I do however foresee a serious problem arising if it turns out to be possible to arrange for the considerably larger Thai contribution—say 10,000 troops—which we hope Thailand will agree to send. If the pattern for the current contingent were repeated on the larger scale, the Thai budget, because of Thai Army regulations concerning allowances, would be faced with an annual charge of something in the neighborhood of $20 million additional expenditures, something like 1/8th of the present defense budget, solely to pay the overseas allowances for 10,000 troops at the present rates.

2. This problem takes on even more serious implications when we note the current shortage of non-commissioned officers and company grade officers in the Thai forces. The raising of a further Vietnam contribution will probably accentuate this shortage since officers in these categories will be drained away to form new units. Furthermore, it is officers in these categories who are most essential to the mounting of counterinsurgency actions by small, flexible and mobile units of the Royal Thai Army. According to MACTHAI, the principal reason for this shortage of officers in these categories has been the dearth of defense funds in the budget and an additional drain of $20 million equivalent will make it even more difficult to maintain forces even at their present strength and quality to say nothing of making up the shortages mentioned.

3. At the same time, it is generally accepted that pay rates for the Thai Army are much too low to attract the numbers and quality of personnel required. The defense portion of the Thai budget is expected to increase modestly in Fiscal Year 1968, and will include provision for some increase in RTA pay rates, but it is not known how helpful this will be in attracting and holding NCOs and junior officers.

4. All of these problems obviously closely relate to each other and any U.S. position in this regard should be worked out taking them all into account so that at least a tentative judgment is reached as to whether or how we should try, for example, to persuade the Thai to substitute a general pay raise or a pay raise in certain categories, as at least a partial substitute for the overseas allowances. It also may be that the overseas allowances could be met in part by provision of goods or services in kind and that some of the expenses could be met in Vietnam by the United States. These considerations also are almost sure to bear on the questions which we anticipate the Thai will shortly be raising with us about the reforming and expansion of Thai forces related to their sending out a larger contingent to Vietnam.

5. I will ask for a staff study on this matter immediately upon my arrival in Bangkok, and would appreciate it if the findings of such a study could then be given prompt attention in Washington to see whether any relief to this situation could or should be provided out of U.S. funds. I am not at the moment asking for any action here, but would like to alert the State and Defense staffs to this problem so that it can receive prompt attention as soon as field recommendations are received.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret.

355. Memorandum of Conversation 355. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 14, 1967.

PARTICIPANTS

General Maxwell D. Taylor

Ambassador Leonard Unger

Mr. Moncrieff J. Spear

1. Thai Troop Contribution

Referring to the number of Thai troops, General Taylor noted that we would be disappointed if the additional tranche were not at least at the level of the present 2300-man unit in Vietnam and noted that the 10,000 had been an asking figure. He observed that in the discussions that he and Mr. Clifford had had in Bangkok,2 the Thai stressed their internal security requirements and said that at the United Statesʼ advice, they had been deploying additional forces to the Northeast to cope with the insurgency. They asked whether in the current discussions the U.S. was now changing its advice to them.

In response General Taylor said that he and Mr. Clifford had pointed out that while the additional Thai, Korean, and other Asian troops would not make a significant difference per se in the military situation, politically they were important because they would enable the United States to add several times the number of Asian forces to the effort in Vietnam.

General Taylor also observed that the Thai were a pleasant people to deal with, ones with whom we could work effectively and that the development of their country was very encouraging.

2. Vietnam Assessment

Ambassador Unger said that he was sure the Thai leaders would be asking him of our assessment of Vietnam, and he asked what he could tell them based on General Taylorʼs observations.

General Taylor cited the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese losses which were now running at about 1000 a week—twice the rate of a year ago. He noted that the air war in North Vietnam ties up enormous North Vietnamese resources. In South Vietnam, he also noted the increased political stability, commenting that during the time he had been Ambassador he had had to deal with five Prime Ministers in one year. Thus, everywhere along the line we are ahead of our position of a year ago. As to how long it would go until the end, Heaven only knew and he, General Taylor, wasnʼt about to venture predictions.

In conclusion, General Taylor wished Ambassador Unger the very best of luck in his important new assignment.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Spear.

2 See Document 350.

3  Unger presented his credentials as U.S. Ambassador to Thailand on October 4, 1967.

356. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 356. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Present Issues Concerning Thailand: Meeting With the President at 1900 this Evening

I understand that the President has asked to meet with you, Secretary McNamara, and Mr. Rostow to discuss four issues concerning Thailand: a. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Praphat, possibly in conjunction with Dawee, may be planning to oust Thanom just before or after a new Constitution is announced, which is expected to be December 5. As these reports run, the ouster would be through pressure and in the nature of a back-stage action rather than an overt military coup—but the latter is plainly not excluded (Tab A).2

b. Martinʼs suggestion that, as one measure to head this off, we urgently consider an early invitation to Thanom—extended within the next month—to make an official visit here early in 1968.

c. A lesser but related action—that the President personally see Thanat and Pote together when they are both here early in October. This happens to be exactly what he did last year, but the call relates to the broader picture in that it would tend to strengthen the hand of these two civilians, of whom Pote in particular is a target of possible Praphat action.

d. The broader issue of our support to the Thai military, and our role in counterinsurgency. This is not mentioned [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] as one of the issues that is driving Praphat to possible action, but Martin believes that forthcoming action on the military side could have a stabilizing effect politically, as well as being justified in itself. Martin is not suggesting any change in our role with respect to counterinsurgency. His pitch is wholly in terms of meeting the $60 million MAP level we have already given the Thai for planning purposes this year, and being prepared with additional equipment when and if the Thai agree to send additional forces to Vietnam.

In addition, there is a sensitive fifth issue, which I have covered in a separate memorandum to you (Tab B).3 This, too, has a direct relation to Praphatʼs action, although I think the basic arguments for sticking with the action we have taken are sound in any event—as I have argued in the separate memorandum.

Further detail on the relevant issues is:

Praphat Plot

Martin has given us a lengthy evaluation,4 which we attach [1 line of source text not declassified] (Tab A). The gist is that Praphatʼs designs are plausible, but quite possibly not nearly so clear and firm as the reports, taken alone, would suggest. Martinʼs evaluation—which we share—is that Praphat taking power would be a serious blow to the possibilities of a Constitution and elections. I would myself add—in far stronger terms—that Praphatʼs general image and the picture of a true “military dictatorship” in Thailand could have an extremely serious, even disastrous, effect on the basic image of our policy in Thailand, with side effects in Vietnam.

In short, we all agree strongly that we should take those reasonable actions that will minimize the possibility of Praphat going through with it, or indeed even attempting it. One is reminded of the adage: “The watched coup never boils.” But nonetheless it is all too clear that Praphat has a considerable power base and that he and Dawee could pull this one off.

Thanom Visit

We have long had a Thanom visit in mind in any event, and did not include it in our 1967 recommendations largely because the King was here in June. Moreover, the President saw Thanom at Manila and may see him again if there is another summit in late November. And of course the President visited Thailand last year.

Nonetheless, we do now believe that this additional Praphat factor tips the scales heavily in the direction of the early invitation that Martin recommends. It is of course clear that the President will be cutting back his official schedule of visitors by spring, and we therefore suggest a date in late February or March, which happens to coincide with a possible Michigan State degree for Thanom. The important point—and our recommendation—is that the President agree now to extend an invitation to Thanom. In a dignity-conscious society such as Thailand, the mere fact of this invitation could have a tremendous stabilizing effect and it is not at all out of line with our relations with Thailand, and its general priority, for the President to extend such an invitation.

We anticipate that the Constitution will be announced in December, and this would mean that national elections would be scheduled in Thailand probably for next October. Thanom would be the government candidate if all has stayed level, and there is therefore the question whether a visit by him would be taken as intervention and an endorsement. In a February/March time frame, we do not believe this would be the case, or that this constitutes a negative factor in any way. On the contrary, the visit could be played in the direction of our close relations with Thailand, with stress on the fact that they had announced a Constitution (under Thanom) and were moving toward elections—a process we could heartily endorse without appearing to favor Thanom unduly.

Call on the President by Pote and Thanat

This seems to us fairly straightforward. He saw them both last year for the same reasons and at the same time. The call was brief, but it gave them excellent exposure to the press as they left the White House, and I do not believe it was a serious burden on the President. In relation to the Praphat matter, the point is that the reports make clear that Pote is a major target on the grounds that he has been “ineffective”. Our own beliefs are exactly to the contrary, and we believe the fact is that Pote is being attacked as a powerful civilian and as a symbol of the growing civilian influence that should attend the whole process of a Constitution and elections. Pote is also a symbol against corruption, which he has done a great deal to reduce—to the point where it is now at tolerable levels in key areas of government, with the conspicuous exception of Praphat himself.

Military Assistance

As noted above, Praphatʼs grounds for action—as reported—do not include this factor. Nonetheless, we would agree with Martin that it is important to the position of the Thanom government that we fulfill the $60 million military assistance level for this fiscal year which Martin, with full authority, revealed to the Thai as a planning figure in February. As John McNaughton certainly understood, and I believe Secretary McNamara accepts, this “planning figure” was at least three-fourths of the way to a flat commitment. Since Thai MAP is now service-funded, fund availability is not affected by MAP cuts. We do not suggest that Unger make any strong noises on his immediate arrival, as we still have some leverage we may wish to use with the Thai military establishment. But we should understand in our minds that we are going to keep to the $60 million level, and we need Ungerʼs advice on just how firm and final to make it, and how soon.

The second military assistance issue relates to the possibility of additional Thai forces. Within the past two weeks, Thanom has given Martin a lengthy bill of particulars, which we have not studied. No decision is therefore possible at this time, and the most we can suggest is that we should be prepared—along the lines of the Presidentʼs conversation with the King—to make a few additions to the program in key areas related to the counterinsurgency problem. There are other serious issues concerning an additional Thai contingent—including the problem of overseas allowances and their heavy budgetary cost—but these, too, are not ripe for present decision. Finally, the Thai may be asking us to help train and equip additional forces if they send an additional contingent to Vietnam. This is an issue we have played very cautiously, and must continue to do so until we have assessed the total picture, including the size of the additional contingent they propose. In short, there are serious potential issues in this area: we should not dig ourselves in on them, but should try to work them out over the next two months into a total sensible deal.

Finally, nothing in the Praphat reports or any of the rest of this need affect our policy view of our role in counterinsurgency. Agreed DoD/State instructions were recently completed that permit the continued highly selective use of US air transport to carry Thai officials about and otherwise support non-combat operations. The instructions look to the phasing down of even this very modest form of direct support. There is general agreement that we must play this in the same key as at present, with any exception being considered on a case-by-case basis. We also agree that Unger should be looking to the possibility of reducing our role as the level of the insurgency and the growth in Thai capabilities permit, and we believe this should be left to careful review as he appraises the situation.

Recommendation

We recommend that you take positions in line with the above. Unger leaves early next week. He has seen and concurred in this memorandum.

WPB

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, Lotus File, 1968–1969. Secret; Exdis.1

2 Not attached nor found.

3 Not found. Presumably it recounts the 1965 decision, which was never acted upon, to grant [text not declassified] to help create a Thai Government political party.

4 Telegram 2794 from Bangkok, September 6. (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, Lotus File, 1968–1969)

357. Memorandum for the Record 357. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, September 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bundyʼs Memorandum to the Secretary of September 15, 1967 re Present Issues Concerning Thailand2

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary of State Rusk

Secretary of Defense McNamara

Mr. Walt W. Rostow

Ambassador Leonard Unger

Secretary Rusk proposed to the President that Prime Minister Thanom be invited to visit the United States early next Spring. The President spoke well of Thanom and indicated his agreement to a visit. There was some discussion of when such a visit should be publicly announced and this brought out the relation of such a visit to the current reports of Praphatʼs intention to carry out a coup or a government reshuffle which would put him into the Prime Ministerʼs post. It was agreed that the latter part of October or early November might be the best time for such a public announcement and it was understood that some time prior to that Ambassador Unger would mention the invitation to Prime Minister Thanom.

There was some further discussion of the possibility of a coup and the judgment presented to the President was that it was in our interests to have the Thanom government continue until after the Constitution has been promulgated and elections held. In addition to the suggestions Ambassador Martin had made to try to head off a coup it was also suggested that something might be said discreetly to the King when Ambassador Unger has his first meeting with him, and that General McConnell might make a brief visit to Thailand, ostensibly as part of a trip to Vietnam, in order to convey to Dawee our concern over Praphatʼs reported plans. (Ambassador Unger will look into this latter step immediately on arrival and recommend to Washington whether or not he believes the McConnell visit should be made.)

Ambassador Martinʼs recommendation that the kind of visit to the President by Foreign Minister Thanat and Economic Development Minister Pote Sarasin which took place last year should be repeated this October was accepted by the President.

Secretary Rusk also recalled to the President an authority which had been given Ambassador Martin some time earlier and which Ambassador Martin has not been obliged to use (this is the same subject as that discussed in first full paragraph page 2 of Mr. Bundyʼs memorandum to the Secretary of September 15).3 He asked for the Presidentʼs agreement so that if Ambassador Unger is queried on this matter by those Thais who are aware of this he can convey that the U.S. commitment stands. The President briefly assented and there was no further substantive discussion on this point.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Unger on September 19. Approved by the White House on September 23. For another account of this meeting, see Document 358.

2  Document 356.

3 See footnote 3, Document 356.

358. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Assistant (Jones) to President Johnson 358. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Assistant (Jones) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 15, 1967, 7:27–8:05 p.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, Leonard Unger and Walt Rostow

Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by noting that Leonard Unger has been given the job of determining the situation in Thailand concerning a potential coup by Praphat. Rusk pointed out it is always a problem of what to do. Praphat is personally corrupt. [1 line of source text not declassified] Rusk said we may not succeed in heading him off but we should try. Unger will want to talk to the King and it may be possible to head it off. From our point of view, in normal times we could take chances on a coup but we canʼt have a coup now with Vietnam going on. We must try to keep this in the icebox, Rusk said.

The President asked what our chances are in light of the prediction.

Rusk said “the First Army around Bangkok decides coups. The head of the First Army has been in touch with Praphat. Both Praphat and Thanom have entry into the Armed Forces. The worst thing would be for the First Army to propose it and the other military forces to oppose it and then we would get into a civil war.”

Unger said “Praphat is trying to line up support. The Thais are like anyone else and want to be on the winning side. Martin wants us to show some confidence in the kinds of jobs they are doing and for non-corruption and good government.”

McNamara said “General Dawee is one of the keys to this. General McConnell is close to him and we have taken good care of him and had him in a hospital over here. We can have McConnell visit Thailand and he could find out if Dawee is behind this and if so could turn him around.”

The President said do you have influence with the military aide … “check and see what we need to do and I will do what any prudent diplomat like Rusk would recommend.”

Rusk said “we will proceed on that recommendation.”

Rusk pointed out in 1965 we provided [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] money and this has not been called on yet.

[Here follows material unrelated to Thailand.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes Files, Folder 4. Top Secret.

359. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 359. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, September 19, 1967.

SUBJECT

Additional Thai Troop Contribution in Viet-Nam

The current state of play is: 1. The Thai Offer. The Thai have offered to send a 10,800-man brigade group. The group would be composed of 3 Infantry, 1 Artillery, and 1 Engineer Battalion, plus supporting units. This unit would include the 2,300-man unit which should be leaving Thailand for Viet-Nam very soon. In other words, the Thai are offering an additional 8,500 men.

2. The Price. The Thai have tied to this offer a statement of their military requirements which, if taken at face value, is huge. Our Embassy, however, has isolated those elements of the Thai request on which quick action is necessary to obtain the additional troops in Viet-Nam. It is much more modest.2

The Thai want: a. 1 U.S. Hawk Battalio.

b. 1 Helicopter Battalio.

c. Equipment for a 10,000-man “compensating force.

d. Equipment, and maintenance and training costs for a 5,000-man replacement pool for the unit in South Viet-Na.

e. Assumption by us of all charges to the Thai budget incurred in equipping, training and maintaining in South Viet-Nam of the brigade grou.

The Embassy also believes the Thai will require accelerated delivery of some airplanes and patrol boats already scheduled under MAP, and some long-term extension of MAP support to elements of the Thai armed forces not now receiving assistance.

Very tentatively, the cost of the package has been figured at a maximum of $149 million. This estimate is being refined, but should not prove too much off the mark. At that price, the 8,500 men will cost us about $17,529 apiece.

3. Problems. The initial reaction in DOD is fairly favorable. They see the following potential problems. a. There is some sentiment in Defense that the Hawk Battalion just makes no sense for Thailand.

b. All agree it makes excellent sense to give the Thai a Helicopter Battalion for use against the insurgency in the North East. There is, however, a real problem in physically providing the helicopters as quickly as the Thai want them. It is probable that delivery during CY 1968 and 1969 (as urged by our Embassy) could only be made at the expense of the requirements of our forces in Viet-Nam.

c. The Thai probably expect us to pay the per diem costs of the men in Viet-Nam, which is offensive, in principle, to DOD and which would set an unhealthy precedent in regard to other troop contributing countries. (The actual amount of money is small, however, and it should not be hard to find a way around this problem.)

d. I am told that Secretary McNamara takes a dim view of financing “compensatory forces”. I would guess, however, that this will be a sticking point with the Thai, and we have already agreed to a similar arrangement with the Koreans.

e. Secretary McNamara had taken the position that it was not worthwhile getting involved in an additional Thai contribution of less than 10,000 men. The Thai are actually offering only 8,500 additional men. The total Thai force, however, would total over 10,000 and this, I expect, will be treated as meeting the McNamara formula.

4. Political Strategy. Our Embassy in Bangkok believes that with a quick response to the package cited above, the Thai could put 5,000 men in Viet-Nam by mid-1968 and an additional 5,000 by early 1969. These are “the most optimistic dates possible” and would be dependent on quick delivery by us of the necessary equipment as well as a good deal of Thai vigor in the follow-through.

Any attempt to negotiate a significantly different package would be difficult and very time-consuming, according to our Embassy. Should we decide that the price is too high and choose to forget the whole thing, the Embassy believes the Thai would immediately become less willing to cooperate in making Thai real estate available for a broad range of Viet-Nam-related projects.

Marshall

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (2), Allies Troop Commitments and other Aid, 1967–1969. Secret; Exdis. A note by William Jorden on the source text indicates that he had read it.

2 The Embassyʼs report and assessment of the Thai offer are in telegrams 3318, 3319, and 3320 from Bangkok, all September 19. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

360. Memorandum of Conversation 360. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, September 21, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Bergerʼs Meeting with Mr. Colby, September 21, 1967

Thailand

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that he had done some further thinking on the reports that Praphat intended to shuffle the cabinet, thus getting rid of Thanom and Pote. As a result, he had concluded that Dawee had not only put the bug in Praphatʼs ear but had started the series of rumors and reports that were now coming in and which the Ambassador had commented on in a roger telegram.2 In [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] view, Dawee thought that Praphat would take over the government, but would shortly see that he was unsuited by reputation to hold it, and would ask Dawee to take over, since Dawee was “clean”. Dawee had always claimed that the King liked and trusted him and probably believed that he could count on the Kingʼs support.

Asked by Mr. Spear what could be done to discourage Praphat, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] proposed that Thanom come to the US on an official visit; this would be a sufficient signal to Praphat that we disapproved of the plotting now going on. Mr. Spear noted that Ambassador Unger was going to indicate to Dawee our approval of Thanom.

Mr. Berger suggested that [3–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

Mr. Berger noted that one of the objectives of the rumored turnover in government was the ejection of Pote. If Pote were as competent and efficient as we believe him to be, why would Praphat or Dawee want to get rid of him? [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that he was not at all sure that Pote was as efficient as the American community liked to believe, and pointed out that Poteʼs relative honesty tended to close down some of the avenues for graft—something that Praphat deplored.

Mr. Colby said that he believed that an even more important question involving Thailand today was the question of the control of the counterinsurgency effort. Since the declaration of martial law in the northeast, it appeared that the counterinsurgency effort would pass from civilian to military control. [1 line of source text not declassified] and that, as Ambassador Martin desired, both the Thai and the United States armies be frozen out. Perhaps we could indicate in some way that there were dangers in overly militarizing counterinsurgency techniques. It was necessary, first of all, to assure civil support for the effort. This could be done more easily if actions taken were under police control. The military should take part only when the police required their support.

Mr. Berger agreed that it was desirable to assure civilian control [1 line of source text not declassified].

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1966–1967. Secret. There was no drafting information on the source text.

2 See footnote 3, Document 356.

361. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 361. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, September 25, 1967.

Text of Cable From Unger (Bangkok, 1328)

This morning Deputy Chief of Mission Hannah and I called on Marshal Dawee so that we could dispose of some urgent business before his departure tomorrow morning for a three-week trip to Taiwan, Korea and Japan. After we had covered Dyemarker2 and troop contribution questions, I asked for a few minutes alone with Dawee, raised the question of Praphatʼs pleas for a forced reshuffle and asked him where this matter stood.

Dawee said that things were quiet again and that Praphat was no longer planning to force a change. According to Dawee, it was Thanomʼs unwillingness to cover up the Surachit case which had precipitated Praphatʼs anger in the first place. Dawee said that he had had several frank talks with Praphat telling him not to make his reputation worse by pressing for a whitewash of Surachit who everybody knew had been involved in corruption. Praphat accepted Daweeʼs arguments even though grudgingly and Dawee appeared confident that for the time being at least the kind of action reported previously will not be undertaken.

He also pointed out to me a comment of Prime Minister Thanom some days ago when it had been suggested to him that some of the Ministers were getting along in years and not as effective as they might be and he had acknowledged that he was considering some changes. Although Dawee did not specifically say so, it was my impression that he was telling me this to point out that Thanom has, in fact, indicated some willingness to make some concessions to Praphatʼs discontent about certain Ministers. (We will try to follow up and find out through other sources who it is Thanom may have had in mind.)

Dawee also told me that Praphat had done a good deal of grumbling and growling about the Constitution and elections and that even Thanom had expressed some doubts on this score. He said that he had pointed out to both of them that it was for the Assembly to decide on these matters and that it would not be proper for them to intervene. He left me with the impression that plans for the promulgation of the Constitution stand about as we have understood.

Dawee said that an important element in Praphatʼs discontent and in some of the attitudes of other top officials was their uncertainty about the help they could expect from the U.S. to protect their own security at the same time they were making a contribution to Vietnam. If the U.S. can give affirmative responses on the important requirements which the Thais have put forward, the kind of plotting which had threatened earlier could be effectively kept under control. As reported earlier, the Hawks are one of the most important elements in the Thaisʼ thinking in this regard.

Our conversation was very frank and easy, and, although Dawee was obviously painting himself as the great force for good sense and moderation in the Thai leadership, I think he gave me essentially a straight story. I told him it was thought he had done well in all respects and had been very wise to work so hard to head off a development which would have put real difficulties in the way of our cooperation. Thailand has built itself an excellent reputation over recent years for its steady course and seriousness and good sense and I was very pleased that he had managed to keep things on an even keel. He looked pleased with himself and we agreed to stay in close contact after his trip.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. The source text is a copy that was retyped in the White House. The Department of State copy, 1133Z, is not filed in the Central Files, but was sent to INR.

2 Dyemarker was the code name for an anti-vehicular and anti-personnel campaign based on mines, sensors, and air strikes to prevent North Vietnamese infiltration down the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

362. Memorandum of Conversation 362. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 6, 1967, 12:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Minister of Economic Development Pote Sarasin of Thailand

The President expressed his satisfaction at Thanatʼs speech of yesterday before the United Nations General Assembly. He also indicated knowledge that Clark Clifford had talked to Pote Sarasin yesterday. The President asked for the two Ministersʼ assessment of the situation in Thailand and Southeast Asia. Pote Sarasin said that internally things were going quite well; there was a regular 8% increase in GNP; certain amount of confidence being built up in the country; 5 U.S. oil firms have been granted exploration and exploitation rights for oil in the Gulf of Thailand; infiltration problem is quite difficult. Ten police were recently ambushed.

Thanat then spoke, saying that before they left, their Prime Minister had spoken of the need to get a settlement on the question of equipment for the Thai forces. The people of the U.S. focused too much on the battlefield of Vietnam and do not realize that free Asia already has turned its back on communism and decided its future does not lie with communism but with freedom, because of the U.S. sacrifice in Vietnam.

The President said he had told the King to proceed on the assumption that when a fire started, one should get every man to put out the fire with a crash program. If necessary, one must go to the next country and help put out the fire there. He went on to say that the best insurance for Thailand is to get its men trained in Vietnam so that in the future they could look after their own freedom without permanent presence of U.S. forces. He pointed out that the U.S. Air Force is the best in the world with its experience of fighting in Vietnam.

If Thailand were to contribute to Vietnam in the same proportion as the U.S., it would have something like 100,000 men engaged there. The President is under extreme pressure on this matter, as can be seen from Senator Percyʼs resolution in the Senate. The President said he would stay the course in Vietnam. How soon we get a settlement depends on what everyone does. He has talked not only to the King of Thailand about the need for more forces from Thailand, but also from the Paks and others.

The President understands this is a difficult political matter. Everyone has elections but it is better to face up to the problem than to suffer the fate of Poland or Cuba—or to have to be rescued like the Dominican Republic.

Thanat replied that the Prime Minister had asked them to communicate the following to the President: Thailand is ready to assume its responsibilities. The training camps are ready to train more men. The critical question is: how much additional equipment can be made available for the strengthening of the Thai forces which remain at home? This is important for both Thai security and Thai politics.

At this point President called Secretary McNamara to establish where the negotiations stood. He reported that Secretary McNamara had said that Thailand was prepared to add about 8500 men to the present level of Thai forces in Vietnam. The President asked that they consider an extra 10,000. Secretary McNamara also said he was prepared to offer helicopters and other equipment which could help in the northeast. He could not, however, undertake to equip an expansion in the Thai forces from 100,000 to 200,000. This would be impossible in the Congress. The President then arranged that they meet with Secretary McNamara at 3:00 p.m. this afternoon. He urged that they settle the matter in this form.

1. Thailand will increase its forces by 10,000. The U.S. would agree to get the incremental costs for training and equipping this increase.

2. They would work out with Secretary McNamara precisely what equipment could be made available for Thai forces remaining in Thailand: helicopters and other equipment.

The President drove home the advantages of an additional 10,000 rather than the additional 8500.

There was then some discussion of motivation lying behind Senator Percyʼs resolution and the damage it would do in the U.S. and in Asia.

Thanat indicated that the additional 10,000 should be regarded as a first step and not as a final measure of the contribution Thailand might be willing to make available in Vietnam.

WR

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. Drafted by Rostow. On October 4 Rusk sent the President a memorandum that included talking points, biographic sketches of Thanat and Pote, and a draft press release. (Department of State, Central Files, POL THAI–US) Clark Clifford had lunch with Pote Sarasin on October 5 and told him that there had been a significant drop in popular support for U.S. Vietnam policy, making the Thai troop contributions even more important. Pote stated that some in Thailand drew the opposite conclusion. Pote suggested that the President strongly urge Thanat to expedite Thai troop support. Clifford asked Bundy to pass the message to the President with his strong concurrence. (Memorandum from Bundy to Rostow, October 5; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68)

363. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 363. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, October 6, 1967.

I–26010/67

SUBJECT

Additional Thai Troops for Vietnam

At Tab A is Embassy Bangkok response2 to the Washington position (Tab B)3 regarding Thai “requirements” relating to a decision to send additional troops to South Vietnam.

Ambassador Unger seeks Washington decisions on the points detailed below. He has asked for a DOD representative to come to Bangkok as soon as possible to discuss the implementation of these decisions and, in particular, to discuss the ground rules for the joint force requirement study with the Thai. I have asked Dick Steadman to undertake this, and he is prepared to leave this weekend. Ambassador Unger hopes to be able to present our position to the Thai by 16 October, and he is striving for a decision and a Thai announcement by the end of October.

Following are the Embassy Bangkok recommendations regarding US commitments in connection with a Thai decision to train and deploy up to 10,800 men to Vietnam.

1. That we agree to full support (with overseas allowances at the Korean rate), except base pay and allowances, for the training and operating costs of Thai forces deployed to Vietnam. You have already agreed to this, and we will endeavor to see that the “no cost to Thai budget beyond base pay and allowances” concept is followed without permitting the introduction of unwarranted frills.

2. That the Thai be informed that the FY68 MAP will be increased from $60 to $75 million and that the FY69 MAP will be a minimum of $75 million.

This proposal is designed to give the Thai concrete evidence of our intention to improve their at home capabilities while avoiding time-consuming haggling over specific items or their “Replacement sets of equipment” concept to make up for manpower losses resulting from troop deployments to Vietnam. The Embassy believes this approach would save time while preserving the option to tailor these programs in the manner which makes the most military sense.

I do not believe that the current equipment status of Thai forces requires programs of this size to provide them a military capability to deal with their internal security problem. However, I do believe that programs of these amounts could be structured to provide material which would be useful in improving the RTARF capability to meet an expanded internal security threat or a limited conventional threat provided the Thai are prepared to fund the required manpower and operating costs to maintain and utilize this equipment. Such MAP programs would concentrate on improving the training, basic equipment, and mobility of Thai forces and on developing the framework of a logistic support system within the Thai Army. Items which the Embassy/JUSMAG feel must be included in the programs for “political” reasons will be identified as such and presented to Washington for a decision.

If expediting a Thai decision and announcement is important, I recommend that you approve an increase in the Thai MAP from $60 to $75 million in FY68 and agree to $75 million as a planning figure for FY69 (not a minimum figure as proposed by Embassy).4

3. That we not now make a specific hard decision regarding the helicopter force structure issue but that we instead address it along with the joint force structure study. The Embassy points to the need for more total rotor lift in Thailand, the rapidly improving RTAF performance of its CH–34ʼs, the Thai decision (by Praphat) that the RTA must have an organic helicopter capability as factors which weigh against making a firm decision now.

The Embassy and JUSMAG are clearly concerned about the possible problems relating to an organic RTA lift, but they are sensitive to the Thai internal problems and seek to avoid our becoming set in concrete on the issue. I feel we should be tough on this and insist that the Thai command and control and maintenance organization be capable of achieving maximum possible utilization of all military helicopters in Thailand. This might include arrangements where the RTA has an organic wing serviced by the RTAF and operating under a command system which makes it responsive to all requirements.

I recommend reserving the final decision on this issue and that Dick Steadman be instructed to be firm in principle and to insist that a Thai/ US agreed plan be submitted here before any commitments are made to the Thai.5

4. That we agree to construct a site for a Hawk battery in the Bangkok vicinity, to deploy this battery when the site is ready (about 6 months), to provide US manning (@ 25 officers and 200 enlisted men) for the battery until the Thai are trained to assume full responsibility (@ 2 years), and to pay for equipment and technical service required to keep the battery operationally ready.

The approximate costs of this formulation would be: 1. Construction (all costs) $0.8 millio.

2. CONUS training for Thai (2 yrs) $1.8 millio.

3. US personnel for 18 months $1.5 millio.

4. Annual equipment and technical service maintenance (all costs)—$1.7 millio.

Our original formulation was that we would train the Thai to use and maintain a Hawk battery, that we would provide them with a battery when they were prepared to run it, that we would provide equipment necessary to construct and maintain the battery, but that all baht costs involved in construction and maintenance would be borne by Thai.

A Hawk battery around Bangkok cannot now be justified on military grounds and, in a post-Vietnam environment, the utility is so marginal that even then its deployment must be viewed as essentially a political-psychological decision.

The Embassy seems to be firm in its belief that the Thai will insist on Hawks and that it will be difficult to persuade them to accept a battery rather than a battalion of four batteries (the original Embassy proposal).

At a minimum, we must attempt to buck up the Embassy in its determination to argue this issue with the Thai. As a compromise, we might persuade the Thai that their psychological problems would be solved by announcing publicly that the US has agreed to deploy Hawks to Thailand at such time as the RTG determines they are needed, while agreeing not to ask for them.

Yet in the end, a decision must be made as to what we are prepared to do if the Thai will not buy this idea.

The alternatives are: 1. Refuse to provide a battery under any conditions.

2. Provide a battery if Thai will fund operating costs and training as an FMS (—- $2.6 million in both the first and second years and $1.7 million in each succeeding year).

3. Provide a battery, construction and maintenance equipment and CONUS training—Thai provide all baht costs. Deploy battery when Thai are trained.6

4. Same as 3, except deploy as soon as construction completed, man initially with mixed US-Thai teams.

5. Embassy formulation. US provides battery, all construction and maintenance costs and CONUS training under MAP. Battery deployed when construction completed, man initially with US/Thai team.

I recommend alternative 4 as the maximum fallback. It burdens the Thai with all baht costs associated with the deployment and thus makes them pay for their decision to deploy rather than announce an ability to deploy.

The Embassy cable also deals with the makeup of the possible additional Thai deployment and they come down hard on seeking to maximize the combat elements in the deployment plan. We certainly will support this position.

Paul C. Warnke

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret.

2 Telegram 4163 from Bangkok, October 5, attached but not printed.

3 Telegram 47003 to Bangkok, September 30, attached but not printed.

4  McNamara approved with the following handwritten note: “subject to association with a net increase of 10,000 men.”

5  McNamara initialed his approval.

6  McNamara initialed his approval of this option.

364. Memorandum of Conversation 364. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 6, 1967, 3–3:35 p.m.

I–26027/67

SUBJECT

Additional Thai Forces

PARTICIPANTS

Thai Side Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Minister of National Development Pote Sarasin

Charge dʼAffaires Arun Panupong

U.S. Side Secretary of Defense—Robert S. McNamara

Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—Paul C. Warnke

Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA)—Richard C. Steadman

Thai Desk Officer, Department of State—Moncrieff J. Spear

After opening amenities, the Secretary said to Thanom and Pote that, as the President had told them this morning, the military requirement is for 10,000 Thai troops in addition to those already deployed to SVN. He said that the U.S. also recognizes the Thai requirement to deal with their internal security problems at home. The Secretary then read from the attached paper which outlines what the U.S. will undertake to provide Thailand in connection with a Thai decision to deploy an additional 10,000 men to Vietnam. He then handed the paper to the Thai.

There was a brief discussion regarding the delivery of equipment and the makeup of the increased MAP. Minister Pote said that the President was anxious for a decision to be announced as soon as possible and that the Thai Prime Minister was concerned that equipment necessary to train these forces be available when the forces are ready. Could this be accomplished?

The Secretary stated that necessary equipment would be there by the time the Thai were prepared to utilize it for training and that the MAP increases were apart from our direct support of forces being trained or deployed to SVN. The Secretary said that, in selecting the type of additional equipment to be provided, we and the Thai would have to consider the capability of their budgetary and personnel resources to utilize and to maintain effectively equipment provided.

Attachment

Department of Defense Paper 2

1. The cost of training the additional 10,000 troops.

2. Equipment for the additional 10,000 troops. (Upon final withdrawal of Thai forces from South Vietnam, the Thai Government may retain this equipment.)

3. The cost of the incremental overseas allowances for the 10,000 additional troops (at rates currently paid to Thai personnel in South Vietnam) over and above their base pay and allowances.

4. Equipment for the rotational troops during their training period. (Upon final withdrawal of Thai forces from South Vietnam, the Thai Government may retain this equipment.)

5. You may announce that we have agreed to supply equipment for a HAWK battery and the training of Thai personnel to man such a battery if you determine that such battery is required for your national defense.

6. An increase in the MAP program for FY 68 from $60 million to $75 million.

7. An increase in the planned MAP program for FY 69 from $60 million to $75 million.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD: FRC 72 A 2468. Secret. Drafted by Steadman. The meeting was held in McNamaraʼs office at the Pentagon.

2 No classification marking. Rostow sent a copy of this attachment to President Johnson at 7:30 p.m. on October 6, indicating it was “the deal Bob McNamara handed to the Thais this afternoon to get a yes or no from their government.” Rostow informed the President that “The helicopters are in the proposed MAP increase to $75 million.” There is an indication on Rostowʼs covering memorandum that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (3), Allies: Troop Commitment, Other Aid, 1967–1968)

365. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Warnke) 365. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Warnke)1

Washington, October 17, 1967.

I–26210/67

SUBJECT

Visit to Thailand, 6–15 October 1967

The following observations arise from discussions with the Embassy and the MAAG and reports of various of their discussions with the Thai.

10,000 Additional Men

The Thai probably will commit themselves to deploying an additional 10,000 men. It will take at least 14 months to reach this figure and perhaps somewhat longer.

Composition of the Unit

The original Thai 10,000 men proposal has 3 battalions of riflemen, with the rest being artillery, support and headquarters troops. The structure we will discuss with the Thai, as developed by the MAAG and MACV representatives, contains 6 battalions of riflemen. General McCown (COMUSMACTHAI) is optimistic that this structure can be sold to the Thai as their own divisions contain 9 infantry battalions. This force structure is not only a far more useful fighting force, but its equipment is considerably cheaper ($20–$23 million vs. $30–$35 million for the Thai proposed structure). Ambassador Unger and General McCown are prepared to press hard in this area.

Training Bases

The “traditional” Thai pattern has been full unit rotation and their initial thinking has been to train and deploy the full 10,000 (now 12,200) men on a unit basis. This system, or even a base of half the troops deployed, would be far more expensive in equipment, training and manpower costs than individual rotation as practiced by the Koreans and ourselves. The Thai eye on the residual equipment reinforces their conceptual preferences.

US Costs of Training and Deployment

Our commitment to bear legitimate costs in assembling and training forces to be deployed to Vietnam will unquestionably produce wrangling with the Thai, some being legitimate arguments and some being Thai attempts to fatten the account. I believe that Ambassador Unger and General McCown are prepared to be firm in this area. I have less confidence in their staffs, operating under pressure, to get things done. At my suggestion, the Embassy and the MAAG have sent personnel to Korea to learn the pitfalls and problems in this area.

Replacement Costs

The Thai have raised the problem of the burden on their budget of the costs for replacing at home the forces sent to Vietnam. They allude to the “no additional costs to Thai budget” formula expressed by Clifford and Taylor and clearly are aware of what we have done in Korea in this regard.

Ambassador Unger has told the Thai at staff level that in making our FY 68 MAP add-on and higher FY 69 MAP planning figure commitments, we took into account the Thai requirement to maintain their military readiness at home and that we conceived that these higher MAPs could offset the manpower drain either by improving the capabilities of forces remaining in Thailand or by various ways, such as increasing consumable purchases, helping to offset the costs of replacing men deployed to SVN if this is a course the Thai choose to follow.

Ambassador Unger stepped right up to this, and I believe he will argue the case well. Whether or not his staff will stand still is another question, as some of them already are talking of a “requirement” to increase the $75 million figure to accommodate this possible Thai demand.

In any event, I argued hard for maintaining the principle of one pot so that the Thai will weigh decisions to replace forces against the knowledge that any US indirect budget support to help meet the costs of such replacements will directly affect the amount of new equipment received. Further, I argued against agreeing to any direct offsets even with one pot, citing our congressional problems with the Korean “net additional costs” formula.

MAP Programs

The MAAG has put together a sensible FY 68 add-on package and expanded FY 69 program, emphasizing building the logistic capabilities of the RTA. Encouragingly enough, the RTAʼs own ideas of its “priority requirements” were in the same area. M–16s are a special problem and the subject of a separate paper.2 Helicopters are covered below.

The Thai reactions to the FY 68 add-on are, of course, unknown. The FY 68 add-on package may be discussed with the Thai during the course of the deployment discussions, but the make-up of the FY 69 program will not be detailed to the Thai until all the deployment problems are settled.

Helicopters

I told the Embassy, USAID and the MAAG that the Secretary would not agree to fund the 15 helicopters in the FY 68 add-on package until he was satisfied that the US Country Team had developed a concept which would permit the best possible utilization of all helicopters in country and that he would not agree to deliver these helicopters unless he was assured that the Thai had successfully implemented this concept. Actually, the US side is well along on this project and all the Mission members (none of whom was there when the Thai were encouraged to establish independent police and Army helicopter forces) are acutely aware of the need to resolve this problem. The “concept plan” will be here soon.

Hawks

The battery instead of the battalion seems to have worked at the RTARF staff level. However, Marshal Dawee is not yet back in Thailand (from a swing through the Far East) and he is the strongest proponent of Hawks. Further, the Thai probably do not yet know that we expect them to bear the baht costs and they may not be clear on our decision not to provide US manning until they are trained. The idea of announcing without deploying has not yet been pushed.

Force Structure

Our discussion of possible Thai force structures resulted in strong Embassy and MAAG support for the concept of forcing the Thai to examine the costs of various forces with emphasis upon what it would cost the Thai to make their existing forces operationally ready. (We tentatively estimate that to make the quantitative and qualitative changes necessary to make the RTA combat capable would require at least a doubling of its budget.)

I am encouraged that the new people in the Pol/Mil section of the Embassy, and the new MAAG team, believe that this is an important subject and are prepared to push it. This will be an entirely new exercise for the Thai, and we cannot expect immediate results.

General Observations

I found a new spirit of cooperation between elements of the Mission. All say the atmosphere has changed markedly with the changes in the top levels of various elements. The new people are trying to please and there are no old wounds between personalities. Moreover, I found in extensive discussions with the MAAG staff a willingness to admit and to step up to the problems in our MAAG and MAP relations with the Thai. The Army and Air Force advisory section chiefs are new, as well as there being a new Commander and Deputy Commander, and the feedback I got is that they are doing a much improved job of getting the Thai to shape up.

Finally, I donʼt think the Thai yet recognize the immense drain on the Army which will result from the additional deployments. This will pull off a large proportion of their junior officer and NCO strength and will hit particularly hard in the logistic area, where their existing capabilities are minimal. This deployment may produce a highly beneficial shock to the complacency of the RTA.

U-Tapao

My visit was primarily to learn how many additional B–52s might be deployed here without requiring additional construction. I found that some movable trailers for aircrews would be the only vertical construction required and that up to 10 more B–52s could be deployed without additional horizontal construction. I have not yet seen the JCSM which recommends deploying 15 more B–52s and undertaking $30 million of new construction to support the deployment.

U.S.-Thai Relations

I have a feeling that dislocations produced by the American presence around the country have been more severe than have been recognized back here and that we have put about as much into Thailand as they will accept. I think we are in for some hard times as the Thai react to our dislocations by asserting their sovereignty.

Richard C. Steadman 3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, Thailand 320–333. Secret.1

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

366. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 366. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 22, 1967.

Dear Bill:

There is something I want to add to the record of my conversation with Pote Sarasin which was conveyed to you in Embassy telegram 4815.2 Pote was quite emphatic in saying that the Thais (and he appeared to be speaking for the leadership here) do not wish to have U.S. ground, combat forces in Thailand even if Thailandʼs security problems grow greater in the future.

He made it clear that this would not apply, of course, if there were an overt Chinese aggression, but in situations short of that Thailand would wish to handle its problem itself without assistance from us in the way of ground forces. Nevertheless, they would probably look for our help with air support and it might also be logical to set up, perhaps in Korat, an American logistic support base to back up the Thai combat effort.

Pote surprised me by going on to say that “we” think it might have been better had U.S. ground combat forces not gone into Vietnam. He stated this as a conclusion reached after some consideration of how the war has developed there and explained that the Thais are persuaded that the American presence has resulted in a reduction of Vietnamese effort and a disposition to leave the fighting to the U.S. He also expressed concern about the growing tendency for the war to become an “American” war and the danger that it even could become a war primarily between Vietnamese and Americans. He emphasized how much use the Communists are able to make of the size and nature of the American involvement, particularly against the background of the earlier experience with the French.

Needless to say, I tried to disabuse Pote of some misconceptions about the situation in Vietnam and also to bring home to him the grave choice we had to face in the spring of 1965 when there was real danger of Vietnamʼs being split into separate parts and its population centers threatened by the Communists. At the same time I acknowledged the dangers of putting our ground forces into Vietnam and told him we shared completely the Thai view that they should do the job themselves here.

I mention all this particularly because of the concern that I know is felt in Washington about our becoming involved in combat with ground forces in Thailand. It also emphasizes, as I see it, the wisdom of our helping the Thais as far as they can make effective use of our help to build up their own strength so that they will in fact be in a position to defend themselves against all but the ultimate threat. As Pote himself said, he would expect American Congressmen to see the advantage of helping with relatively modest amounts of equipment and other support now so that Thailandʼs own soldiers will be in a position to fight their countryʼs battles and a call for U.S. combat assistance will never be made except in extremis.

Pote made clear that he knew he was touching some delicate nerves and that I should be absolutely assured neither he nor anyone in the Thai Government had any intention of making any indelicate or damaging statements. For obvious reasons I am sure you will want to hold this letter very close but at the same time you may feel it worth while to inform a few key individuals of what I believe is an authentic reflection of the thinking of some at least of the Thai leadership.

Yours,

Leo

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240, Ambassadorʼs Private Correspondence, 1967–1968. Secret; Eyes Only; Nodis.

2 Dated October 19. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27–3 VIET S)

367. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 367. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, October 28, 1967.

SUBJECT

Negotiations for Additional Thai Deployments to Vietnam

This morning we received in ISA the attached cable2 in which Ambassador Unger presents the official Thai reactions to our deployment support proposals and asks for various Washington decisions and authorizations by Monday3 morning, Bangkok time. Marshall Dawee has agreed to table at a Thai cabinet meeting scheduled for Tuesday any U.S. decisions on the Thai response. Ambassador Unger believes that if he receives favorable consideration of his recommendations by Monday, there is a good chance he can persuade Dawee to support these positions and that there is a real possibility of a favorable decision by the Thai cabinet on Tuesday, with a public announcement on Wednesday.

There is a tactical question as to whether or not we should immediately reply to the Thai if we decide not to respond favorably to some of their proposals as modified by Ambassador Unger. There might be merit in letting them wait for a week so that they will know we have given their proposal real consideration but have real problems with them. However, I recommend that we respond immediately to Ambassador Unger, if possible, and that we leave this tactical decision to him.

Ambassador Unger raises the following points for decision. His arguments and recommendations are marked in red on the cable and should be read in conjunction with the discussion below.

1. Size of Force.

I would accede to Thai decision to stick to their original proposal to increase their army forces in Vietnam to 10,600 troops. You may wish to consider checking with the President before addressing this question.

Agree to increase to 10,6004

Insist that we are interested in considering only an additional 10,000

2. Force Composition.

The support unit dominated Thai force structure proposal, which would cost an estimated $35 million to equip (versus an estimated $20 million for the U.S. proposed structure), would provide little combat utility to MACV. I agree with Ambassador Unger that we should not try to conclude this agreement now. However, I believe we should inform Ambassador Unger that we are not undertaking to equip and support the Thai structure and that we will back MACV in insisting on a balanced force (i.e., roughly half the force to be combat infantry).

Approve above course of action5

Other

3. Rotational Training.

This is the full unit rotation versus partial unit versus individual training base argument. The “traditional” Thai pattern is for full unit rotation, which would require a full set of equipment for training.

I agree with Unger that we should not attempt to settle this now. However, I think we also should inform Unger that we are not prepared to support a replacement training base larger than roughly half the forces they have in Vietnam. This is the concept proposed by MACTHAI and upon which were based the training cost figures prepared by him and submitted to you (Tab A).

Approve above course of action6

Other

4. Training Facilities.

There is no acceptable reason why existing facilities at Pranburi (built in part with $7 million of MAP funds and currently under-utilized) should not be upgraded as necessary for the training of Vietnam deployments. The RTA is clearly using Vietnam as an excuse for creating a new base. The estimated $3 million construction figure was included in costs earlier submitted to you.

I recommend that you back the Ambassadorʼs conviction that we say no to new facilities but agree to no fallback position now.

Approve above course of action6

Other

5. Hawk Deployment.

This is apparently as big a psychological issue with the Thai government as it is a matter of principle with us. It is just possible that a deal with the Thai could fall apart on this issue.

There are three separate ingredients which can be varied to form a position. Ambassador Ungerʼs three alternatives cover only part of the spectrum.

a. Battery vs. battalion

A battery consists of 2 launchers with 36 missiles and had an original acquisition cost of about $3.5 million. Four batteries constitute a battalion, and as some elements, like radar, are not multiplied by the number of batteries, original acquisition costs were about $12 million.

There are 17 Hawk batteries in the CONUS contingency reserve; four of these are tentatively earmarked for deployment to defend U.S. units in Thailand.

An important issue here is follow-on costs. It would cost about $1.7 million per year (mostly equipment maintenance and replacement) to maintain a battery. It would cost about $4.8 million per year to maintain a battalion. Further, in about FY 70 the U.S.-owned Hawks probably will be modernized. Third-country owners will then have to modernize their batteries (at about $7.6 million) or support their share of the reduced maintenance replacement parts production line, which will increase the annual battery maintenance costs to anywhere from $1.5 to $12 million per year depending on how many countries retain the old system.

A battery has almost no military utility. A single battalion around Bangkok has some military justification but the long range bomber attack threat against Bangkok is so slight that it is difficult to justify this expenditure (and not at all possible on military grounds while USAF units are in Thailand). Stick to proposal for battery

Agree to provide battalion

Agree to provide battery and offer sale of remainder of battalion7

Other

b. U.S. Manning

It would take about 2 years to train the Thai to man Hawk units. It would require 155 U.S. personnel and cost about $700,000 per year to provide U.S. manning for a battery and 525 U.S. personnel and $2 million per year for a battalion. It would be about 6 months before construction was completed and Hawk units were ready for manning. Agree to U.S. manning

No U.S. manning8

c. Costs

Almost all of the construction costs (which total about $500,000 for a battery and $2 million for a battalion) would be from local currency. Some maintenance costs will be local currency but most are equipment parts and replacement which we have agreed to finance out of MAP.9

6. Vietnam Deployment Associated RTG Budget Costs.

There is no troop pay in the new $11–12 million annual figure. This is an expansion of the $2.2 million estimate of types of costs which the Thai had borne for the first deployment but which we would be expected to bear for the second deployment under the “no additional budget burden” formula.

I recommend that we repeat our commitment to bear all reasonable and necessary costs other than base pay associated with recruiting, training, maintaining and rotation of the additional Thai deployment to Vietnam but that we tell Ambassador Unger that the categories and amounts of such costs must be approved here (as is the case with the Korean “net additional costs”).

Approve10

Other

7. Additional MAP.

This really boils down to what we are prepared to pay for these forces. I am not convinced that the near term Thai performance in their internal security role will be significantly affected by raising again the level of the Thai MAP. Provisions of consumables for units on CI duty would be useful, but this could be accomplished through diversions within agreed levels.

I am struck by the fact that were it not for our shifting the Thai MAP to the Services they would now be faced with a 20–40% reduction from the original $60 million level. Accordingly, I would adopt d. below.

Alternatives: a. Agree to Thai $13 million now in FY 68 and FY 69

b. (Unger #1) No more in FY 68, agree to “Study needs” in FY 69 with $10 million additional limit

c. (Unger #2) Agree to $5 million in FY 68 and $10 million in FY 69

d. No more in FY 68, no agreement to raise planning level in FY 69 but will as always keep Thai requirements under review11

e. Other.

Paul C. Warnke

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Secretary of Defense Files: FRC 72 A 2468, Thailand 370. Secret.

2 Telegram 5177 from Bangkok, October 27, attached but not printed.

3 October 30.

4  McNamara initialed his approval on October 30 subject to the following handwritten note: “accept range in hand from 11,000 to 12,800.”

5  McNamara initialed his approval.

6  McNamara initialed his approval.

6  McNamara initialed his approval.

7  Warnke hand wrote the following note: I recommend we agree to provide a battery only, but to sell the remainder of a battalion (3# below). McNamara initialed his approval of that option.

8  Warnke hand wrote the following note: “I recommend we not agree to U.S. manning.” McNamara initialed his approval of that option.

9  Warnke hand wrote the following note: “You earlier ruled that the Thai would bear all local currency costs. McNamara initialed his reaffirmation of this decision.

10  McNamara initialed his approval.

11  McNamara initialed his approval of this option.

369. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 369. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, November 6, 1967, 1247Z.

5603. For Gaud, Bundy and Bullitt. Subject: FY 68 AID Program. Ref: Bangkok 4020 (TOAID 1106).2

1. Now that I have had time to get reacquainted with the Thai situation I would like to provide assessment promised in parens in para 10 reftel. The situation here clearly demonstrates an urgent need for an increase in AID funds for Thailand during the current fiscal year over the FY 67 figure of $49.8 million. I am also impressed by the opportunities here. With an adequate U.S. program we can build on strength and upon the Thaiʼs own effort, so that we can get more and better results per dollar invested than is currently possible in other countries where crisis has dampened the ability of the host government to mobilize its own resources and utilize the dollar effectiveness of the U.S. input.

2. Thai Government attempts at coming to grips with the problem of insurgency and the villager are beginning to pay dividends. Not only suppression but also village security and village development are making progress. The number of people in the government in Bangkok and in the provinces who are working to help the villager overcome these problems is increasing. Nevertheless, the number is still small and the structure of the effort, though beginning to have a positive effect on the problem in the northeast, is still fragile. The limited numbers of Thai officials who understand what needs to be done and are willing to take the lead in gearing the RTG to wage an effective fight on insurgency are encouraged to do so by our support under the aid program. These same officials are carrying the fight to use more and more Thai resources in the rural areas—emphasizing the security-threatened areas. The iron is hot and now is the time to strike. A grant aid level in excess of FY 1967 will parallel the increased Thai effort and take advantage of an increasing momentum, thereby supporting those bold Thai officials who are taking the risks involved in counterinsurgency efforts. In Thailand it is essential that we not risk a set back in the building of an effective security-development structure now under way in the threatened areas. It is clear that the cost of fighting insurgency at its present stage in Thailand is far less than it will be if insurgency is permitted to grow.

3. A fundamental problem in Thailand and the one toward which a substantial portion of our aid program is directed results from the fact that the post-war socio-economic progress has not had time to reach the rural areas—the remote villages in particular, and above all those in the NE. In fact, per capita GNP for the entire country has reached only $135. At the lower end of the scale on the income distribution is, of course, the subsistence farmer in the remote areas. Rice yields for the whole of Thailand are no more than rice yields in India and are less than half that of Taiwan. Rice yields in the northeast are 35 percent below the national average. Per capita GNP in the northeast is less than $65: per capita cash income in the northeast is less than $30. The unfortunate aspect of the Thai situation is that the least advantaged population is the farthest from Bangkok and most accessible to the insurgents. This the CTs can and do exploit. The villager in the northeast has little social economic base or stake for which to fight. As of now less than 9 percent of the population of fifth grade school age in the northeast actually has the opportunity of attending the fifth grade, primarily because of the lack of space. Government employees, either to help protect the villager or to provide knowledge about how the lot of the villager can be improved, are very limited in number, particularly in the remote areas. Communication, transportation and credit facilities are grossly inadequate to permit a villager to become a better farmer and market the product or receive even the most essential services from his government. Data are given mostly for the northeast since main concentration aid effort is there. But Thai must quickly get on top of rural situation all over Thailand to provide the essential backing for counterinsurgency measures. Thus, resource requirements are enormous for the Thai—making it imperative that we keep our aid at high level.

4. Due to the inadequate infrastructure in rural Thailand, particularly in the security threatened areas, the resource requirements for the counterinsurgency effort in a five-year period are very large. For example, merely to double the cash income of the farmer in northeast Thailand in five years, while providing the necessary infrastructure to sustain this growth in farm incomes, would require investments exceeding those called for in the RTG five-year plan by over one billion dollars. The proposed five-year plan funding already includes an estimated $250 million from the U.S. This billion dollar requirement is in addition to that $250 million plus liberal anticipated assistance from the IBRD and other countries.

5. The USOM program proposals for FY 68 and onward have been sharply refocused to enhance the conjunction of our aid program, and the Thai resources used in connection with it, so as to improve increasingly the life and future of the villagers as a lasting answer to the insurgents. At the same time we will administer the program so as to commit the technical ministries increasingly to this objective. The emphasis is a logical add-on to the infrastructure which has been built with the assistance of previous aid programs. The composition of the program under various funding levels was discussed thoroughly with Bullitt and Simmons during their recent visit. That composition, of course, reflects our estimates of our needs in Thailand. It is assumed that the distribution of funds among projects will be based on our estimate of the needs and that we will have ample opportunity to review with you the allocation of funds among projects under the aid level eventually adopted. The projects in the program at the $50 million level are being discussed in detail with the Thai on the assumption that funds will be available in the amount or larger. This is being done to insure that the Thai will put up the necessary support—both money and people—to make these projects effective. Of course, no commitments with respect to the amount of money is being made with Thai. Funds are only committed against definite allotment of funds from AID/W.

6. While it seems to me that the program can stand on its own merit on the foregoing basis, it is also important to relate it to a broader economic and political framework. The basic requirement needed to meet U.S. objectives in Thailand (and indirectly in SEA) over the next five years is an increased capability among the Thai people to handle their own economic, social and security affairs as indicated above, this means getting out to the people, particularly to the 80 percent who reside in the rural areas. The Thai are doing this with increasing success and their plans are sound. However, there is a problem of finding adequate resources to do the job in the time available to meet U.S. objectives and to beat the Communists in their effort to achieve their Southeast Asian program. It will not suffice to “euplize[?] the poverty” by draconian measures which in effect lower the growth rate in the central plains area while raising it elsewhere. Rather, it is necessary to aim at all rural areas but with emphasis on those with the greatest vulnerability or the most immediate threat. The resources contributed by the U.S. to the process this year can mean a saving in crash programs of emergency assistance in the next few years.

7. For the most part the U.S. program can dovetail neatly with Thai second five-year plan concept. The five-year plan in most respects is fundamentally good but as permanently formulated we do not feel it recognizes sufficiently the basic needs in rural areas discussed above, and it is our objective over time to persuade the Thais to modify the plan accordingly so that correlation between it and the U.S. program will be complete. The plan, perhaps over-ambitiously calls for almost doubling the first five-year plan, and the World Bank feels that the plan is too large and will result in inflation. For these reasons we believe expenditures under the plan will fall short of the estimates, but it remains nevertheless a valid target with the qualification note above and even [garble] short-fall it will require large amounts of foreign assistance if it is to produce the greatest effect. The requested U.S. aid will be a necessary component of the total effort if we are to achieve minimal U.S. and Thai development objectives. In the USOM program there really is no safety factor for further paring. Accordingly, the U.S. should seek to stimulate DAC, the World Bank and others to step up the rate of their aid rather than cut our back.

8. The Thai are doing well in the mobilization of their own resources. They have increased revenues last year by almost 14 percent; so far this year they have stepped up revenues at a rate approaching 16 percent. They are properly concerned about the threat of inflation with its catastrophic consequences but are willing to take a risk in order to meet the minimal needs for continuance of Thailand as an independent nation. We expect the Thai FY 67 actual budget deficit to be about 18 percent, a substantial increase of deficit over the previous year. Almost 40 percent or some $400 million of the FY 68 budget is directed to five-year plan projects. However, they will face increased unanticipated costs which must be met such as replacing forces sent to Vietnam, recruitment and the support of additional forces, additional internal security requirements on the Thai budget to complement foreign aid, salary increases which have long been postponed, and the like.

9. It should not be necessary to argue the relevance of the aid program to our deep political stake here. However, a few points are of particular importance for the following year. The RTG, so deeply identified with our posture in Vietnam, Laos, SEATO and other Asian associations, will shortly undertake to promulgate a constitution and to hold elections creating representative bodies. Our relationship with Thailand in the eyes of the world will benefit accordingly. Simultaneously during this time of political experimentation the RTG is in the process of committing itself to provide a large additional ground force deployment to SVN, a decision which will lay the RTG open to criticism by its opposition during the expected elections next year, the first in over ten years. The U.S. is on the verge of committing itself to major increases in military assistance in conjunction with the new Thai forces deployment to SVN. Even though the U.S. assumes a great deal of the direct budgetary cost of an expeditionary force itself, there will be new indirect burdens upon the Thai defense budget which will either impose limitations upon RTG programs addressed to meeting vital civil needs, or require new levies upon the private sector to sustain them. In the face of unquestionable needs, it is critically important that U.S. help the civil side to maintain the pace being set on the military side. Special emphasis is laid upon the need to maintain some balance in civil-police-military programs because of the recent assignment of an increased role to the second army in counterinsurgency operations in the NE, and to the first army west of Bangkok. That the size and pattern of the aid program can and do affect the direction of the Thai effort is evident from the kind of thinking reflected in FTB 11,677 which clearly suggests that failure to get the necessary support from AID will slant the Thai counterinsurgency effort increasingly to the military side.

10. We have too much invested in Thailand, politically, economically and militarily, to jeopardize it with chancy budgetary surgery. There are signs that the Communists are seeking also to operate in the north, the west central, the mid-south and the far south of Thailand.

11. In these areas their lines of communication are less direct but they hope to dissipate the Thai effort by forcing the RTG to spread itself thinly. This is only one of the reasons why the requested resources are needed this year, not later.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI. Confidential; Priority.

2 Not found.

370. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 370. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, November 22, 1967, 1550Z.

73183. Ref: A) State 68166;2 B) Bangkok 6269.3

1. We have given careful consideration to the arguments set forth in ref B that we delay presentation of our request for stationing additional B–52s at U-Tapao. We clearly recognize the problems involved. It has been decided at the highest level, however, that on balance the military requirements of the war in Vietnam set forth in ref A are overriding. You should, therefore, present this request to the RTG ASAP.

2. In making this presentation, you may wish to make the following points: (a) there is a direct relationship between the present request to deploy additional B–52s to U-Tapao and the security of Thai troops currently in Vietnam and those to be deployed since massive concentration of B–52s firepower has proven effective means of breaking up enemy concentration of forces. As noted in ref A we do not currently have surge capability and we do not wish to be restricted again as we were during recent fighting on DMZ. As Thai are aware B–52s have also been used against targets transitting Mugia Pass into Laos and thus reduced infiltration of enemy forces which could be brought to bear against Thai contingents. (b) During Clifford-Taylor discussions4 Thai leaders made strong argument for increased bombing as means of shortening war. Thai failure to approve deployment now being requested would appear to be inconsistent with this position. (c) You should also stress our appreciation of the problems which growing American presence creates and point out that we have given special consideration to the matter of on-base housing for the additional 1000 personnel which this deployment would require. Although these personnel will have to live in sub-standard housing initially, USAF prepared to accept this hardship to its personnel, (1) because of overriding military necessity for early deployment of B–52s and (2) out of consideration for Thai problems.

3. We appreciate the points made in paragraphs 2 and 3 of ref B5 and the need to give the Thai greater insight into our thinking on where we go from here. We are preparing such material and will be communicating it to you.

4. In instructing you to present this request to the RTG, ASAP, we have taken into account your view that this step may limit our flexibility in seeking to resolve the SOFA negotiations and could subject us to greater pressure for additional resources to meet the problems which you have highlighted in para 3 ref B. However, it is considered judgment here that B–52 deployment must take first priority.6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Spear, cleared in draft with Habib, in substance with Steadman, and by Jorden of the White House; and approved by Bundy.

2 In telegram 68166 to Bangkok, November 13, the Department informed the Embassy that it desired to increase the number of B–52s permanently based at U-Tapao Air Base from 15 to 25 so as to mount 800 Arc Light sorties per month from Thailand. The Embassy was instructed to approach the Thai Government for its permission for the augmentation. (Ibid.)

3 In telegram 6269 from Bangkok, November 20, the Embassy suggested that having just completed the negotiations for deployment of a Thai Division to South Vietnam, this was “a psychologically unfavorable moment” to ask for additional B–52s at U-Tapao. They gave reasons for their judgment and suggested a 10-day to 2-week delay in raising the matter with the Thai Government. (Ibid.)

4 During their mission to exchange views on Vietnam and obtain additional allied ground forces, see Document 350.

5 In these paragraphs the Embassy suggested that the Thai were becoming increasingly negative about the U.S. military presence in Thailand and were increasingly concerned about local Thai communities being overloaded by U.S. base personnel.

6 Printed from an unsigned copy.

371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, December 2, 1967, 1915Z.

78668. Joint State-Defense message. Subject: SOFA. Ref: Bangkokʼs 6616, 6617, and 6618.2

1. We have reexamined the entire SOFA question in light of history US-Thai negotiations and your recommendations reftels. It seems to us that the essential question raised by the Thai attitude throughout the negotiation, particularly their insistence on the supremacy of Thai law and their apparent unwillingness in written agreement to derogate from its application, is whether Thailand can accept any agreement that grants US forces kinds of exemptions and privileges found in status of forces agreements elsewhere in the world. Are they prepared to conclude formal arrangement which permits us to exercise court-martial jurisdiction in Thailand? Are they prepared to grant, in written agreement, tax and customs exemptions, entry privileges, and other exemptions and privileges usually accorded our forces as well as the operational rights necessary for carrying out mission of such forces.

2. Believe we have reached a point where we need to talk to RTG very candidly at high level to determine answers to these essential questions. If more forthcoming position on criminal jurisdiction is key to resolution SOFA impasse, we are prepared to settle on essentially the same arrangement which we concluded with the Philippines in 1965 (NATO-Netherlands waiver formula, US custody, and finality of US official duty certification), with hostilities provision and with appropriate safeguards against application martial law. We could also provide Thai with aura of reciprocity through Presidential Proclamation under Service Courts of Friendly Foreign Forces Act (22 USC 701–706) which would require US officials to assist any Thai military courts that may be convened in the US. This assistance includes attendance of witnesses. FYI. True reciprocity in the sense of the RTG being able to invoke waiver to oust federal or state jurisdiction in US not possible without submission of agreement to Senate for advice and consent to ratification. Presidential proclamation only assures assistance of US officials to Thai military courts which might be convened in US. End FYI. We would want to get fullest negotiating mileage out of any such criminal jurisdiction proposal by holding out the prospect of a forthcoming criminal jurisdiction arrangement as an inducement to Thai agreement on other subjects where we have few chips on our side.

3. We realize that formal SOFA, even with criminal jurisdiction arrangement more favorable to the Thai than draft which we have tabled, may still be unacceptable to Thai because it appears as formal, written derogation Thai law. If that is the case, we prepared as alternative to propose simple exchange of notes embodying general statement of principles which would. a. Acknowledge Thai sovereignty and recognize duty of US forces to respect Thai law.

b. Recognize that there will be cases where the operational need to maintain the integrity of the US forces through full reliance upon the disciplinary powers of those forces (including the convening of courts-martial) will have to give way to the exercise of Thai jurisdiction in certain off-duty cases where the nature of the particular case is such that it is of paramount importance that Thai authorities exercise criminal jurisdiction.

c. Assure inapplicability of martial law.

d. Agree to continue current cooperative arrangements on other matters.

e. Expand competence of present Thai-US Coordinating Committee (despite Thai position reported A–544)3 to work out details of jurisdiction arrangements (that would be at least as favorable as Philippine arrangements) and to monitor continuation of current arrangements on other matters. Any impasse in the Coordinating Committee would be taken up at the Government level for resolution.

4. Accordingly, we believe hard question should now be put to the Thai, and our thought is to put it directly to Thanat along the following lines. (This could either take the form of a personal message from the Secretary, or you could make the initial presentation reserving the Secretaryʼs letter for later, if necessary. You are obviously in best position to judge the most effective tactics.) a. I am concerned that our efforts to conclude a SOFA have apparently run into difficulties. I understand that your negotiators have indicated their inability to accept important aspects of the draft proposed by the United States principally on the ground that they require departures from the full operation of Thai law. The purpose of a SOFA is to provide a legal framework within which the Armed Forces of a friendly state can effectively carry out their mission. This inevitably involves modification of the host countryʼs law in order to accommodate this situation but does not mean the denigration of the sovereignty of the host country.

b. I understand that the criminal jurisdiction formula is pivotal to the conclusion of a status of forces arrangement. In the interest of moving these negotiations forward expeditiously and in the broader interest of the common objectives of the United States and Thailand in Southeast Asia, I am prepared to reexamine the United States proposal on criminal jurisdiction if it will resolve the present impasse. What I have in mind is a criminal jurisdiction article along the lines of our 1965 agreement with the Philippines. The article would also contain appropriate provisions exempting US forces from application of martial law. The agreement would, of course, recognize the duty of US forces to respect the law of Thailand and would provide for the concurrent exercise of criminal jurisdiction by Thai authorities and by American authorities through the convening of courts-martial in Thailand.

An arrangement along the foregoing lines is the farthest that the United States can go in dealing with the criminal jurisdiction article. We could not do more.

c. Criminal jurisdiction, however, is only one aspect of an over-all status of forces agreement. We also have a question, on the basis of the negotiations thus far, whether the Government of Thailand believes it is in a position to satisfy our requirements on other aspects of a status of forces agreement; and I would like your frank assessment on this. I am thinking here of such questions as necessary tax and customs exemptions, entry privileges, and other means of facilitating the operational mission of our forces, as are customarily found in status of forces arrangements elsewhere in the world.

d. If you do not believe it is possible to deal satisfactorily with criminal jurisdiction and with these other subjects in an overall status of forces agreement, perhaps we should consider a different approach to the problem. In that event, we would be prepared to enter into an agreement by exchange of notes that would deal only with the question of criminal jurisdiction and in briefer and more general terms than would be required in a formal status of forces arrangement. We would expect that such an exchange of notes would contain an assurance that with respect to other matters relating to the status of our forces in Thailand, the present satisfactory arrangements would continue. Ambassador Unger can explain the essentials of this exchange in more detail. (FYI: along lines para 3 above.)

e. I know that you have a concern that any agreement entered into should have some characteristics of reciprocity. I think that we can be helpful in this respect. We should be able, in an exchange of letters, to offer U.S. assistance to Thai forces in the exercise of their disciplinary jurisdiction in the United States. On this point, the kind of arrangement we could offer you is identical to the one we presently have with Australia.

f. There is another important matter encompassed in our draft status of forces agreement on which we would like to have some understanding. That is the question of the use of facilities and areas in Thailand. Such an understanding could be treated separately and consist simply of your assurance that United States forces would have the use of bases in Thailand as long as our two governments agree on the necessity and desirability of that use. That understanding need not necessarily be public; but we must be free to show it to interested members of our Congress, who quite understandably have been concerned at appropriating hundreds of millions of dollars for base expenditures in Thailand with no written understanding between our two Governments on the matter.FYI. Land acquisition costs may have to be injected at some point. End FYI.

5. Question of whether to disclose our alternate proposal for an exchange of notes on jurisdiction (para. 4.d. above) initially or whether to reserve it as fall-back position is also one which you are best able to judge, and which we leave to your discretion.

6. For Seoul and Taipei—Please advise if this approach to Thai will cause you problems with your SOFAs, and inform Bangkok soonest so that discussions with Thanat can start, if there are no insurmountable difficulties.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Confidential. Drafted by Salans; cleared with Colonel Ramundo of DOD/ISA, Eugene Herbert of L/EA, Spear, and Lawrence Hoover, Jr. of L/UNA; and approved by Bundy. Repeated to Seoul and Taipei.

2 Telegrams 6616, 6617, and 6618 from Bangkok, all November 28, contained Embassy recommendations and reasons behind its proposals for a draft SOFA. (All ibid.)

3 In airgram A–544, November 20, the Embassy reported that the Thai delegation accepted in principle the idea of a Joint Committee, but suggested the already established U.S.-Thai Coordinating Committee be enlarged, rather than a new committee created. (Ibid.)

372. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 372. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 8, 1967.

SUBJECT

Speedup in deployment of additional Thai troops to Vietnam

We have gone thoroughly into the possibility of a speedup in the movement of Thai troops to Vietnam. The schedule of the deployment of the first group (about 6,000 men) has been advanced from August to July. The remainder are scheduled to be in Vietnam by January 1969.

1. We looked into the possibility of compressing this schedule and found the following: —Our military consider the schedule about as short as it can be if the units are to meet professional standards.

—The creation of an expeditionary force of over 10,000 men is a really major undertaking for the Thai military. They will be hard put to it to perform on the present schedule, much less on a shortened one.

—The schedule compares favorably with our own performance in similar circumstances (the creation of a new unit around a cadre of trained officers and NCOs). It takes us about a year from decision to deployment (e.g. the 9th Division now fighting in the Delta area).

—If we were to pressure them into sending half-trained units there is a real possibility that the units would get involved in a bloody disaster, with the worst possible effect on US-Thai relations.

2. We also looked into the possibility of sending existing and MAP-equipped Thai battalions to Vietnam after an intensive but short training period. The trouble with this approach is: —The Thai Government and the Thai King are publicly and emotionally committed to the volunteer concept. They are in concrete on this, and have our approval for it. The use of existing units is therefore not a political possibility.

—Moreover, it is the judgment of our military people that there are no Thai battalions which could be deployed to Vietnam without a rather extended training period and without some re-equipping. The savings of time would, therefore, be slight.

—Finally, to take the two best professional battalions out of Thailand would greatly compound the already large problem of finding the cadre around which to build the 10,000 men expeditionary force.

3. Another possibility is to move the unit into Vietnam as quickly as possible and complete the training cycle on the ground. The Thai themselves like this idea, and would like to deploy the forces to Vietnam in June for final training.2 In the past, MACV has had reservations about completing the formal training cycle in Vietnam. We will raise this again with MACV.

On balance, I am now convinced that we should work for a June or July deployment and concentrate our efforts on making certain that there is no slippage. If training in Vietnam works out, we should be able to get the second group into Vietnam before the end of 1968. I have taken steps to make certain that we get the needed equipment and personnel where they ought to be, when they ought to be there. The Thai themselves are very anxious for an early deployment and feel with some justification that they are making a maximum effort.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Vietnam, 5 D (2), Allies Troop Commitments and Other Aid, 1967–1969. Secret.

2 Johnson wrote the following comment at this point: “Hurry, this is better than Aug.”

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 373. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, December 14, 1967, 1250Z.

7415. Subject SOFA. Ref: Bangkok 6985.2

1. Departmentʼs urgent and high level attention is invited to FTB–11, 9733 which clearly draws the lines of the impasse we have reached in SOFA negotiations and emphasizes the absolute necessity that we be placed in a position to reopen negotiations with the RTG before Christmas even if only on the subject of jurisdiction. While I must emphasize the extreme sensitivity of the RTB report, compromise of which would have grave consequences, yet I believe it is essential that the key personnel in Washington concerned with the SOFA be fully apprised of the substance thereof in order that they will be able to approach their task with an understanding of the seriousness of the local situation.

2. In general, the report bears out all that we have been reporting in a series of Embassy telegrams numbers 6082, 6083, 6616, 6617, 6618 and 6985, plus another sent through a separate channel, DTG 281328Z.4 The following points are worthy of special note: A. The memorandum to the Thai Cabinet was submitted by the Ministry of Defense which has consistently adopted a more cooperative attitude on this subject than the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. This in itself is a measure of the much stronger attitude which we can judge will be taken by the Minister of Foreign Affairs upon his return from medical treatment in New York.

B. All the specific numbered points in the Defense memorandum have been discussed in various SOFA negotiating sessions and reported on different occasions. Some will appear to be of relatively minor importance, and we believe that they can be negotiated. Others are clearly issues on which the Thai Government will insist.

C. Point 3 in Defense memorandum deals with jurisdiction. We believe this point can be successfully negotiated with the Thai on the basis of a NATO style formula (with certain Philippine modifications) as outlined in my conversation with Thanat reported reftel. However, it is essential that we move quickly at least on this point. Shortly before his departure, Thanat said he would send Sompong back from New York to resume talks on this subject. Sompong has returned. We think it is clearly important that we be able to provide a draft proposed jurisdiction article to the Thai before Christmas as was stated in embassy message 281328Z.

D. Point 5 of the Defense memorandum deals in effect with Article X of the U.S. draft and succinctly sets forth the Thai view that the U.S. proposals regarding facilities and areas are tantamount to converting the U.S. use of Thai bases into a U.S. base system which the Thai regard as “undercutting the independence of Thailand.)

E. Point 9 of the Defense memorandum proposes that “In the future Thai officials deal strictly with American troops committing offenses so that the U.S. finds out what the position of American troops is, if there is no status agreement.” It will be noted that following Cabinet discussion “The Cabinet instructed Thai officials concerned in this matter to deal strictly with American troops guilty of malfeasance in Thailand.” We interpret this to mean that the Thai will at some early date claim and apply Thai jurisdiction to at least some selected cases. As indicated in previous telegrams, under such circumstances we do not believe that the Thai assumption of jurisdiction can be avoided by pleading the 1950 Military Assistance Agreement (except, of course, in the case of JUSMAG personnel).

3. Unfortunately, it would appear that Thanat has not sufficiently circulated among his colleagues before his departure the substance of our conversation reported in reftel. It would appear that the members of the Cabinet at this meeting had no knowledge of it. Moreover, we learned today that the chief military member of the Thai negotiating team, Judge Advocate General of Ministry of Defense, had no knowledge of that conversation nor did the supreme command. We are, however, taking steps to ensure that the appropriate authorities are advised.

4. In the light of the foregoing, I must reiterate my previous urgent request that Washington authorize us to give the Thai before Christmas a revised draft jurisdiction proposal along the lines of my conversation with Thanat and the draft text which we forwarded November 28. I believe this is essential to re-establish with the RTG our sincerity of purpose and to follow up on my conversation with Thanat by demonstrating that our approach has actually changed. We do not mean to negotiate a separate jurisdiction agreement at this time but rather to give the Thai a new jurisdiction text to study while we are completing a new text of the remaining articles.

5. In handing jurisdiction text to Thai we would explain that while there are no proposed agreed minutes we would, of course, expect to record in the negotiating record our mutual understandings regarding various details, such as duty certification, custody arrangements, etc.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 In telegram 6985, December 6, Unger reported on a conversation of December 5 he had with Thanat on the status of forces negotiations. Unger reported that he had obtained Thanatʼs agreement to a new, shorter draft SOFA without agreed minutes which used the NATO-Netherlands waiver formula for most sensitive jurisdiction questions. (Ibid.)

3 This report summarized a memorandum from the Thai Ministry of Defense to the Cabinet on the SOF negotiations.

4 Telegrams 6082 and 6083 from Bangkok, both November 16, are in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US. Regarding telegrams 6616, 6617, and 6618, see footnote 2, Document 371. Telegram DTG 281328Z from Bangkok, November 28, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 15–3 THAI–US.

374. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman) 374. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Steadman)1

Washington, December 27, 1967.

SUBJECT

The Presidentʼs conversation with Prime Minister Thanom in Australia2

The President stressed the importance of the earliest possible deployment to Vietnam of additional Thai forces. Prime Minister Thanom agreed, but pointed out that the training of the forces could not begin until the necessary equipment was in hand. Thanom undertook to guarantee deployment in Vietnam of the forces in a maximum of 90 days from the receipt in Thailand of necessary equipment. The President promised that the equipment would be provided at the earliest possible moment.

I would appreciate having from you a status report3 on where we are in providing the human and material resources needed for the training of the Thai expeditionary force. I would be particularly interested in anything which we will have difficulty in providing in time to meet the accelerated schedule implicit in the Presidentʼs conversation with Prime Minister Thanom.

Marshall Wright 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, International Meetings and Travel File, Presidentʼs Trip to Holtʼs Funeral, Memos and Misc. Cables. Confidential. In an attached covering memorandum to Rostow, December 29, Wright stated that Steadman wanted this memorandum “as a weapon with which to reopen the whole question of training schedules for Thai troops.” Wright also stated that he checked with Bundy, “who agrees that this summation of the Presidentʼs conversation with Thanom is accurate.” (Ibid.)

2 President Johnson was in Canberra for former Australian Prime Minister Holtʼs funeral and memorial service, December 21–22. Johnson met from 2:32 to 3:05 p.m. with Prime Minister Thanom who was also attending the funeral. (Ibid., Presidentʼs Daily Diary)

3  McNamara sent the President a report; see Document 375.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

375. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 375. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 12, 1968.

SUBJECT

Equipping, Training, and Deploying Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division to South Vietnam

During your Canberra discussions with Prime Minister Thanom,2 you stressed the importance of the earliest possible deployment to Vietnam of the additional Thai forces. Thanom agreed and we understood him to guarantee the deployment would be completed in a maximum of 90 days from the receipt in Thailand of the necessary equipment. Subsequently, Embassy Bangkok reported that the Prime Ministerʼs thinking was that 90 days was a minimum period.

Meanwhile, we requested the Joint Chiefs of Staff to undertake on an urgent basis an analysis of our current timetable for providing the human and material resources needed to train the Thai force to determine the feasibility of accelerating its deployment.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that the presently planned training cycle is estimated to be the minimum time required to produce a Thai force capable of accomplishing the specified mission in the Vietnam area of employment without accepting unnecessary risk. Urgency, consistent insofar as possible with sound military practices, was a controlling consideration in the development of the present training plan. I agree with the JCS view that the current timetable provides for the most practicable deployment of the Thai Division.

As it now stands, the first of the two increments comprising the Division will begin training on 8 January and will deploy to Vietnam starting 15 July. This schedule would give the Thai force, composed mainly of green troops, a maximum of about 180 days training, in contrast to a U.S. Division which normally receives nine to twelve months preparation. Moreover, the latter is formed around a solid cadre of experienced professional personnel, whereas the opposite is true in the Thai case. As a matter of interest, current legislation precludes assignment of any U.S. Servicemen to duty on land outside of the United States until he has completed a minimum of 120 days training.

With respect to the delivery of equipment, maximum use is being made of material already prepositioned in-country. Items not on hand will be airlifted. The Department of the Army has assigned a priority for the Thai Division equal to U.S. combat forces in South Vietnam. In short, equipment is and will be provided just as soon as the training schedule permits the Thai to absorb it.

We have also investigated the possibility of completing the training cycle of elements of the first increment in South Vietnam, which would mean the arrival of the element in June instead of July. It is the judgment of General Westmoreland and the Joint Chiefs of Staff that this course of action is militarily undesirable. If elements of the Division arrive before they are capable of combat, they would require a protective force which would be a drain on COMUSMACVʼs resources. There would also be the danger of their sustaining an early defeat which could negate the political significance of their presence.

The Department of Defense will continue to take all those actions needed to secure the earliest practicable deployment of this force. I will give this matter my personal attention.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Admin Files: FRC 73 A 1250, Thailand 370. Secret.

2 See Document 374.

376. Research Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 376. Research Memorandum From the Director of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 19, 1968.

REA–2

SUBJECT

The Thai Political Scene Comes to Life

In anticipation of the promulgation of a new constitution and subsequent national elections, the Thai political scene has begun to come alive after ten years of inactivity. This paper examines the governmentʼs efforts to establish a political party as well as the emerging opposition groupings.

Abstract

After ten years of political inactivity in Thailand, it now appears likely that the government will promulgate a new constitution some time this year and that national elections will be held within eight months of the promulgation. Since Marshal Saritʼs coup in 1958, the ruling group has appeared extremely reluctant to institute its promised return to parliamentary government, but considerations of Thailandʼs international reputation and possibly the urging of King Phumipon have evidently now convinced the government of the desirability of some movement. To insure political stability and the continued control of the present government, the new constitution provides for a strong executive which is completely separate from a weak legislature. The government has also been attempting to organize its own party to compete in the national elections.

For some time after this effort began in 1964, it seemed clear that the widely respected civilian Minister of National Development, Pote Sarasin, had been chosen to organize the government party. More recently, however, there have been indications that Poteʼs effort was not going well. Subsequently it has become clear that the Director of Local Administration, Chamnan Yuwabun, has been attempting independently to organize a party on behalf of Deputy Prime Minister Praphat Charusathien—much to Poteʼs displeasure. The governmentʼs organizational efforts now appear stymied by the Pote-Praphat split, but it seems likely that this split will eventually be papered over.

The emerging non-government groups are mostly cliques based largely on personal loyalties, but their ideological veneers permit them to be classified roughly as belonging to the center or the left. In the center, the strongest group appears to be that of ex-premier Khuang Aphaiwong and his followers from the former Prachatipat (Democratic) Party. This group appears to have retained considerable popularity, and the reconstituted Prachatipat Party will probably make a good showing in the elections. The other major group of the center is that led by Liang Chayakarn, a veteran Northeastern politician. It appears that Liangʼs strength is considerably less than Khuangʼs and is limited largely to the Northeast.

In the Northeast, Liang will have to share popularity with the fragmented leftist groups, whose strength appears to be limited to that area. The two strongest leftist groups appear to be those led by Thep Chotinuchit, who has attracted many former members of the Socialist United Front, a leftist coalition active in the mid-1950ʼs, and Sang Patanothai, who has the support of many followers of the late Prime Minister Phibun Songkhram. Two other groups, which also hope to participate in the elections, consist of followers of former Prime Minister Pridi Phanomyong (now in exile in Communist China) and a few ex-Communists. These last two groups appear less well organized, and there is a strong possibility that they might be barred from electioneering under the Anti-Communist Act.

If these groups are the principal ones to emerge once political activity is legalized, the government should have little difficulty in dominating the post-election political scene. Even if the government party should fail to gain a majority in the elections, it should be able to obtain sufficient parliamentary support from at least one of the center groups, and perhaps from the more conciliatory leftist groups, to ensure a pro-government majority in the elected house of the bicameral Parliament. Thai politics are, however, in a period of change, and many of the old political pros and cliques are probably discredited in the public eye. It seems likely, therefore, that a number of independent candidates and members of local groupings will be elected to Parliament. The way in which they subsequently coalesce into new groups or take over some of the older political factions could eventually challenge the initially pro-government balance of political power.

[Here follows the 10-page body of the paper.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–5 THAI. Secret; No Foreign Dissem.

377. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 377. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 20, 1968.

SUBJECT

Deployment of Thai Division to Vietnam

Discussion:

We fully recognize the political desirability of the earliest possible deployment of additional Thai troops to Vietnam consistent with sound military practice, and we have been and are supporting diplomatic measures to this end.

At the same time, we are concerned at what appears to be a possible misunderstanding that may have arisen from your discussion with Prime Minister Thanom at Canberra. The Prime Minister spoke in terms of having the first Thai troops in Vietnam 90 days after their equipment arrived. We believe this represents Thai recognition of the political importance of this action and a desire to be helpful, but subsequent developments make it appear that training requirements may have been inadequately considered by the Thai leaders in making this commitment.

I understand that Secretary McNamara is sending you a memorandum2 advising that the Joint Chiefs of Staff have examined the military aspects of this matter and he and they have concluded that the schedule for July deployment is the minimum time necessary to produce a militarily effective Thai force. In this connection, we note that Prime Minister Thanom has emphasized to Ambassador Unger that the Thai forces must receive adequate training.

We are concerned at the possible political repercussions, both here and in Thailand, if the new Thai unit should incur heavy casualties at the hands of the VC because of inadequate training prior to deployment, exposing the Thai Government to charges that training had been reduced at U.S. urging. This would be doubly unfortunate because the Thai regiment now in Vietnam won a handsome victory over the VC in its first major engagement in December which was well publicized in the Thai and U.S. press.

We will continue to press for the earliest practicable deployment of the new Thai forces and seek ways to maximize the political and psychological impact of the Thai troop contribution.

Dean Rusk 3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Spear and sent to Rusk under cover of a memorandum by Bundy, January 18, which recommended that the Secretary sign the memorandum.

2  Document 375.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

378. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara 378. Memorandum From the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, January 22, 1968.

SUBJECT

Thai Troops for Viet Nam

The President accepts the case made in your recent memoranda2 on the indicated subject that only combat-ready Thai forces be sent to Viet Nam.

It remains his objective, however, that the arrival in Viet Nam of the first additional Thai contingent be at the earliest possible date.

To this end he wishes to be assured: 1. That we are providing training equipment to Thailand on an accelerated schedule, so that there is no possibility whatsoever that equipment shortage could be a cause or an excuse for delay.

2. That we have exhausted every possibility of inducing the Thais to send a unit of men already trained for combat.

3. That we have set, in any case, clear target dates for the dispatch of these forces, firmly understood between ourselves and the Thais.

Walt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret.

2  Documents 375 and 377.

379. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 379. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 1

Washington, January 27, 1968, 0435Z.

105995. Harriman/Bundy Talk with Thanat.

1. Prior to Secretaryʼs meeting with Thanat, reported septel,2 Harriman and Bundy met with him the previous evening. The following were highlights.

2. Cambodia. We described in detail the Bowles mission and went through the current difficulties including the latest incident. We focused on the prospects for ICC expansion, noting that we did not suppose this could do more than ease the problem and spotlight the NVA/VC violations, and giving the current state of Indian indecision and Soviet and Polish negativeness. Thanat seemed to have no problem with the mission or with the objective of ICC expansion, although he was obviously most doubtful that much could be accomplished in this way. He seemed to agree that Sihanoukʼs behavior might conceivably indicate that he thought the wind was blowing in our direction, but clearly felt that any real change in his position would be a long process. We mentioned the question of resumption of relations, making clear that we had the problem under consideration and that the legal effect of possible declarations appeared acceptable and certainly was not designed on our part to state any position on the frontier problems. At the same time, we noted that we would not be acting rapidly in this area and that we continued to feel that US representation in Cambodia might involve embarrassment and conceivably less effectiveness than we had through the Australians. Thanat remarked that he had no problem with our resuming relations with Cambodia, but he said this lightly and we do not suppose that it gives a final reading on Thai reaction to any specific form of declaration and particularly to how Sihanouk might interpret such a declaration publicly—which is of course near the heart of the problem.

3. SOFA and Thai Force Increase. We mentioned briefly the Presidentʼs conversation with Thanom 3 and said we thought that mutually agreed timing had just about been worked out. Thanat showed no desire to pursue this. We also mentioned that you had put a new and shorter SOFA draft before the Thai and that this went as far as we reasonably could on the jurisdictional problem. Again Thanat showed no disposition to pursue this, and Ambassador Bunchana [Atthakor] indicated he was generally informed.

4. US Press Criticism of Thailand. As usual, Thanat gave this quite a whirl, and we tried to reassure him that the over-all image of his country was excellent and that he should not take occasional errors or even malevolence too seriously. He did not seem any more persuaded than ever.

5. US Opinion. Thanat expressed familiar doubts whether a “dove” sentiment was gaining and whether the US public really understood the stakes in Southeast Asia. We gave him our clear judgment that the Presidentʼs position had been measurably strengthened in the last three months and that his critics were making little headway and the more extreme ones were discrediting their cause. Thanat responded by referring predictably to Senator Kennedyʼs television show and to what he saw as bias in a great deal of US television and newspaper comment. We conceded that the “doves” were vocal, but reiterated our judgment that our position was on the whole steady and that if anything the swing in public opinion was in a “hawk” direction.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI. Secret: Priority; Exdis. Drafted and approved by Bundy and cleared by Harriman.

2  Thanat met with Rusk on January 26, from 10:35 to 11:20 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) They discussed the Pueblo incident, Vietnamese peace negotiations, Cambodia, U.S. opinion on the war in Vietnam, U.S. troops in Thailand (Thanat praised the conduct of U.S. troops and noted “this was not a problem”), SEATO, and repercussions of the U.S. balance of payments problems on Thailandʼs reserves which were mostly in U.S. dollars. (Memorandum of conversation, January 26; ibid., POL THAI–US)

3 See Document 374.

380. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 380. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, February 12, 1968.

I–20427/68

Dear Walt:

This responds to your memorandum of January 22 to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara concerning the assurances the President desires relative to the Thai deployment to Vietnam.2

Equipment for the Thai force is being delivered to Thailand on an accelerated basis. Items are being airlifted when necessary to meet the training schedule. While there may be certain temporary shortages of minor items, there is no possibility that these could be a cause or an excuse for delay.

Target dates for the deployment of the Thai force have been set and are clearly understood by both sides. The first of the two increments commenced training earlier this month and will deploy in mid-July. The second increment will begin training immediately thereafter and will deploy in January 1969.

The Thai have made clear publicly from the beginning that this deployment shall not be to the detriment of their internal security capability and that it shall consist of volunteers from the active forces, the reserves, and civilian life. Deploying an existing unit would run directly counter to this firm public commitment of the RTG to their people, and to His Majestyʼs insistence that the force be composed of volunteers. An attempt at this juncture to induce the RTG to change our jointly agreed-upon plans would be not only to no avail but might cause considerable political damage. Bill Bundy concurs in this judgment.

Please be assured that all levels of the Department of Defense recognize the importance of early deployment of additional Thai forces to Vietnam.

Sincerely,

Paul C. Warnke 3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6 THAI. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by J.B. Devine of ISA. Copies were sent to McNamara, Wheeler, and Bundy.

2  Document 378.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Warnke signed the original.

381. Memorandum of Conversation 381. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bangkok, March 22, 1968.

SUBJECT

Thai Elections

PARTICIPANTS

[name not declassified]

Ambassador Unger

After I had taken up a few matters of current business I mentioned the forthcoming promulgation of the Constitution and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] took this as a signal to launch into an extended discussion about elections and possible confidential US assistance. He referred to much earlier conversations with Ambassador Martin and a more recent discussion with Robert Jantzen and said that with the elections now almost definitely scheduled for early in 1969, the help earlier requested would soon be in order.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] again made clear that only he, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] were privy to the discussions previously held with Americans. He emphasized that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and other leaders were definitely not informed and made clear his concern that at this stage the matter not be discussed with them.

Basically he said what is desired is the election of a strong anti-Communist government party which will assure that the Communists, either directly or through infiltration, do not gain an influential or controlling position in the Thai Government. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] emphasized that he was talking about a government-wide party including [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and he was convinced that this could be achieved. He mentioned his reservations about some of the things which [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is associated with and even more with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and his running of the Bangkok Municipality, but [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was definitely against the Communists and therefore at this stage it was essential that they work together. I asked [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] whether he had any suspicions about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and his attitude towards Communism; he said that he did not and that he would be ready to accept candidates put forth by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] as long as they were not Communists. While we both recognized the problems posed by corruption in government and the useful tool this provided the Communist propaganda, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] point was that in the present circumstances, with the Communist threat paramount, some things would have to be accepted which he believed would probably later be corrected once there was a functioning representative government under the Constitution. I made clear to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that my government would have the most serious doubts about seeming to be put in a position of supporting one group in the government, however secretly this was done, against another group. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] insisted that it was his and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] purpose to work with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and the others and to maintain the unity of the present governing group; the dangers of a division were very clear to them. I remarked that I did not believe [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] were in very close and frequent contact but [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] insisted nevertheless that they would remain together and work together through the election and the formation of a government under the Constitution.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also said he was prepared to work with other non-Communist parties if they so wished, and he specifically mentioned Seni Pramoj and the Democratic Party. In passing he also mentioned in confidence that he had recently acquired indirectly the newspaper, Prachathipatai.

I confirmed to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that I was aware of previous conversations about secret assistance from the US in connection with the election and that I fully understood its highly confidential nature. Should we proceed my position would be like that of Ambassador Martin, namely that I would deny any reports of assistance and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that he would, of course, be obliged to do the same. He went on to say that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], with whom he had recently discussed this matter, was reluctant about proceeding further in discussions with the Americans about this type of assistance. He told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that he was afraid the Americans will meddle in Thai matters and even ask to run the show. Nevertheless, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had persuaded him to agree that the matter should be taken up with me. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] himself was not prepared to put up the very substantial funds which might be involved and he does not want to approach businessmen on this matter since they would probably expect some quid-pro-quo for any assistance rendered. On the other hand, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said, the Americans and Thais both have a deep interest in assuring that the Communists do not take over in Thailand and American help is certainly justified when you consider the considerable direct assistance rendered to the Communists by the Communist nations.

I said that while my governmentʼs receptiveness of this matter was already known, Washington would naturally wish to know the kinds of things the funds were to be used for, and to have a general idea of the strategy to be followed, the kind of party to be formed, and the principal individuals involved. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said what they had in mind were funds to finance campaign expenses. He mentioned posters, printing expenses, costs of travel and holding meetings, and the like. He thought that this would not exceed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] dollars earlier mentioned. He said that they did not have in mind handouts to candidates in the manner of General Phao some years ago, but rather assistance to candidates to enable them to campaign effectively. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] then said that he was not prepared to go into detail about their plans and projected organization and all of the persons to be involved. He said that the US should be prepared to take “our word”—presumably meaning his and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. If we have confidence in them we should be ready to go ahead but the Thais are not prepared to put all of their plans and projects up for detailed examination and approval, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said.

I replied that my government would have no intention of running the elections in Thailand and accepted without question that this was a matter for Thai decision. Nevertheless, it made sense for us to discuss questions of party organization, the conduct of a campaign, etc. While we recognize the Thai situation as different from others, nevertheless we had had a good deal of experience around the world and could call attention to the way in which problems have been met elsewhere, which might be usefully adapted to Thailandʼs circumstances. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] did not reply to this but returned to his earlier point and said that if we insisted on a detailed review of the Thai plans and projected actions, it might be best to drop any idea of American assistance. I only observed that I would have the opportunity to talk with the Secretary of the State and Mr. Bundy in Wellington and that I would plan to meet promptly with him again as soon as I returned.

(Note: Several hours after our discussion [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] telephoned me and in guarded language he made the point that he personally would expect to keep me well informed about the formation of a government party and the organization and conduct of its campaign. He insisted, however, that it was out of the question to sit down in groups with others present to discuss such matters. I took this to mean that he was retreating somewhat from his adamant position during our earlier conversation.)

In the course of our discussion [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also stated that he insisted that Chamnan, as the official responsible, conduct the elections in a fair and open manner and that he must avoid supporting individual candidates at the same time that he is carrying out his official responsibilities. ([less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said this in such a way as to suggest that he realized some things not quite kosher might be going on behind the scenes but it was essential that Chamnanʼs public posture be absolutely correct.) In this connection again, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said also that his participation in the whole election procedure will come promptly to an end if illegal or dishonest actions are taken.

On timing of the elections, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that promulgation should not take place before the end of May or early June so that the elections would come after the first of the year when the harvest has been completed. Otherwise, farmers, who after all make up the bulk of the population and its most stable element, will not participate as fully and there will be charges of bad faith. Unfortunately, Prince Wan made an off-the-cuff statement about the Royal Astrologer being responsible for setting the date and the King feels that this has now put him on the spot and obliged him to speak for the earliest possible date, namely sometime in April. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] seemed confident, nevertheless, that it will be possible to shift the date for promulgation to later in the spring.

Our conversation was brought to a close because of pressmen waiting for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] at his weekly press conference and we agreed to meet and talk again once more before my departure for Wellington. In taking my leave I said once more that the US does appreciate the need for assistance and, as Ambassador Martin stated some time ago, is ready to help. We do need to know what the funds will be used for and above all, we must know that our support goes to a party or movement representing the entire present leadership, not just one group. We also feel that our experience elsewhere could be useful in some cases for application, as adapted, to some Thai situations. I also mentioned that there would be the question of how funds could be released, but we agreed to return to that matter later.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified], in answer to my question, had asked me not to raise this matter with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] whom I expect to see on Monday morning. During his later telephone call (see Note above) he did, however, say that on second thought he believed I should mention our conversation to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and indicate that the latter need not be concerned about the consequences of the provision of help by the US.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 14 THAI. Secret. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Hannah, Jantzen, Hamilton, and Bundy.

2  Unger and [text not declassified] resumed their conversation of March 24 at 9 p.m. They discussed the need for a Thai government party that represented the entire Thai leadership and how to include younger Thai civilians in it. (Ibid.)

382. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 382. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 25, 1968.

SUBJECT

United States Policy and Programs in Thailand

You may have seen my recent memorandum to John Bullitt raising certain questions about United States-supported programs in Northeast Thailand (copy attached). The memorandum was occasioned by a briefing I had recently on the situation in Thailand and our programs there.

The following are some of my thoughts on the broader context in which, under your leadership (and complementing the efforts of Ambassador Unger in Bangkok), I believe this inquiry should proceed.

The Political-Military Group is about to put before the SIG its report on United States counterinsurgency policies around the world. I understand that one of its principal recommendations is that regional bureaus should set up working groups under the aegis of their IRGs (but more restricted and selective in membership) to review and appraise the insurgency situation in selected problem countries.

This is a recommendation with which I personally agree. Leadership in this area must, of course, rest, in the first instance, with the Chief of Mission and the Assistant Secretary (and, under his direction, the country director). But there is a place, as well, for an inter-agency working group—operating under the IRG and manned by specialists with experience across country lines—to assist the bureaus in appraising insurgency situations and the effectiveness of programs. In my view, these working groups should include, besides OSD/ISA, JCS, CIA and AID, knowledgeable representatives from other offices with a global functional interest such as G/PM and Systems Analysis (OSD). In the Latin American area such a working group has been operating with good results for several years.

I do believe that such a group should be formed in EA and that Thailand should be high on the list of countries to be examined.

My central concerns, as they relate to the Thai situation, are: —the effectiveness of United States-supported counterinsurgency efforts (see Bullitt memo), and the proper mix of security and development efforts;

—the dilemma of how to avoid both trying to do too much too quickly and not doing enough;

—the possibility of a clandestine organizing effort that is more widespread than our intelligence data now indicate exists.

As regards the longer term, I am interested in an examination of the relationship between the developing situation in Viet-Nam and Laos and our policies, programs and interests in Thailand (one of the reasons I have endorsed the proposed RAND study); and in an examination of alternative United States strategies in the light of these interests and developments. Finally, I think it is important not to limit the insurgency review to security programs. It should include, as well, consideration of the complementary development programs.

There are some general thoughts on how we might proceed. I know there have been several reviews and studies on Thailand and our programs and policies in that country (such as Ambassador Ungerʼs current study of Thai-United States resources). I also know of the Missionʼs own very detailed review procedures of the insurgency situation, Ambassador Ungerʼs continuing personal interest and concern, and the monthly reviews by the Thai working group (under the chairmanship of the country director) here in Washington. All of this gives us a good base from which to move ahead.

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

Attachment

Washington, March 18, 1968.

Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Assistant Administrator for East Asia, Agency for International Development (Bullitt)

SUBJECT

Scope and Effectiveness of Thai-AID-Supported Programs in Northeast Thailand

I fully agree with your, Mr. Bundyʼs and Ambassador Ungerʼs plans for a thorough evaluation of U.S. programs in Thailand. I will be discussing with Mr. Bundy how to carry forward this evaluation at the Washington end in the IRG/EA framework.

In this connection, I endorse the proposed RAND study of future problems in the United States-Thai assistance relationship. I hope that after Ambassador Unger has reviewed and commented upon the prospectus, work on the study can get promptly underway.

I also endorse the re-appraisal of the Thai insurgency situation through the special NIE now in progress and the study of Thai-United States resources which is being carried forward under Ambassador Ungerʼs leadership. I would like to review personally the results of both.

As regards AID activities and programs, even while this work goes forward, I believe we should also re-examine and re-assess more directly U.S.-supported programs and activities, their adequacy in terms of geographic coverage, effectiveness in raising living standards, and ultimate effect on the loyalty of the local population. A number of questions can legitimately be raised in this connection.

1. Coordination: How good is coordination between security operations (Army, police, border patrol), measures to improve the security structure (organization of village security forces, establishment of police tambol stations, police and border patrol deployments, installations of radio links to villages, etc.), and deployment of the rural development effort (accelerated rural development projects, deployment of mobile development units, community development efforts, agriculture extension programs, mobile medical teams).

2. Geographic scope of Thai-U.S. operations: In geographic terms, how adequate is the coverage of Northeast Thailand by Thai security and development efforts relative to the geographic incidence of the insurgency. How quickly will coverage increase.

3. Effectiveness of AID civil police administration programs: How do we judge the effectiveness of these programs, particularly as they relate to the security situation in the 25 most sensitive changwads. More generally, what do we know about relations between the police and the local population.

4. Effectiveness of accelerated rural development program: This program which had been intended as a broad effort to meet village development needs has concentrated heavily on road construction. In your judgement, are other village needs (water supply and control, irrigation, school construction, medical needs, agriculture extension) adequately being met by this or other programs.

5. Balance between security and development programs: More generally, what is your judgement on the proper balance between security and development programs. Are the Thais doing enough in the development area. Should the emphasis be shifted either way.

6. Effect on village social structure and political loyalties: What concrete evidence do we have as regards the effects of these programs on village social structure, (e.g. the role of the traditional village leadership, the aspirations of younger people, increased participation in voluntary associations and the political processes) and political loyalties.

7. Effect on local and provincial government structure: In what ways do these programs utilize, strengthen and develop local and provincial government administrative capability and authority.

I recognize that some of these questions will also be covered in Ambassador Ungerʼs study. I would appreciate it if you and your staff would examine these and other related questions that may occur to you in your review.

Nicholas deB Katzenbach 2

1 Source: Johnson Library National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Confidential. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it and the attachment were drafted by Claus Ruser of Katzenbachʼs staff on March 16. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) THAI)

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Katzenbach signed the original. A note on the source text indicates that Katzenbach handed the original memorandum to Bullitt on March 18.

383. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) 383. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy)1

Bangkok, April 16, 1968.

Dear Bill:

Since my second try with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] before going to Wellington I have had no further discussions with him, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] about political party organization or possible contributions from us.2 I have considered that his uneasiness when I raised this subject made it clear that he was far from settled in his own mind about taking any help from us and perhaps also unsure about what role [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be playing. I also felt that my lengthy conversations with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], as well as some that Bob Jantzen and others have had with other individuals, have made it clear that there is not as yet even an understanding about who the main figures are to be in any government party that may be formed, and we surely have no certainty of united action among such figures as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on one hand and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on the other.

For all these reasons I think we should take no initiatives whatsoever ourselves to raise the matter of financial support and consider it definitely on ice unless and until the Thais themselves make a new move.

This is not to say that we should not use what resources and connections we have quietly to stimulate serious thought about party organization and the effective conduct of an election campaign, and to this end we will be taking various steps here, [1 line of source text not declassified]. On this same line, this morning I mentioned in passing to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that while he was in the States he might possibly find it interesting to have a discussion with one or several academic or practical political types who could talk to him informally about how campaigns are run and parties organized. (I carefully refrained from any relating of this to the assistance question.) [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] sounded interested but [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] quickly chimed in and said this was not a good idea and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] should not be thus involved. He, however, would be interested if an opportunity was offered. While I think [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has serious limitations as a practical politician, you might want to have a word with John Roche and/or Dick Scammon and see if anyone has any ideas as to what might be engineered to involve [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. (Thanat, incidentally, told me over last weekend that he has concluded, at least thus far, that politics is not for him and he has never been mentioned as a possible participant in any government party arrangement.)

Yours,

Len

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret; Eyes Only. Copies were sent to Godley and Spear.

2  Unger talked briefly with [text not declassified] on March 25. Unger stated that the elections were critically important and that [text not declassified] was in a unique position to bring about free elections. [text not declassified] replied, “a leader must have lots of money which he did not have.” Unger answered, “somewhat elliptically because of Thanatʼs presence, that there might be ways to help, but quietly.” Unger was sure Thanat had not overheard the discussion. [text not declassified] and Unger talked again on March 28. [text not declassified] stated that he did not want to be under anyoneʼs “control” and Unger assured him that was the last thing the United States wanted. They agreed to talk further. (Memoranda of conversations, March 25 and 28; ibid., Central Files, POL 14 THAI)

384. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 384. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, May 3, 1968.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the Prime Minister of Thailand on Thursday, May 9

What We Want

1. Status of Forces Agreement

In order to regularize the legal status of our 47,000 servicemen in Thailand, we have since late 1966 been negotiating with the Thai a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA). Thai sensitivity to certain aspects of our initial proposals regarding jurisdiction caused the Thai late last year to reject them, and on February 1 we submitted a shorter SOFA draft intended to meet their principal objections. They have indicated informally that our new draft is much more acceptable, and preliminary discussions of some of its provisions are already under way. We expect formal negotiations to resume shortly.

Meanwhile, local political pressures have led the Thai to insist with increasing urgency on assuming jurisdiction over U.S. servicemen accused of crimes involving Thai citizens or property. An Air Force sergeant has been tried, convicted, and sentenced to a fine, and other cases may come to a head in the next few weeks.

We are concerned at the prospect of U.S. military personnel being tried in Thai courts without the protection of a SOFA and fear that Thai termination of the de facto immunity previously accorded our servicemen may remove Thai incentive to make concessions necessary for the conclusion of a mutually acceptable SOFA.

Our Embassy has submitted to the Foreign Ministry a note calling for joint consultations and listing the procedural and legal safeguards which we feel must protect any American serviceman subjected to Thai legal processes in the interim before the SOFA is signed.

Recommended U.S. Position

Emphasize to the Prime Minister and particularly Foreign Minister Thanat (who will handle the negotiations) that we believe a SOFA is the best basis for avoiding or resolving jurisdictional problems. Express our satisfaction that preliminary discussions have started, and press for early agreement. Express the hope that in the interim the established practice of Thai forbearance in jurisdictional matters will be maintained. Thai trials of U.S. servicemen in the absence of a SOFA would create risks of domestic U.S. political problems which could restrict our negotiating flexibility.

2. Balance of Payments Program

Thailandʼs foreign exchange holdings have built up in recent years due partly to U.S. security expenditures. We hope to neutralize the effect of these expenditures on our balance of payments problem by having the Thai Government shift more of its reserves into longer term special Treasury bonds. The President will probably have already raised the question with the Prime Minister. A State-Treasury team will go to Bangkok soon to discuss details with Thai financial officials.

Recommended U.S. Position

Express our appreciation for past Thai cooperation in keeping their reserves in dollars. Thailandʼs growing economic and financial strength should enable the Thai Government to enter into the same type of close cooperation in the financial field that we have engaged in previously in our political, economic and military relations. We would therefore appreciate the support of the Prime Minister and his colleagues for the measures which our Embassy and the Washington team to Bangkok will be discussing shortly for neutralization of U.S. security expenditures in Thailand.

What the Thai Want

1. Vietnam

Thai leaders are most anxious to get at first hand our high-level thinking on where we are headed in the war in Vietnam and in the negotiations. (Thanom and Thanat will be seeing Secretary Clifford and will get a JCS briefing on the military situation in Vietnam.) In the past there has been some Thai criticism that we have not done enough to make Vietnamese forces and programs effective. Thanat has offered to speak to Thieu and Ky about cooperating more closely. The Thai can also be expected to be wary about negotiations with the Communists. They will probably press for full consultations, and if full-scale peace negotiations eventuate, participation. (This latter is by no means certain; Thanom told the press in Brazil on his way here that the Thai would see how the contacts developed and then decide whether to participate or not.)

Recommended U.S. Position a. Give Thanom a full, frank exposition of our thinking on negotiations—the course of the efforts to make contact, our objectives in the Paris talks, and the basis of our position in any subsequent discussions. Press for full Thai support for these efforts.

b. In view of recent improvements in South Vietnamese perform-ance, and the fact that the Italians have recently braced SVN leaders on the need to work together, we believe Thanatʼs approach at this time might appear to be “ganging up” on the Vietnamese leaders.

2. U.S. Commitment

Thanom and his Ministers will be seeking to make their own assessment of the U.S. political scene as it will affect the U.S. commitment to Southeast Asia in general and Thailand in particular. The Prime Minister has asked that some U.S. Air Force units remain in Thailand after the U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam. Finance Ministry officials have indicated concern over the possibility of rapid reduction in U.S. war-related spending in Thailand, which could have significant adverse repercussions on the Thai economy.

Recommended U.S. Position a. Stress the Constitutional basis for the firmness and continuity of our SEATO commitment to Thailand and give the Thai leaders your frank assessment of the position of the leading candidates on U.S. policy toward Southeast Asia and Thailand.

b. Assure Thanom that we will consult on the phase-down of U.S. units in Thailand and on the economic impact of reduced U.S. military spending in order to provide for as smooth a transition as possible.

3. U.S. Support for Thai Counterinsurgency Programs

The Thai have been making progress in countering their insurgency, although major problems remain, particularly in North Thailand. They are reasonably satisfied with the amount and kind of our support for their counterinsurgency effort, but may seek accelerated delivery of MAP and AID equipment.

Our Mission in Bangkok has been studying Thai and U.S. resources, demands against these resources, and burden-sharing. This study indicates in general terms that the Thai are capable of allocating even greater resources than they are now devoting to rural areas threatened by Communist insurgency. The amounts will have to be worked out in Bangkok.

Recommended U.S. Position a. Compliment Thanom on the success of the Thai approach to the insurgency problem, combining civic development with police and military security measures.

b. Assure him of our continuing support for the Thai counterinsurgency program and of our efforts to expedite deliveries.

c. Tell Thanom we welcome the increasing amounts his Government has been devoting to rural development and counterinsurgency. Express the hope that even greater resources will be made available. (We will be discussing this in greater detail with Thai Budget Bureau Director Renu, who will be with the Prime Minister.)

4. Press Criticism

As you are well aware, Foreign Minister Thanat is sensitive to comments from American press and other sources which he regards as critical of Thailand and of its support for U.S. policy in Southeast Asia. There have been no recent articles to arouse his ire since your last meeting with him in January, but we understand there may be some Time and Newsweek articles stimulated by this visit which could include critical comment.

Recommended U.S. Position

That you handle this in your usual effective manner.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, PM Than-om Kittikachorn Visit Briefing Book, 5/8–9/68. Secret. Drafted by Spear, cleared by Aldrich, Devine of DOD/ISA, John R. Burke of EA/VN, Louis A. Cohen of EA/RA, and William W. Thomas, Jr. of EA.

385. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 385. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 6, 1968.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the Prime Minister of Thailand

Thanom will have three major concerns:

The U.S. commitment to Thailand, particularly after your term of office.

Where we are headed in Viet-Nam.

U.S. support for Thai development and counter-insurgency programs.

A. U.S. Commitment to Thailand

Thanom and his colleagues are deeply concerned about an early, large-scale U.S. withdrawal from SEA under your successor and will be making their own first-hand appraisal of the U.S. political situation as it affects Thailand. Thanom has asked that USAF units remain in Thailand, in reduced numbers, after U.S. withdrawal from Viet-Nam.

Suggest you give Thanom a full, frank explanation of the domestic political scene, particularly as it relates to Southeast Asia. Also agree to consultations on withdrawal of U.S. units in Thailand.

B. Viet-Nam Issues

1. Military Situation. Thanom will want to know how we see the military situation developing. Thai leaders have felt that we have given insufficient priority to making the GVN and ARVN effective, and Foreign Minister Thanat has offered to speak to GVN leaders, urging them to work together.

Suggest that: a) You tell him where we are going in the war;

b) You express appreciation for Thanatʼs willingness to talk to the Vietnamese leaders, but explain that others have done so recently and Thanatʼs approach might be interpreted at this time as “ganging up.”

c) Stress the need for arrival of the Thai division on schedule in July.

2. Negotiations. The Thai, with unhappy memories of the Geneva negotiations of 1962, are skeptical about negotiations and will press for fullest consultation and eventual participation.

Suggest that: a) You stress we are entering negotiations from a position of strength;

b) Review the course of our efforts to establish contacts with NVN, explaining the reason for our positions;

c) You go over Ambassador Harrimanʼs instructions in general terms;

d) You assure Thanom that our position in negotiations will be based on the Manila communiqué and the 14 points and we stand on effective implementation of the Geneva Accords on Laos and Viet-Nam, and for free choice in South Viet-Nam;

e) You stress that by removing the war and negotiations from the political campaign, you are freer to do what is necessary to pursue these matters to a successful conclusion.

C. Support for Thai Counter-Insurgency and Development

Concerned over possible U.S. withdrawal, the Thai want to be in a position to defend themselves under any circumstances. Thanom will press for accelerated delivery of MAP and AID equipment for countering Communist insurgency in Thailand. Thanom might also ask U.S. assistance in road-building in Northeast Thailand.

Suggest that: a) You express satisfaction at Thai determination to lick insurgency on their own and the progress they are making;

b) Assure them we are seeking to expedite MAP and AID deliveries and of our continuing support;

c) Express hope they will continue to allocate even greater Thai resources to rural areas threatened by insurgency;

d) We are exploring ways of assisting in road-building. Ambassador Unger will follow up on this back in Bangkok.

D. In addition, we wish to make the following points:

1. Status of Forces Agreement. We are pleased that talks are now under way on a SOFA and hope that our two Governments can conclude an agreement promptly. In the interim, we hope the Thai Government will continue its forbearance in matters in jurisdiction over U.S. military personnel in Thailand.

2. Neutralizing U.S. Security Expenditures in Thailand. Thailandʼs growing economic strength should enable it to assist us further in our balance of payments program. Our State and Treasury officials are looking forward to discussing this matter with Thai financial leaders. We hope the Prime Minister will support these efforts.

Foreign Minister Thanat has asked to be present during your discussions with Thanom. This would be desirable to insure effective communication since the Prime Ministerʼs English is not as good as it appears to be.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, Memos, 8/67–7/68. Secret. The Department of State copy of this memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Spear. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 THAI)

386. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Marks) to President Johnson 386. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Marks) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 6, 1968.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with the Prime Minister of Thailand

Problems

After your meeting with Prime Minister Thanom, I will talk to him about two problems:2 1. The Thai Government has not given proper attention to the need for a national information program designed to gain popular support. Hence, USIA operates some information programs which I want the Thai to assume.

2. The Thai are having trouble with their foreign press coverage, some of which they consider “insulting.” Yet, they merely react after a story is published instead of paying attention to correspondents beforehand. Foreign Minister Thanat has talked of banning “unfriendly” correspondents, a step which I believe would backfire.

Recommendations

I recommend that in your discussion with the Prime Minister you: 1. Emphasize the importance of a Thai-initiated national information program to improve communications between his government and the Thai people.

2. Suggest that the best way to encourage friendly foreign press coverage for Thailand would be to pay more attention to foreign correspondents in Bangkok before they write their stories.

3. Tell the Prime Minister that you have instructed me to meet with him separately to discuss in detail ways in which we can be helpful to him.

Leonard H. Marks

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Thanom Kittikachorn Visit, 5/8–9/68. Confidential

2 No other record of the Marks-Thanom conversation has been found.

387. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 387. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, May 8, 1968.

SUBJECT

Notes of Presidentʼs Conversation with Thanom, May 8, 12:00–1:00 p.m.

I am sending you in this single copy my notes of the Presidentʼs conversation with Thanom at this first meeting. For working purposes, I gave a quick summary of the highlights to Secretary Rusk and to Secretary Clifford for their use in their follow-up conversations. I also informed Ambassador Unger in a general sense.

As the conversation went, Thanom and Thanat met privately with the President for about 10–15 minutes, after which the President invited Ambassador Duke and myself to join.

1. Presidentʼs Decision/Selection of Paris. When I entered, the President stated that he had already briefly discussed the reasons for his personal decision with Thanom, and that he had particularly wished to do this privately. He also reported that he had briefly discussed the reasons for the selection of Paris for the talks, and that he had already got Than-omʼs assurance that the Thai would continue with their troop commitment this year. The dates the President mentioned—without contradiction from the Thai—were not later than July for the first contingent, and November (sic) for the second contingent. (I believe in later conversations the second contingentʼs time of arrival was more generalized and in any case to be before the end of the year.)

2. Possible TCC Summit. Thanom raised this issue, asking simply whether the President thought a summit meeting might be useful in the next few weeks. The President responded that he would be in a better position to judge by July 1st. He was expecting to see Thieu and all the other TCC heads by then; he mentioned that it was Mrs. Marcos he expected to see, but made a remark to the effect that Marcos did not have much of a stake anyway. (He did not spell out any plan for seeing Holyoake.)

The President went on that he could most conveniently go to Honolulu, and would hold his schedule flexible to make this possible on fairly short notice. He was prepared in principle to meet with any two or more of the TCC if this were useful. At the same time, we all had to be on our guard lest the press interpret such a meeting as having a crisis flavor.

Thanom responded that he himself was ready to come to Honolulu whenever the President judged it useful and wise to do so, and would hold himself flexible.

The President then said that we might have a better judgment in 2–4 weeks, and asked whether Thanom had any special date in mind.

Thanom responded that he did not, and that “we will follow your convenience.”

Comment: My feeling was that the President had expressed just the right blend of sympathy and reserve, and it seemed to be quite clear that Thanom was not pressing very hard. There was no mention of the idea later proposed by Thanat, of a Foreign Ministers meeting in Bangkok.

3. Prospects for the Paris Talks. Thanom asked how the President saw the Paris talks unfolding, and the President said that of course stopping the bombing might be the immediate issue. We would press quite hard for clear indications of what Hanoi would do, and take a very firm position. If Hanoi did not give us such indications, we might at some point face the question of stopping the bombing on a trial basis to see what happened. However, the President made clear that this was a most tentative forecast, and that all that he could say definitely was that we were going into the talks in a firm position. As I recall, the President made some mention of our recent military successes, political improvements in Saigon, and the gentle feeling that we were in a fairly strong position.

4. Balance of Payments. The President then brought up the question of the Thai assisting us on our balance of payments problem by transferring some of their reserves into longer-term US securities. At the Presidentʼs request, I described the proposal in general terms—as involving a transfer from present short-term holdings to longer-term holdings bearing a higher rate of interest. I noted that of course such an arrangement would require technical discussions.

Thanom reacted sympathetically to the Presidentʼs suggestion, and said that his government would be entirely willing to discuss this further in a forthcoming spirit. He indicated that there were other monetary questions that needed discussion, without specifying what these were.

Comment: The matter was further pursued by Secretary Rusk with Thanat (with Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Petty present), and more informally by Mr. Barnett with Pote. The Thai subsequently agreed to the visit now being carried out by Barnett and Treasury representatives.

5. MAP Program. The President brought this matter up, saying that he had just received a recommendation from Defense that we go ahead to furnish a half of the cost of a frigate for the Thai Navy, along the lines the Thai had suggested. He said that he was giving a firm go-ahead on this, and that Thanom could now understand that this request was approved. Thanom reacted with obvious pleasure to this disclosure. (The matter was further discussed by Secretary Clifford at the afternoon meeting that day.)

6. Satellite Conversation. The President then alluded briefly to the plan that he and Thanom should inaugurate the Satellite circuit with a conversation after the dinner to be held that night. Again Thanom reacted with obvious pleasure.

7. Thai Counter-Insurgency Program. The President then asked Thanom how the insurgency situation was going. Thanom responded that the Laos Government was being more cooperative in the northern areas, and that things were generally going better. He particularly referred to the capture of key Communist leaders, and said that this had provided a wealth of information on the way the apparatus worked. He did note that they were still unable to find out what the source of funds was.

Thanom also noted that the situation in the northeast had cooled down, and said that the real cure there and elsewhere lay in economic and social measures. In response to the Presidentʼs question whether there were any gaps in our own assistance, Thanom said that things were in satisfactory shape, although he also mentioned that they were concerned that our programs remain adequate in respect to the hill tribes effort, the volunteer defense corps, and the village security force. The President said we would have a look at these, to be sure they were adequate. He made no commitments, and this discussion was in general terms.

WPB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Files of Walt Rostow, President-Thanom meeting, May, 8, 1968. Secret; Eyes Only. According to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary, the meeting lasted from 12:14 to 1 p.m. (Ibid.) Transmitted to the White House on May 20.

388. Memorandum of Conversation 388. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 8, 1968, 3:30–5:35 p.m.

I–22598/68

SUBJECT

Visit of Thailand Prime Minister, Thanom Kittikachorn

PARTICIPANTS

United States Side Secretary of Defense—Clark M. Clifford

Deputy Secretary of Defense—Paul H. Nitze

Assistant Secretary of Defense—Paul C. Warnke

U.S. Ambassador to Thailand—Leonard Unger

Assistant for Thailand (ISA)—James B. Devine

Thailand Side Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn

H.E. Thanat Khoman, Minister of Foreign Affairs

H.E. Pote Sarasin, Minister of National Development and Minister of Economic Affairs

H.E. Bunchana Atthakor, Ambassador to the United States of America

LtGen Sawaeng Senanarong, Secretary General of the Prime Ministerʼs Office

LtGen Kriangsak Chomanan, Deputy Chief of Staff, Supreme Command Headquarters

Renoo Savansit, Director, Bureau of the Budget

Introduction

After welcoming the Prime Minister and his party and reminiscing about their previous meetings in Manila and Bangkok, the Secretary asked if there were any items the Prime Minister wished to raise.

Patrol Frigate

The Secretary said he understood that a patrol frigate was recently approved for the Thai Navy and wondered if the Prime Minister was aware of this. The Prime Minister, who spoke in Thai throughout the meeting and had his remarks summarized in English by one of his party, usually Lieutenant General Kriangsak Chomanom, indicated the President had informed him of the approval that morning but that he was not clear on the details. Ambassador Unger commented that the approved cost-sharing arrangements were the same as those discussed by MACTHAI with the Thai Navy in Bangkok. General Kriangsak then asked if the ongoing O&M costs for the frigate would be borne by the military assistance program. Mr. Nitze agreed that they would, but within the existing MAP ceiling for Thailand.

Vietnam

Secretary Clifford then turned the discussion to Vietnam and, specifically, the results of the Communist Tet offensive. He observed that the initial reaction in this country was that it was a victory for the enemy but this was before all the facts were in. With the facts we now have, it is apparent, he said, that the enemy suffered a severe setback, especially in the losses they suffered in their elite units. The offensive also failed from a psychological viewpoint in that the Vietnamese people did not welcome the NVA/VC as liberators in the cities.

The Secretary moved on to a review of the Khe Sanh situation and observed that Communist efforts to turn it into another Dien Bien Phu had failed. He said the enemy withdrew as a result of the punishment they received from the B–52 strikes and the highly accurate artillery fire. He stressed that the Communist withdrawal was not a de-escalation gesture; the enemy simply could not stand the losses they were receiving, i.e., an estimated 12,000 were killed.

Bringing his review of Vietnam up to the present, Secretary Clifford noted that approximately 100,000 North Vietnamese had moved through the Panhandle of North Vietnam since the first of the year and the great majority of these had infiltrated into South Vietnam. But recent Communist attacks on some 129 cities, towns, hamlets, and airfields have had virtually no lasting effect.

Peace Talks

The Secretary concluded his discussion of Vietnam by reviewing the U.S. position on the Paris peace talks. He acknowledged that we were unclear as to North Vietnamʼs true intentions and indicated that we would just have to wait and see how the negotiations proceeded. He suggested three possibilities, however. North Vietnam may see the talks as a way to augment its military capabilities or, along the same line, it may view them as a means of lulling the American public into a false sense of euphoria. Alternatively, it may see the talks as an avenue for arriving at a peaceful settlement of the war.

The Secretary then reviewed the reasons for the Presidentʼs decision not to seek another term, noting that had he stayed a candidate it would have exacerbated the existing political divisions in this country. As it now stands, the Presidentʼs decision has resulted in much greater unity and understanding here.

As concerns our future intentions in Southeast Asia, Secretary Clifford stressed that it was the Presidentʼs firm intention to protect the investment we had made in that area. In short, we would not pull out and write off the investment of 21,000 military personnel killed in action and the billions we have spent in our efforts to insure self-determination for the Vietnamese people. He stated further that the Paris talks would not affect our goals in other areas of Southeast Asia, particularly in Thailand. We were willing to try for peace at Paris but if these diplomatic efforts failed, we would have to go the military route.

Thai SVN Division

The Secretary at this point asked the Prime Minister about the status of the Thai light division and, specifically, if there were any equipment problems that were affecting its training. After a discussion in Thai with the Prime Minister, General Kriangsak said that training was proceeding smoothly and that the necessary equipment was arriving, but that there was a shortage of 1.6 million baht ($80,000) for latrines at the Kachinaburi training site. Kriangsak also said that, in response to a query from the President that morning regarding the feasibility of accelerating the deployment of the Thai force to SVN, the Prime Minister had replied that an acceleration of the training schedule would adversely affect the operational readiness of the unit. Prime Minister Thanom felt that the currently planned training cycle was required for the first increment but that they would try to move up the deployment date of the second increment from January to November if it could be done without degrading the readiness of the unit. At this juncture, Foreign Minister Thanat commented that it was his understanding that there were some deficiencies in arms that had been due in March for the unit. No one at the table was familiar with any such shortage. Secretary Clifford directed that the problem be investigated and indicated that if deficiencies did exist he would put a man on it and correct the problem. (Note: A subsequent discussion with General Kriangsak and investigations by DA indicate that Thanat was referring to typewriters and one or two radios and tool sets, none of which affect the readiness of the unit.)

Insurgency Situation

The Secretary inquired about the status of the insurgency in Thailand. After receiving the Prime Ministerʼs thoughts in Thai, General Kriangsak responded that insurgent strength in the Northeast had diminished, that the number of CI defectors had risen, primarily due to effective use of radio station 909 for psychological purposes, and that the Civilian-Police-Military CI approach had proven very effective. Kriangsak briefly alluded to the situation in North Thailand, observing that the hilltribes presented a special problem. He noted that a force of 15 police was ambushed shortly after they left on their trip.

RTA Logistics and Personnel

Secretary Clifford remarked that he had been informed that the Thai Army logistical system was in need of substantial improvement. He said that much of the equipment already provided by the U.S. appeared not to be properly utilized due to a shortage of such commodities as tires and batteries which could be provided from Thai sources. He stressed the need to retain skilled personnel in the Thai Armed Forces, especially in the junior officer and NCO categories. He also noted that additional RTA units might be required in insurgency threatened areas. The Secretary concluded by noting that there was need for closer U.S.-Thai cooperation in the entire field of logistics and that we must work together to remedy the problems.

The Prime Minister through General Kriangsak admitted that the Secretaryʼs remarks were indeed true. For example, he noted that Army, Navy and Air Force helicopters had separate maintenance systems and that recruitment procedures required improvement. (Note: Efforts are currently underway to establish a single helicopter maintenance facility for all RTA, RTAF and Police helicopters.) He said that the Thai would do the best they could to solve existing problems. He did observe, however, that the shortage of skilled personnel was due in part to the need to fill out the forces to be deployed to SVN.

Helicopters Deliveries

General Kriangsak then asked if the helicopter delivery schedule previously approved by Secretary McNamara would be met. Ambassador Bunchana interjected that he hoped we would be able to waive the proviso that U.S.-Vietnam helo requirements might conceivably necessitate diversion of the helicopters to Vietnam. Mr. Warnke observed that we must reserve that right but it was not expected that diversion to Vietnam would be required. Secretary Clifford reiterated Mr. Warnkeʼs comments, noting that he had recently approved an increase in helicopter engine production which had heretofore been the major bottleneck in helo production.

Korat to Ubon Road

General Kriangsak, at the Prime Ministerʼs behest, then raised the subject of a Korat to Ubon road. He outlined the justification for it in terms of its requirement under SEATO Oplans and Project 22, as an aid to CI efforts, as important for the flow of USAF commodities to the Ubon airbase, and as having value to Thailandʼs economic development. Kriangsak went on to express the hope that U.S. engineers could help with the project. (See below for further discussion of road.)

Budget Priorities

The Secretary thereupon raised the subject of budget priorities, observing that DOD must absorb one half of the FY69 overall budget cut agreed to by the President. He emphasized the gold flow problem confronting us and stressed that the U.S. and RTG would have to work together in determining what is needed right now and what can be postponed. He went on to say that each program in Thailand needs to be examined from this standpoint given the limited available resources.

Status of Forces Negotiations

Secretary Clifford then raised the subject of the status of forces agreement negotiations and stressed the need for reaching prompt agreement. He observed that the matter of criminal jurisdiction was a particularly delicate issue, but stated that servicemen charged with offenses arising from the course of their official duties or offenses involving only U.S. interests should be tried by U.S. courts. He recognized that both Governments have public opinion problems and noted that there was concern here regarding Thai handling of a recent case involving a U.S. sergeant. Ambassador Unger outlined the current status of SOFA negotiations, indicating that he and the Foreign Minister had reviewed the subject and that many of the problems were on their way to resolution.

Foreign Minister Thanat interjected the observations that the SOFA issue had been on the books for some seven years and that the U.S. had never responded to an earlier Thai SOFA proposal. He emphasized the importance of the need to consider Thai public opinion and stated emphatically that certain offenses had to be dealt with under Thai law, especially in peace time. He said that the Thai Government was not opposed to a status of forces agreement and that it was prepared to proceed on a reasonable basis. He alluded to the case of the U.S. sergeant and commented that there were apparently conflicting reports on what actually occurred, but indicated that we should not engage in controversy but rather work together.

Base Security

The Prime Minister through General Kriangsak discussed the base security problem in Thailand and the need for increased manning, more weapons and communications equipment. Kriangsak asked if the U.S. would be of assistance. Mr. Warnke confirmed the urgency we attach to base security and expressed our willingness to examine jointly measures that might be taken to improve the current program. The Secretary stated his agreement with this approach. Kriangsak went on to note that there was a requirement for equipment for an additional regiment of Thai guards to permit rotation of the current force for training purposes. Ambassador Unger suggested incorporating this proposal in the aforementioned review of the base security program and the Secretary agreed to this.

U.S. Use of Foreign Nationals, Services, and Commodities

Pote Sarasin then raised the problem of U.S. contractor use of foreign nationals, particularly Filipinos, for services that could be performed just as well by Thai. Secretary Clifford asked how many foreign personnel were involved. General Kriangsak said he did not have specified figures but cited tug boat services for which a contract could have been let to a Thai company but instead went to a Philippine company. Ambassador Unger said that, as a matter of policy, first preference did go to Thai if they possessed the necessary skills. Secretary Clifford agreed that this should be the test and again asked for illustrations of where this policy was not followed so that we could trace back to see what went wrong. He asked Ambassador Unger to maintain liaison with the RTG on this subject.

General Kriangsak suggested that the U.S. provide the RTG a list of its requirements so that efforts could be made to build the necessary capability in Thailand. Kriangsak also mentioned that cement had been imported when it could have been procured locally and that a local airline could provide administrative airlift services that were currently being performed by an outside line. He said that MACTHAI was cooperating in this regard, but was hopeful that more could be done.

(Secretary Clifford and Mr. Warnke left the room on urgent business for a few minutes at this point.)

C–123ʼs for RTAF Tachikawa Detachment

After a lengthy discussion in Thai with the Prime Minister, General Kriangsak discussed the Thai Air Force detachment at Tachikawa, Japan, and the requirement that exists back in Thailand for the unitʼs two C–47ʼs. He asked if the U.S. could replace these with two C–123ʼs. Mr. Nitze confirmed that we are prepared to do this. The Prime Minister expressed his appreciation.

Delivery of Engineer Equipment

Kriangsak then asked that the delivery of engineer equipment we now have programmed under MAP for a Thai engineer construction battalion be expedited. He said the equipment was badly needed and that they could not wait three, four or five years for it. Mr. Nitze observed that this subject, along with others that had been raised, would be better considered first in the field. Kriangsak said the Prime Minister agreed, and that he mentioned them for Washingtonʼs information.

HAWK Battery

General Kriangsak at this point brought up the HAWK battery and indicated that the RTG had learned a great deal about the HAWK system through the visits of Thai officers to Vietnam and Taiwan. Mr. Nitze commented that the HAWK battery was a good example of what Secretary Clifford had meant earlier regarding the need to look at priorities.

Korat to Ubon Road

The subject of the road from Korat to Ubon was brought up again by General Kriangsak. Mr. Nitze reiterated the need for both the U.S. and RTG to undertake high priority projects first and postpone others. In this connection, he said we had similar problems initially with the patrol frigate proposal in light of the more pressing counterinsurgency requirements.

(At this juncture, Secretary Clifford and Mr. Warnke returned.)

Appointment of Thai to U.S. Service Academies

The discussion turned to Thai desires to have additional Thai admitted to the three U.S. Service Academies. Ambassador Bunchana indicated he had discussed a Naval Academy appointment with Secretary of the Navy Paul Ignatius. General Kriangsak quoted the Prime Minister as saying he asked for appointments for Thai during his 1959 visit to the U.S. but had never received a response from the Navy. Secretary Clifford promised to look into the matter.

Status of Forces Negotiations

The meeting ended with Foreign Minister Thanat observing that there was more to the SOFA negotiations than the criminal jurisdiction issue. He said RTG willingness to cooperate was illustrated by the tax exemptions that had been granted just as if a SOFA existed. He asserted that these amount to 200,000,000 baht annually.

Conclusion

After an exchange of amenities, the meeting ended.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Clifford Papers, Memorandum of Conversation. Secret. Drafted by Devine and approved by Warnke on May 13. The meeting was held in Cliffordʼs office at the Pentagon.

389. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow) 389. Memorandum From Marshall Wright of the National Security Council Staff to the Presidentʼs Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, May 8, 1968.

SUBJECT

SIG Meeting on Thailand2 —May 9, 3:30 p.m.

There are no decisions to be taken at the meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to examine in depth with Len Unger the situation in Thailand and United States programs there. I understand that Katzenbach is being provided with some rather sharp questions about the relationship between programs, whether they are consistent with each other, and whether they should be changed in the light of our experience in Vietnam. Katzenbach may also question whether the Thai take the insurgency as seriously as we do and whether they are putting enough resources into the counter-insurgent effort.

Another likely topic is the political situation in Thailand and how the Ambassador views the likelihood and significance of elections. (The present guess is the constitution will be promulgated in June with elections to follow in January or February of 1969.)

In my mind the three most interesting things to pursue with Len are: 1. How do we handle the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Thailand post-Vietnam without causing the Thai to panic? How serious will the economic effect be of our withdrawal? How should we cushion it? (Our troop presence in Thailand is by no means an unmixed blessing for the Thai and will become even less so if they move into open politics. I suspect that if we will avoid giving the Thai the impression that we are in hot haste to get the troops out, they will probably themselves suggest fairly rapid schedules of withdrawals for most of our forces. If, however, we seem anxious about it, it will arouse all their latent fears about the firmness of our commitment to them.)

2. What kind of arrangements on Laos are necessary as part of the Vietnam settlement from the Thai point of view? What is the relationship between the post-Vietnam situation in Laos and the Thai attitude toward a U.S. military presence in Thailand.

3. What effect will the coming of open politics have on U.S.-Thai cooperation? What can we do to minimize the bad things and maximize the good.

Attached is a paper circulated by Art Hartman which outlines the major issues to which Len Unger has been asked to speak.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Vol. 4, 36th meeting. No classification marking.

2 In March 1966 the Johnson administration created the Senior Interdepartmental Group chaired by the Under Secretary of State and supported by Interdepartmental Review Groups (IRGs) headed by the Assistant Secretary of State for the appropriate area. The action was an attempt to return to the Department of State primary responsibility for foreign policy formulation and supervision of interdepartmental activities abroad.

3 Attached, but not printed.

390. National Intelligence Estimate 390. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, May 9, 1968.

NIE 52–68

COMMUNIST INSURGENCY IN THAILAND

The Problem

To assess the probable development of Communist insurgency in Thailand over the next two years or so.

Conclusions

A. The Communist insurgent threat to the stability of the Thai Government has not grown appreciably over the past year despite the appearance of insurgent activity in additional areas of the country. At the heart of the insurgentsʼ failure to make significant progress is the lack of a charismatic leader or a compelling issue with which to stir popular emotions. The insurgent movement is further handicapped by its foreign flavor; its policies are strongly influenced by Peking and its leaders are predominantly Thai-born Chinese.

B. The Thai Government has generally shown increasing competence in dealing with the insurgency. But many problems remain, including bureaucratic rivalries and the failure of the government and the army to make the most effective use of the resources already at their disposal.

C. Despite its many serious handicaps, it is probable that the insurgency in Thailand, with the continued support of Peking and Hanoi, will persist and even increase in intensity over the next two years or so. Even though government suppression activities may become more effective, it is unlikely that major guerrilla units will be eliminated; the guerrillas will probably gain in skill and continue to find sufficient numbers of adventurous youth and disaffected peasants to maintain something like their current personnel strength. The Northeast will continue to be the key area, but the local threat in the North may become more serious.

D. The insurgent movement would almost certainly benefit from a settlement in Vietnam favorable to the Communists; the benefits would be even greater if all Laos fell to Communist control. But the Thai Government would not be disposed to accommodate with the domestic insurgents in either case, and there would not be an automatic and rapid growth in the insurgent movement. The effectiveness of the counterinsurgency program, however, could be diminished by political instability at the center resulting from the combined impact of Communist successes in Indochina, uncertainty as to the future role of the US on the Southeast Asian mainland, and divisions over the international political adjustments thought necessary to ensure Thailandʼs survival in a new environment.

[Here follows the Discussion portion of the paper, and two maps, “Communist Activity and Major U.S. Military Bases,” and “Major Ethnic Groups.”]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, 52, Thailand. Secret. The CIA, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and the NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. All members of the USIB concurred with its release except the representatives of the AEC and FBI who abstained on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. A table of contents and a map entitled “Thailand Communist Insurgency Regions” are not printed.

391. Editorial Note 391. Editorial Note

Secretary of State Dean Rusk met with Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn and Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman on May 9, 1968, at 10 a.m. at Blair House. Ruskʼs next appointment was at 10:30 a.m. at the Department of State. Rusk later hosted a lunch for Thanat in the Madison Room of the Department of State at 1 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) The first meeting at Blair House was recorded by Moncrieff J. Spear, the Country Director for Thailand, as separate memoranda of conversation for each topic. The first topics were Vietnam negotiations and Laos; the second, U.S. Treasury bonds and dollars reserves held by the Thai; the third, information activities; the fourth, the Michigan State Universityʼs contract for educational assistance and planning; the fifth, regionalism; and the sixth, status of forces negotiations. These memoranda, May 9, are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET, FN 9 US–THAI, POL 23 THAI, AID (US) 8–6 THAI, POL ASIA, DEF 15–3 THAI–US, respectively. The record for the luncheon meeting on the 8th floor of the Department followed the same format of one topic, one memorandum of conversation. Rusk and Thanat discussed the U.S. press, ASEAN and the Sabah claim, Cambodia, the Vietnam peace talks, and Treasury bonds (with a official of the U.S. Treasury, John R. Petty, who attended the lunch for that purpose). These memoranda, May 9, are ibid., PPB 9 US, POL 3 ASEAN, POL 17 CAMB–US, POL 27–14 VIET, FN 9 US–THAI, respectively. A file of documents relating to the Thanom/Thanat visit is ibid., S/S-Official Visits File: Lot 70 D 419, V-62a and b.

392. Memorandum of Conversation 392. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 9, 1968, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Negotiations (Part I of IV)

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The President

Mr. Walt Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Assistant Secretary William P. Bundy

Ambassador Leonard Unger

Mr. Moncrieff J. Spear, Country Director, Thailand

Mr. David Edminister, Department of State—interpreter

Thai Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn

Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Minister of National Development and Economics Pote Sarasin

Lt. General Sawaeng Senanarong, Secretary General of Government House

Ambassador Bunchana Atthakor

Paris Conversations

The President said that, based on a speech made by Foreign Minister Thanat, our position at Paris would be that the provisions of any peace settlement should be monitored by the Asians themselves. He hoped that Thailand would approach other Asian states such as Japan and Indonesia with regard to the role of the Asian monitors. The Prime Minister asked “Which states?” The President replied Ambassadors Harriman and Vance would be in touch about this after the talks had started and we had consulted our other allies.

The President said that the Thai had found out the night before at the White House dinner how close together we all were—like one family. He noted he had visited Thailand three times and wanted to come again. Foreign Minister Thanat asked him to do so. The Prime Minister then thanked the President for all his kindness, and referred to the useful talks which he had had with Secretary Rusk regarding the Paris talks and ways and means of keeping in close contact. He referred to the Secretaryʼs assurances about the United States negotiating position and expressed the full confidence of the Royal Thai Government in U.S. conduct of the talks.

Three Cautions

The President then cautioned the Prime Minister on three points: 1. The North Vietnamese thought that we lacked the will to carry the struggle in Viet-Nam to a successful conclusion. It was necessary to tell our people that now was the time to put all our resources into the fight and “move the whole stack in”.

2. The North Vietnamese would also be seeking to divide us here in the United States, hoping to win in Washington what they were unable to get on the battlefield. They would refer to corruption in South Viet-Nam, say our allies were shirking their duty, etc. To curb this divisiveness, the President said he had decided to forego seeking another term of office so that he would be freed for the balance of this year to devote his full interest to the struggle in Viet-Nam and negotiations. He had appealed to all candidates not to involve the war in the political campaign. He felt that he had been able to “cool it” a good deal.

3. The enemy was further seeking to divide us from our allies—frightening the Koreans with the prospects of a second front, using similar tactics against Thailand, and trying to convince the Vietnamese that the United States would sell them out. The Communists would also seek to twist the Prime Ministerʼs visit and try to get a fight going in the family. The President hoped we would all be on guard against these tactics.

The press, the President noted, wanted good headlines. If the allies were getting on well, this was not news. But if, for example, there was a story that the Prime Minister had made a mistake or he, the President, had made a mistake, or that our troops were going to be pulled out, this would make the headlines. But, as he had said last night, the Prime Minister shouldnʼt believe such stories.

The Thai could be confident that the President would devote the remainder of his time in office to getting an honorable peace; he was not about to run out on his commitments, his principles, or his friends. Therefore, the Prime Minister should get his 11,000 troops to Viet-Nam just as fast as he could. Our allies are the only friends we have, so we must trust them. One could criticize every country, but it was more important that we spend our time criticizing our enemies, not our friends.

The Prime Minister replied that he fully agreed with the President regarding enemy attempts to sow suspicion and dissension. The Thai would not allow themselves to be duped. At the same time, they were apprehensive about “some in our ranks”. The President, mentioning Senators Fulbright and Kennedy, said he shared this apprehension. The United States, after all, had more of these critics per capita than the Thai.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68. Secret. Drafted by Spear and cleared by Bundy. The meeting was held at the White House from 5:11 to 5:36 p.m., according to the Presidentʼs Daily Diary. (Ibid.) Part II, a separate memorandum, was an account of the President congratulating Thanat on his birthday; Part III concerned the increased Thai use of fertilizer and the need for sulphur that Johnson promised to obtain for Thailand from major U.S. producers. (Ibid.) Part IV is Document 393.

393. Memorandum of Conversation 393. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 9, 1968, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Thai Troop Deployment (Part IV of IV)

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The President

Mr. Walt Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

Assistant Secretary William P. Bundy

Ambassador Leonard Unger

Mr. Moncrieff J. Spear, Country Director, Thailand

Mr. David Edminister, Department of State—interpreter

Thai Prime Minister Thanom Kittikachorn

Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman

Minister of National Development and Economics Pote Sarasin

Lt. General Sawaeng Senanarong, Secretary General of Government House

Ambassador Bunchana Atthakor

The President said he considered the deployment of 11,000 Thai troops to Viet-Nam to be of the highest priority. He referred to increased Korean deployments and our own dispatch of additional troops. Noting that the enemy lost around 100,000 men since the beginning of the Tet offensive, he said that our own losses in this period were 6,000. It was necessary to strike while the iron was hot, i.e. deploy the Thai troops by June, or certainly no later than the first of July. It was important that we “keep moving out” so we can “get somewhere in the talks.” The Prime Minister promised that the first increment of the Thai division would be in Viet-Nam in July and that the second would deploy about the turn of the year.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VII, 8/67–7/68. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Spear and cleared by Bundy.

394. Summary of Discussion and Decisions at the 36th Meeting of the Senior Interdepartmental Group 394. Summary of Discussion and Decisions at the 36th Meeting of the Senior Interdepartmental Group1

Washington, May 13, 1968.

PRESENT

Under Secretary of State, Chairman

Deputy Secretary of Defense

General Brown for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. Poats for the Administrator, Agency for International Development

The Director, United States Information Agency

SIG Staff Director

Ambassador Unger, Bangkok

JCS—General Orwat

ISA—Mr. Earle

State—Mr. Bundy

State—Mr. Spear

State—Mr. Ruser

I. Future Business

The SIG agreed to meet on Friday, May 10, noon, to consider contingency plans for Czechoslovakia.

II. Review of Thailand

The following are highlights of Ambassador Ungerʼs presentation and the ensuing discussion.

A. Thai Response to International Situation

Ambassador Unger said that there had been considerable uneasiness in Thailand about international developments earlier in the year—notably about the Presidentʼs announcement that he would not stand for re-election, and Hanoiʼs decision to negotiate. Both developments had made a deep impression on Thai thinking. The President, in Thai eyes, was the guarantor of United States foreign policy in Southeast Asia. There had been considerable nervousness, similar to that during the 1962 crisis, that the United States was anxious to cut its commitments in South Viet-Nam and that the terms of a settlement would leave South Viet-Nam open to Communist take-over.

The Thaiʼs present attitude was more realistic. The Wellington discussions2 had been useful in reassuring the Thai leadership with regard to United States intentions. The Thai had also been impressed by the firmness with which we had handled the site question. They considered Paris a reasonable compromise.

The Thais were realistic on negotiations. They would like to be kept informed but did not wish to become active participants in the talks. However, they would expect to be thoroughly consulted before the United States commits itself on the terms of a settlement. As they see their role as that of protector of South Viet-Namʼs interests, they would strongly object to a role of passive on-looker for either South Viet-Nam or themselves.

As regards the current visit, the Presidentʼs public and private comments had been very helpful in further reassuring the Thai leadership as was the language of the communiqué, which harks back to the Manila declaration.

B. Attitudes on Thai Security Interests

There was not in Thailand today a great deal of open political discussion. In fact, the majority of the politically articulate population probably did not at this time have clearly defined political views. There was a vaguely defined cleavage of loyalties that in general followed the division between the military and the civilian sectors of the Thai elite. However, there was a good deal of intermingling of these groups, and all the evidence supports the conclusion that the two groups work pretty well together.

On the other hand, there was probably below the surface some split of opinion with regard to Thai national security interests and the question of how closely Thailand should cooperate with the United States. Were we to create the impression that the United States was veering away from its SEATO commitments and the arrangements for joint military planning (such as Project 22), or if we were to lodge a disclaimer with respect to our commitments, this potential cleavage would come to the surface. The advocates of close cooperation with the United States, principally Thanom, Thanat and their associates, would come under fire. Praphat and his associates would push for a more independent, nationalist line. While the Thais would not break away from the Alliance, we would find them much less cooperative on issues on which we must deal with them.

The Ambassador said that he would not wish to overemphasize these nuances in the ruling eliteʼs attitudes. For the present, these shadings in views on Thailandʼs security interests were quiescent: they were potential rather than actual. We had an excellent chance of keeping them this way. But it was essential that we kept them in mind in all our decisions affecting Thai security interests.

C. Other Domestic Political Developments

Ambassador Unger foresaw a more difficult period in United States-Thai bilateral relations. Elections were scheduled under the new constitution for next February or March. This process—adoption of the constitution and preparations for the elections—would result in some ferment. For example, newspapers were already increasingly outspoken with respect to such issues as corruption, the size of the United States presence, the Thai commitment to the United States, and the costs of this commitment in terms of Thai national interests. The military was going along with the elections, albeit with some misgivings. There was some concern, particularly on the part of Praphat and his group, that the militaryʼs economic interests might be assailed publicly in the Assembly. Our people were making considerable effort to persuade Praphat and his group to adopt a more relaxed attitude toward public criticism and to take steps to improve their image.

D. The Insurgency

Ambassador Unger gave the view that, of the various insurgencies, that in the North was potentially the most serious.

The insurgency in the Northeast had gotten nowhere for about a year. The hard core of the insurgent groups was intact and capable of causing trouble. But these bands had been unable to increase the scope of their operations and had not succeeded in developing an effective propaganda line. The combination of Thai military, police, and civic action programs had been effective in containing these groups.

In the North, the potential for insurgency had existed for some time. Last year, the problem had been surfaced by sweeps of government forces into remote areas never fully under government control. A chain of events had led to a situation where control of the insurgency had become an issue of national prestige. Efforts by the Thai third army to suppress the insurgent groups had met with little success. Indeed, the nature of the armyʼs operations had further alienated the hill tribes inhabiting these areas.

The government was now trying to formulate a long-range policy for getting the insurgency under control. Some elements of this new security policy were encouraging. The third army now acknowledged the need to use tribesmen in intelligence and scouting missions. It was beginning to institute new development programs to complement security operations. The border police were being given greater responsibilities. An effort was made to profit from Lao successes in dealing with the Meo tribes. Clearly, however, the Thai had not yet found an effective security program for these remote regions.

The insurgency had now quieted down, and as the rains came, would quiet down further. Because of its ethnic basis, the insurgency was, to a considerable extent, self-limiting. On the other hand, because of the wide open Lao border, it was almost impossible for the Thai to establish and maintain control over these areas. In fact, it was uncertain how many of the insurgents were regular Thai residents and how many came across the Lao border from Sayaboury province.

In other parts of Thailand, the Ambassador said, the insurgency situation remained roughly the same, more potential than actual. There was some insurgent activity on the peninsula, particularly along the border with Burma (i.e. the West Central area). Police work was, generally speaking, effective, and the insurgency seemed fairly well under control.

As regards border areas with Malaysia, small insurgent groups of Malay-Chinese stock had been maintaining themselves there for quite a number of years. Their operations had been directed mostly towards Malaysia. They had not made great efforts in the direction of Thailand. However, there was a potential threat to these areas from the fairly substantial, relatively well-off Chinese minority, whose loyalties to the Thai Government were suspect. This minority—as well as the Malay living in these southern provinces—were now politically inactive. But it was possible that the insurgents could stir up the Chinese minority through propaganda-insurgency efforts aimed at this group.

Cooperation between the Thai and Malaysian Governments was good. Border police units were numerous and fairly well equipped. A further useful step would be a Thai Government effort to improve relations with the Malay population. In this connection, Thai plans for the University of the South, as a focus for Malayan population and culture, had considerable importance.

Ambassador Unger stressed his conviction that this project should receive encouragement and support from the United States.

E. The United States Presence

Incidents involving American servicemen, the Ambassador observed, had the potential of causing considerable trouble. The Thais had tended to disregard these incidents in the past. With the reawakening of political activity, they were now receiving much greater newspaper publicity.

The point was made that according to Washington figures some 20 per cent of American servicemen continue to live off-base, and that this pattern tended to increase the number of incidents involving United States personnel. There was also a question of whether on-base recreation facilities for servicemen were adequate. The Ambassador said that considerable effort was being made to expand on-base housing as rapidly as possible. The problem of substantial numbers of servicemen living off-base was now largely confined to Udorn. He agreed that efforts must continue to improve recreational on-base facilities.

The Ambassador said he expected negotiations on the SOFA to be completed rapidly, following the Thanom visit and the opportunities it afforded for further discussions. The Thais were unwilling to accept an automatic waiver-of-jurisdiction provision, but would in practice agree to waive jurisdiction in the greatest number of cases possible. Meanwhile, a new problem has arisen: the national government had terminated the procedures in effect for several years, and the police now required a special order from Bangkok to be able to turn over detained servicemen to American authorities.

Ambassador Unger emphasized that we would, through a written exchange with the Thais, assure adequate protection of servicemenʼs rights in cases where the Thais were unwilling to waive jurisdiction.

It was noted that arrangements with Thailand were considerably more favorable than those with the Philippines, which were modeled after our SOFA with the Netherlands. Out of some 323 cases, the Philippines Government had waived jurisdiction only in 9. Nationalists in other East Asian countries, fortunately, had not so far focussed on the Philippine SOFA as a model for similar arrangements in their countries.

Another aspect of the United States presence, the Ambassador said, involved such intangibles as Thai attitudes, feelings, and perceptions.

The Thai, generally, remained friendly towards Americans. But there clearly was some uneasiness simply about the number of Americans, their effect on Thai culture, etc. However, although somewhat troubled, the Thai, generally, would like to see some United States presence after a Viet-Nam settlement.

The Thai Government had raised this matter before the present visit. It would like to see some United States forces stationed in Thailand indefinitely as an earnest of our commitment to their security. The Ambassador proposed we assure the Thai Government that we would not move precipitously and agree to consult before removing United States units.

F. The Thai Economy

The economic situation, Ambassador Unger said, was no longer quite as favorable as in past year. A drought and lower export prices for corn, jute and tapioca had slowed down economic growth in 1967. But, unless the drought should continue this year, there was no reason to think growth at a rate of 7–8 percent would not be restored. Economic expansion in the Bangkok area, in particular, was impressive. Some of it was superficial—the boom in real-estate values, etc.—but a good deal of it involved basic improvement of the economyʼs productivity.

Some of this prosperity was reaching the countryside but not as much as we considered desirable.

G. Thai Civilian-Military Relations

The Ambassador referred to concerns about a military coup, occasionally still encountered among observers of the Thai scene.

He gave the view that the political situation in Bangkok had changed very markedly from that prevailing during his earlier tour of duty in the late fifties. The process of government had become in large measure institutionalized. Control of the first army was no longer the key to political power. Rather, the stability and continuity of the government now depended upon the relationship between Thanom and Praphat, each of whom had his own large group of military and civilian followers throughout Thai public life. The elections would have no effect on this relationship. Furthermore, the ruling elites should have no difficulty in organizing some kind of party structure, which would provide additional support for the regime.

H. Follow-up Action

The Chairman said he wished to express to Ambassador Unger the SIGʼs appreciation for this comprehensive and candid presentation. He gave the view that we would want to keep the Thai situation under continuing close review, both in Bangkok and in Washington. He would like to endorse the various efforts now under way to assess and appraise aspects of our relationship with Thailand, including: —Assessment of the reliability of intelligence data on the insurgency now being undertaken by CIA.

—The Country Teamʼs resources study now under review by the IRG/EA.

—The assessment of AID programs requested in the memoranda to Messrs. Bundy and Bullitt,3 the latter to take into account the findings of the new NIE4 on Thailand and their implications for AIDʼs strategy.

The Chairman also referred to his earlier suggestion, in line with the Political-Military Groupʼs internal defense policy paper, that the IRG/EA form a working group-subcommittee to keep insurgency situations and internal defense programs under review for the East Asia region. He noted that in the Latin American area, such a group manned by experts on insurgency, had worked with excellent results. He saw such a working group as a way for EA to mobilize experience available in Washington to assist the bureau and the country teams in formulating its policies in this difficult area.

1 Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Vol. 4, 36th meeting. Secret; Limdis. There was no drafting information on the source text, which indicates that this was the “Chairmanʼs Summary of Discussion and Decisions.” It was probably drafted by Arthur A. Hartman, Staff Director of the SIG.

2 The combined SEATO, ANZUS, and Seven Troop Contributing Countries meeting at Wellington, New Zealand, April 1–6.

3 Apparent reference to Document 382 and the attachment thereto.

4  Document 390.

395. Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency 395. Memorandum Prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, July 10, 1968.

No. 0604/68

SUBJECT

Intelligence and the Thai Insurgency: An Assessment

1. It is our judgment that because of the nature of an insurgency movement there can be no such thing as full and comprehensive intelligence on an insurgency situation. Intelligence on the Thai insurgency is no exception; it is plagued with information gaps and other deficiencies.

2. By the same token, it is not inconsistent to say that intelligence over the past four years has provided an accurate outline of the insurgency problem in Thailand. Even in the early days of 1965, when the question of whether Thailand was faced with an insurgent threat was still a matter of dispute, intelligence from the field provided the basis for a relatively confident and, as events subsequently proved, wholly justified estimate that the threat was real enough. If the intelligence was strongly reportorial in nature, it nonetheless represented no mean accomplishment given the disorganized state of the Thai security and intelligence services.

3. The alacrity and doggedness with which US officials in Thailand followed the developing insurgency started to show results in late 1965 and early 1966, when interrogations and captured documents began to provide depth to what had been a two-dimensional picture of the insurgency. The accumulation of these reports, taken together with the routinely acquired knowledge of Communist activities, provided the basis for a national intelligence estimate in July 1966 which concluded, in effect, that the insurgency would grow somewhat over the following two years but would remain manageable. A CIA memorandum in August described in some detail the apparent weaknesses of the Communistsʼ (and the governmentʼs as well) organization in the countryside and concluded that for all of the bellicose statements emanating from Peking and Hanoi the insurgency was not on a firm footing, and the Communists would soon find the going rough. The judgments in both papers were made on the basis of raw intelligence developed in the field, and if they have weathered well, it is to the credit of the early intelligence effort in Thailand.

4. With the dimension of the insurgency situation largely established by the end of 1966, the more difficult task of filling in the holes in the intelligence picture became a major order of business. Performance in this area has been mixed. There is no question, for example, that we have a better, albeit still general, understanding of the Chinese role in promoting the Thai insurgency, but the relationship between Peking and Hanoi in this field is far from clear. Nor do we have a sound appreciation of the relationship between the Chinese and Thai Communist parties, although our information on the latter, particularly on its role in directing the insurgency, has grown significantly since the not-very-distant days when the Thai partyʼs very existence could be accepted only as an article of faith.

5. The blanks in the big picture, however, are less serious than the defects in coverage of the insurgent apparatus in Bangkok and the countryside. Despite the considerable strides that have been made over the past year, coverage is still largely focused on the military organization to the virtual exclusion of the more elusive, and, perhaps ultimately more important, political organization. Attention has been focused on Communist paramilitary groups and the areas where they exist. Communist propaganda and similar overt activities are reported from throughout Thailand, but the amount of clandestine subversive activity is harder to know, even through Thai villagers, due largely to the nonindigenous character of the insurgent organization in Thailand, volunteer information considerably more frequently than is the case in Vietnam.

6. [26–1/2 lines of source text not declassified.

7. Although there may be some disagreement over details, none of the problems or deficiencies either described or alluded to in this assessment will come as a surprise to those with a continuing and close interest in Thai affairs. More is being done now, however, to ensure that knowledge of the Thai insurgency is sufficient to avoid unpleasant surprises. Shoddy Thai procedures for handling enemy interrogations and captured documents are being tightened so the maximum return can be obtained from these primary sources, and strong efforts to develop unilateral penetrations of the enemy at appropriate levels are being pushed. Finally, a healthy skepticism prevails both in the field and in Washington about the current state of the insurgency—especially the pitfalls of relying too heavily on statistics—and this bodes well for the future in terms of a continuing hard look at the intelligence picture.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, SIG, Vol. 4, 36th meeting. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. A covering note from Hartman to SIG members, July 16, indicated that at the May 9 meeting of the SIG, the Chairman asked Helms for this assessment. It was given to the members of the SIG on a limited distribution basis. (Ibid.)

396. Memorandum of Conversation 396. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bangkok, July 18, 1968.

SUBJECT

Govt. Party

PARTICIPANTS

[name not declassified]

Ambassador Unger

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said he had asked me to come in immediately following a meeting which had taken place the day before involving I gathered, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. At that time [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to approach me to indicate a renewed interest in a US contribution for the Government Political Party. ([less than 1 line of source text not declassified] spoke in such a way as to suggest to me that he had been taking the initiative with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] who now was prepared to have the request to us renewed.) [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] confirmed to me again that only he, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] were witting of this matter.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] explained further that the Government Party had at last worked out its major problems of organization and that there was now complete unity among the leaders. The head of the party is the Prime Minister and his three deputies are Pote, Praphat and Pol. Gen. Prasert. ACM Dawee is the Secretary-General, although [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] pointed out that this is not in the same sense as the all-powerful Secretary-General of a Communist party. The three Deputy Secretaries-General, who relate to the three Deputies respectively, are Gen. Sawaeng, Gen. Krit Siwara, and Police General Pichai Kunlawanit. In addition, there are various advisors including Thanat for foreign affairs, Serm for finance, Phya Arthakariya Nibhonda for legal matters, and perhaps others. All of these officers of the party would constitute a board of directors, like the board of a large corporation.

When [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] came back to the question of a contribution I said there must be many well-to-do individuals who realized their stake in a strong government party and who, therefore, would be ready to contribute. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that it was true that there were a number of potential wealthy contributors who had made their willingness known, but they were approaching the matter in the traditional Thai manner and would expect some concrete benefit from any contribution they made. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said it was important for the Government Party not to be beholden to such people. Once the Government Party was successful in the elections and secure in office it could accept such money because it would not have to accept the conditions, but until these elections had taken place funds would have to be found from other sources.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] spoke again as he had in the past about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and his very bad image which is a political liability to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. As far as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] himself is concerned, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] spoke in a good deal more friendly vein than earlier and acknowledged that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] himself was effective in his relations with the public as long as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is not in the picture. While I could not get very specific answers to my questions, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] left me with the impression that as a result of the Prime Ministerʼs definite views and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] acquiescence [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] will be kept out of the picture as much as possible; to what extent this means he will be leaving the country and how much cleaning up of his business connections might be involved was not clear. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and I were diverted for a few minutes to a discussion of the importance of Thailandʼs developing a livestock industry and I stressed the potential this had for diversification of agriculture in the Northeast. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] indicated an intention of taking this matter on so that the pork monopoly would no longer block in-country production for the urban market.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] returned to his earlier statement to me that there will be some Cabinet changes to get rid of the older, less active members. It is clear that he personally strongly favors moving in some of the younger men, but has encountered a good deal of resistance on this score, including probably from the Prime Minister who would find it uncomfortable to push through such changes. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also said that it is a problem, given Thai attitudes, in that younger men who have the energy and ideas nevertheless are hesitant to speak out in the presence of their elders, or certainly to engage in any controversy.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also said that the Prime Minister had recently talked to the newly appointed members of the Senate and impressed on them the importance of their role, making it clear that they were not expected to be a rubber stamp for the Government. On the one hand it is hoped that the Senate will avoid a situation typical of earlier Thai parliamentary history when small interest groups of deputies could force the body to take irresponsible action and impede government programs. On the other hand, Thanom expects the Senate to keep Thailandʼs broad interests uppermost and speak out against government actions if necessary; [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] felt that the Senate will be an effective check against extremes in either direction. He confirmed that there will be additional appointments made once the total size of the house is determined, so that the Senate will number two-thirds of the larger body. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also was at pains to explain that many of the apparently military men in the Senate are not really playing a military role today; he cited as an example his son-in-law who, although a colonel, is also a fully functioning civil servant.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] referred to the two elements he was concerned about in the forthcoming elections. The first was the Communists who would not be permitted to form a party but who will undoubtedly try to support candidates whom they think they can control. The other element he referred to as the left wing. According to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] this represents extreme economic egalitarians whose idea is to take from the rich and obstruct the kind of rapid economic development taking place in Bangkok and spread the money evenly over the entire population. He thought it likely that this group would be exploited by the Communists. Otherwise, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said he didnʼt really care who won the election and this meant that he could view with equanimity Seni Pramoj and the Democratic Party winning for example. In answer to my question he confirmed that he saw it as important that the present united government leadership retain control and leadership through this first round of elections. Once those difficult seas were safely navigated some new directions might be tried.

Returning to the matter of a US contribution I told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that this matter had been shelved by the US as a result of his comments to me several months ago and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] apparent reluctance to discuss the matter. There was now a new fiscal year and I did not know about the availability of funds at the present time. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] promptly reminded me that Ambassador Martin had earlier explicitly promised the availability of funds up to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] following a visit to the US in which the matter had been cleared out with President Johnson. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] mentioned incidentally that that large a sum might not be needed. I said that I recognized this and now that he had given me the word that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] specifically asked him to put this matter to me I would in turn raise it with Washington promptly. I reminded him that when we had earlier discussed this matter I had raised several questions, particularly with regard to the real unity of the Government Party leadership—as well as with regard to just what purposes the funds would serve. In this connection I wondered whether it would not be advisable to enlarge the Thai circle of those aware of a possible US contribution to include [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reacted negatively to this, mentioning at first that bringing in [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would almost inevitably bring in [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] as well which they did not wish to do. Later he tended to emphasize more that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] simply could not be depended on to keep such a matter to himself and that through him the word would inevitably get out.

As to arrangements, if there is a US contribution it would probably work via [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] told me that he has recently transferred some properties so that he has now provided an ostensible source of funds if questions should at any time be asked. He also stated again that if there were any reports or queries he would absolutely deny them and would assume I would do the same.

I told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that I would raise this matter promptly with my government and that as a matter of fact I might during the next week have a good opportunity to discuss it if Mr. Bundy were to be visiting Bangkok following the Honolulu Conference, as now appeared possible. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] once more assured me that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was now seeking our help and he said that he would await further word from me.

Comment: Although [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] confirms indications from other sources that there is now some greater unity among the Government Party leaders, divisions apparently persist. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] comments strongly suggest a desire of his group to be as well heeled to run their side of the show as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] group will be, presumably from the kitty built up by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] over the years.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Unger, Hamilton, Jantzen, and Hannah. The meeting took place in [text not declassified].1

397. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley) 397. Letter From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Godley)1

Bangkok, July 24, 1968.

Dear Mac:

The last time we talked here you mentioned the exceptionally delicate matter of possible assistance to the government political party. At that time, and for several months before, the matter had been dormant and I believe I said that I would be just as happy if it remained so and expected to take no initiative.

Now [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has reopened the question and you will see from the attached memcon2 how this discussion went. I have already sent Norm Hannah a copy of this memcon, and did not think it necessary to send a separate one to you since I understood Norm would be back in Washington tomorrow. Now that I know that he will not be returning until the 31st I felt it important to get this directly to you to do whatever background exploring you can about fund availabilities, etc., assuming you know whom to approach in the Department [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. As far as the Department is concerned, I believe the only file is in Bill Bundyʼs office. I will, of course, be discussing this with Bill during his visit here.

There is one point worth exploring even if youʼre foreclosed from taking any other action before Bill returns and that is to try to get some background from Graham as to the original intentions [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] as far as he was able to read them. On the one hand we have taken a strong position in favor of unity of all of the present leadership in the government party, meaning as far as possible a collective approach to the designation of candidates, adoption of party platform, raising of money, etc. On the other hand, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] proposal seems clearly intended to strengthen the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] faction vis-a-vis the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] faction within the government party. (I am, of course, aware also that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is proceeding with some of his own separate aims and means, in my opinion, to dominate the party and put forward as candidates and have elected a large majority of his men.) What Graham may be able to tell you is to what extent these issues came openly into his conversations. I, of course, can see the value of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] not having too predominate a position among the deputies in the newly elected Lower House.

Rather than trying to give me an immediate reply on these points, I suggest you explore them as far as you can and then discuss them with Norm when he is in Washington for his one day visit. I, in the meantime, will be discussing them with Bill here.

Yours,

Leonard Unger 3

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret; Eyes Only.

2  Document 396.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

398. Memorandum From the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Refugee and Migration Affairs (Martin) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown) 398. Memorandum From the Secretary of Stateʼs Special Assistant for Refugee and Migration Affairs (Martin) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Brown)1

Washington, July 30, 1968.

I have read Len Ungerʼs letter of July 24 to Mac Godley and the attached memcon of Ungerʼs conversation of July 18 with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].2 I do not know whether any additional conversations took place between them which added any light before Bill Bundyʼs arrival in Bangkok, or whether [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has sent in any appraisal of Praphatʼs intentions [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. No where in Lenʼs letter to Mac am I able to find his appraisal of where American interests lie in view of the evolving relationships between Thai personalities since last September. Since he assumes, as I do, that the commitment is firm, my comments must be based, therefore, on my knowledge of the interplay between the personalities involved.

I believe the party organization described by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] in the second paragraph of the memcon is about the maximum of “unity” one could logically expect. The convolutions within that framework will be intricate, competitive, complex, and in all of Asia, would be exceeded in deviousness only by the Javanese. Despite this, there is also a remarkable consistency and cohesion, which we have seen demonstrated over the past decade. There is really nothing in Asia to match it.

The present combination is viable and its success in the forthcoming elections is almost essential if American policy still includes among its goals a post-Viet-Nam Southeast Asia not under Chinese hegemony, either truly neutral or aligned with us in some way yet to be defined. Without a stable government in Thailand, I do not think realization of such a goal likely.

The reason the combination is viable is that it includes all the power elements necessary for stability. However, the vying for ascendancy, or the struggle to maintain present parity, will reach an acute stage during the period before the election.

For some time, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has been the “bag man” if that is an appropriate description, for the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] faction. They have obviously accumulated considerable funds and are prepared to spend them to elect their candidates. (Thai candidates have traditionally run as individuals not as party members. Although it had been proposed to require party affiliation this time, I do not know how the electoral law will come out.)

I would suspect [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are now feeling the pinch. It is quite true that contributions will be available to them. It is also quite true that contributors will expect to exercise an influence commensurate with their contributions. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] believes strongly that the only way to break out of this vicious cycle is to finance this campaign without such contributions. He has put forth rather eloquently the view that the normal Asian “conventional wisdom”, that venality is inevitable, was dealt a shattering blow when the Government allowed the Sarit scandal to be fully exposed with enormous recovery to the Treasury. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] believes that if a group can be elected without selling itself in advance, time will have been provided to eradicate such venality.

While I believe he overstates the case, he does have a case, and I believe a good one.

I might add that, despite [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] inspired rumors involving [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], I believe him to be essentially honest.

I am also certain that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is completely honest, so much so that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] hates his guts—a feeling [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] fully reciprocates, believing [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] too closely tied to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], which he is not. And while [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] permits his family to use the influence of his position in the best Asian tradition, no scandal attaches to him personally.

It is obvious that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has arranged matters to make it appear to the candidates that he, personally, is putting up the money. This will, of course, greatly enhance his influence. Since we can be completely sure that this influence will be used to advance all U.S. interests that are not in conflict with Thai interest, I believe we should welcome this prospect.

One overriding concern from the beginning was that the provision of this assistance never be known. This is the reason why [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are so insistent on limiting knowledge of it so severely. A leak would destroy them. Since our own interest in secrecy fully matches theirs, I suggest we leave decisions on who on the Thai side needs to know, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

I have previously stated that, long-range, our interests are best served by being very slow to make commitments but meticulous in keeping commitments once we do make them. I am quite sure in my own mind that, without the absolute conviction that we would honor this commitment, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would not have pushed through to final action the promulgation of the new Constitution, with the elections this makes mandatory. [1 line of source text not declassified] has always opposed this, [1 line of source text not declassified].

But we now have the Constitution. The elections will have to be held. It would seem very much in our interests not to have [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] emerge as the dominant force in the new regime or force [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to avoid this only by mortgaging their faction to campaign contributors whose influence would seriously erode the emerging new “conventional wisdom” that the Governmentʼs business cannot be carried on without a return to the widespread venality that marked previous parliamentary regimes in Thailand.

The full amount would have been a small investment for the dividends we have every right to expect from it. Now that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has indicated a smaller amount may be required, I think there is really no excuse for not fully carrying out this commitment.

I strongly recommend this be done.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand, Lotus File, 1968–1969. Secret; Eyes Only.

2  Documents 397 and 396.

399. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 399. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, July 31, 1968, 1126Z.

18214. For Bundy and Norman Hannah.

1. As you would expect, the July 26 raid on the airbase at Udorn2 has stirred up a great deal of activity both on the US and Thai side, some of it essential and to the point and some of it ranging from the pointless to the dangerous. Probably there will be a delayed reaction in Washington but some of the same ideas and proposals may surface there. In anticipation of this I wanted to get my thoughts to you immediately to be sure we were thinking along parallel lines and also to confirm that the line I am taking here will be supported in Washington if it is challenged.

2. To rehearse the obvious briefly, we are of course distressed that the Communists have now turned to a type of action we have known for a long time they were perfectly capable of mounting. We know the heavy responsibility that rests on us to do everything reasonable to provide our men and equipment with protection from raids. We also know, however, that it is illusory to suppose that any complete protection can be provided; if we had any doubts our regular experiences at Danang, Bien Hoa and elsewhere surely prove the point.

3. Nevertheless, US commanders particularly those who, together with their men, face the threat directly are going to be pressing to take whatever measures seem to offer them better protection. There have already been proposals made about bringing mortars and recoilless rifles into the bases to be operated by US personnel against sources of hostile fire from outside. A proposal has been made that US helicopters be used to take Thai military personnel to the scene of action in the vicinity of the base. The flying in of a standby reaction force from out of country upon call in an emergency has also been mentioned. Proposals are being revived that we request the RTG to permit US military to carry weapons off base.

4. There is a feeling also, even if not articulated, that if a serious attack should occur US forces should move into combat action outside base areas along with whatever Thai forces were also committed.

5. I wish I could dismiss all of these proposals with the assurance that the Thais are in a position to take on and effectively carry out all of those tasks. They are not, nor do I anticipate they will be at any foreseeable time. We are already in frequent close consultation with the RTG at all levels and will be seeking constantly to move the RTG toward a base security program which in our opinion offers the best protection. We will also be bombarding Washington with requests for funds and equipment to support our own and Thai efforts in this regard. In due course I hope that we will have a mixed Thai-US arrangement “within the fence” and an effective Thai arrangement outside, (including the indispensable intelligence component and at least minimum provision for reaction forces), so that we can certify to a reasonable level of protection having in mind all of the competing demands on Thai and US forces and resources. Such protection would of course also be premised on the cardinal principle that in Thailand it is the Thai armed forces and police who are responsible for security, including the security of US installations outside their boundary perimeter.

6. I could easily and I believe effectively argue on military grounds for letting US personnel take a larger role in protecting bases outside the fence. I know, however, that each limited and seemingly logical action outside the perimeter will lead to further actions not quite so limited so that before too long we would find ourselves widely and deeply engaged on the sound premise that defense of the bases knows no precise geographic limits. American forces would be firing their weapons into Thai villages; American aircraft would be bombing and strafing presumed hostile sites where innocent Thais would surely be counted among the casualties; American ground forces would be involved in actions, bedevilled by the friend or foe dilemma so familiar in Vietnam. Ironically all of this effort on our part and its unhappy consequences for the Thais would carry with it no assurance whatsoever that the bases would be secure; again I offer our experience in Vietnam to illustrate.

7. There is latent and now increasingly articulated concern in Thailand about the American presence, but it has been almost entirely a benign presence in which identification with Thai interests and objectives is not hard to demonstrate. This would rapidly change in circumstances where American men and planes and guns are killing Thais. The Communists in the country and outside would of course be able to make great capital of this and they could count on an increasingly wider and more sympathetic audience as the military action proceeded. (Indeed their report of the Udorn incident referred to it as a “popular reaction to the US occupation”.) The eventual result would be, even if not a request for withdrawal of US forces from airbases in Thailand, at least seriously damaging to the Thai Government and posing the gravest jeopardy to the kind of cooperative relations we and Thailand have enjoyed so long and to so much mutual benefit. In this way the Communists would have accomplished much: to frighten US into actions which would achieve their prime aim—division between the US and the Thai Government and people.

8. In conclusion, I believe we can and should, of course, remain on the bases in Thailand in order to maintain our capability for strikes against Vietnam that play an indispensable role militarily as well as support our firm posture in Paris, and accept that the external protection of these bases is a Thai responsibility and that the protection will inevitably leave something to be desired. There is no need to postulate a choice between “fight” and “withdraw” at this time, and therefore we should not permit discussion to be couched in those terms. I will report regularly on progress we are making toward a mixed Thai-US system that will reduce risks while preserving our ability to use Thai bases, in order to assist those in Washington arguing both for patience and for the kind of support mentioned in paragraph five.

9. Specifically, I have explained the foregoing considerations to General Seith (Deputy Commander, 7/13th) and instructed him that no weapons or systems or personnel of a nature relevant to them will be deployed in Thailand without my permission, and that he is to concert all actions respecting base defense with the Embassy and the Consul. He has demonstrated comprehension of my views and full willingness to cooperate with them.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–1 THAI. Secret.

2 On July 26, at about 10:30 p.m. local time, the airbase at Udorn was attacked by enemy forces. They destroyed an aircraft and a truck, damaged another aircraft and another truck, and wounded four U.S. personnel. One attacker was killed. The attackers, whose identity was not known but was assumed to be “Communist terrorists,” were estimated to number about ten. (Memorandum from Rostow to Johnson, July 26; Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VIII, Memos, 7/68–12/68)

400. Memorandum for the Files 400. Memorandum for the Files1

Washington, August 5, 1968.

SUBJECT

Discussion of Attached Letter from Ambassador Unger,2 August 1, 1968

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Bundy, Ambassador Brown, Ambassador Martin, Mr. Hannah, Mr. Spear, Mr. Stuart

Mr. Bundy asked me for the background of the 303 approval of the proposal to fund the creation of a government party in Thailand. After a brief exposition of the terms of the proposal, its approval by the 303, and its further authorization by the Secretary and Higher Authority, I pointed out that Ambassador Unger had on several occasions received assurances from [2 lines of source text not declassified].

Mr. Bundy commented that it was quite clear that we had a commitment to fulfill, but that it was important to find out if the situation had changed sufficiently so that we ought to reconsider. At this point Ambassador Martin, supported by Mr. Hannah, argued at length that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would eventually be taken into the group, that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was front man for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], and the proper person to head up the operation. True, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was, through [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], collecting election funds already, but only because [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] were doing nothing to prepare for the election. Mr. Hannah argued that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] could not help but know of our help, that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would tell him. But what, Mr. Spear wanted to know, would keep [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] from supporting candidates who were opposing candidates supported by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]? Mr. Hannah conceded that this could happen, but went on to say that so far we didnʼt know what the election law would provide, that is, whether candidates would run on party tickets or as individuals. So far, Thai candidates had always run as individuals.

It was clear that to Ambassador Martin and Mr. Hannah, there had been no change in the situation which had first prompted Ambassador Martin to propose the operation. Mr. Spear appeared less certain, but nevertheless convinced that we had a commitment which had to be fulfilled. Mr. Bundy leaned to the belief that what appeared to be a possible split in the government was more apparent than real, and said that Ambassador Unger had presented the matter evenhandedly in his letter (Mr. Bundy in Bangkok last week) but that Ambassador Unger was convinced that we had to follow through. Nevertheless we needed to know whether [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be taken into the party, whether [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would tell [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] what would happen if we insisted that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] tell [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and what the results would be if we went ahead with the action and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was not told. What did Ambassador Unger think we ought to do? [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] What did Bill Hamilton think? He tasked Mr. Hannah, who was leaving for Bangkok the next day, with getting these views back to him. If there were dissents, he wanted them clearly stated.

Ambassador Brown was given the assignment of finding out whether [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] still had the money to carry out the action. He said that he would do so in the afternoonʼs meeting with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].3 I was instructed to advise [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] ahead of time of the problem and ask him to be prepared to answer the question.

RKS

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret.

2 Apparent reference to Document 397.

3 Brown met with [text not declassified] on the afternoon of August 1. [text not declassified] stated that the money would have to come “from [text not declassified] and presumably there would have to be some sort of huddle with BOB, [text not declassified] possibly State.” (Memorandum from Trueheart to Hughes, Denny, and Evans, August 6; Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968)

401. Memorandum of Conversation 401. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bangkok, August 9, 1968, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Political Parties, etc.

PARTICIPANTS

[title and name not declassified]

Ambassador Unger

As arranged by telephone the previous day [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and I had an extended private discussion of possible US assistance in connection with the forthcoming campaign in Thailand. I first explained to him again that I had reopened this matter with Washington after our discussion in July and also discussed it with Mr. Bundy here and was now awaiting word from Washington. I expected Mr. Hannah to bring back some information, including word as to whether there are at present funds available as well as other aspects of the question which Washington may wish to explore further. I made it clear that while we recognize the undertaking of Ambassador Martin some time ago, I could not at the present time speak with assurance about what Washingtonʼs attitude would be. I said that I had conveyed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] assurances on the matter of the unity of the present leadership in the government party, but that this question still gave us trouble (Washington and myself) in view of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] position that no one besides [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] should be aware of the US assistance.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had obviously done some thinking overnight on this subject and said that he understood our concern on this matter, although he did not believe it should be a troublesome point. Nevertheless, if we felt it was advisable, then he suggested that I talk directly with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and work matters out with him, rather than with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], on the understanding that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would also be informed. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] felt that in this way [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be under more pressure to keep the matter confidential and thus [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] felt that his concerns about a leak, while not entirely put at rest, would not be as grave. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] stressed if we followed this road and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was in the know, then (he seemed to be saying) his [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] role should be at least secondary.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] went on to insist that there is full unity in the leadership of the government party and that he and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are entirely agreed on basic political questions such as the need for Thailand to protect itself from Communism and to maintain close relations with the US. His differences with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] relate solely to the latterʼs “business” ventures and association with unsavory individuals like [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. He said that he has argued repeatedly with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to clear up his connections but he feels he has only been partially successful thus far. He has pointed out to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that his legitimate business connections bring in ample income and he should not be greedy for more. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was discouraged at the moment that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was continuing or even expanding his participation in the government refinery which [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] does not regard as improper in spite of his position. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also mentioned his desire to do something about the pork monopoly problem but has failed to date. In spite of all of this, however, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had his virtues and was patriotic and they would work together on fundamental matters. The thing [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] absolutely opposed was to have government funds used for the elections by the government party and this was one of the reasons why he was looking for help.

I told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] I found his suggestion about approaching [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] directly a useful one that would probably meet some of the reservations I had expressed. I asked him not to do anything further in the way of arranging a meeting with the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], however, since I did not know of Washingtonʼs views or possibilities on this matter and needed as a minimum the word that I hoped Mr. Hannah would be bringing back. I said to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] quite frankly that I was sure he realized the delicacy of this matter for the US. We fully understand that there is not only competition among political parties, but among trends and factions within political parties, including the government party. We are interested in helping those who are interested in helping secure Thailandʼs independence against the threat of Communism but we do not want to be supporting one faction in the government party against another. Again [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] hastened to assure me that there were no such divisions and that assistance from us would not be used in any divisive way. I then asked as a practical matter, for example, how would he expect that the leadership of the government party would go about the selection of candidates. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] shied away from this one and said that he would rather not discuss this. (Nevertheless, later he left me with the impression that if our assistance should be provided it would be accompanied by some discussion of government party planning for candidates and campaigns.) He again stated that there are no divisions among the party leaders on these matters.

I also said to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that the question I was sure would be in Washingtonʼs mind would be just what these funds would be used for and how they would be used. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that I had his word that they would be used without question for the purposes intended and would not be diverted to anything else. As heʼd earlier said, they would be used for printing and equipment and travel of candidates in connection with the campaign. I said I fully accepted his word but that my question had related more to the effective use of funds rather than any question of diversion. Without giving me any specific information [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] again said we could rest assured that the funds would be used to very good effect even though they did not wish to go into detail on this. “Trust us—we know what to do”, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] at this point went off into a discussion of the difficulties others besides himself had with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], notably Police General Prasert. Many matters which had been going smoothly have again run into trouble and precipitated debate since [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] return to the country. Specifically [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] mentioned the reopening of the VSF question.

I then asked [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] where Thanat and Puey figured in the government party picture. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] never replied to my query about Puey but said that Thanat is certainly with the government party group, although like [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], he has reservations about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. The military, however, are dubious about taking Thanat fully into their councils. They feel he is too emotional and they also are critical of his manner of dealing with the US. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] recounted the Cabinet discussion on B–52ʼs (presumably the question about their original deployment) and made it clear that Thanat had been rather negative. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said he had pointed out to Thanat that Thailand had concluded it was in its interest to work closely with the US and this could not be done in half measures. Nevertheless, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] left me with the impression that Thanat is basically with the government party group and not likely to set off on his own.

At the conclusion of our conversation we agreed that: 1) I will see what Mr. Hannah brings back from Washington. In the light of this information and my further consideration about approaching [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] directly, I will consider what next step I could take and when.

2) At that point I will get in touch with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] but I know that it is out of the question that I will have anything for him before next Tuesday at the very earliest.

3) Only after I have contacted him will [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] then tell [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], who will then call me in if I have to take the matter up directly with him.

In winding up our conversation [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] acknowledged the possibility that we may come to the conclusion not to go ahead on this matter, although he obviously was very much in favor of our helping and appeared to feel that it was an important factor in his being able to influence the conduct of the elections in a way we would like to see them held. At the same time he also emphasized that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] was not prepared to agree to conditions about elections in return for our assistance. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] also mentioned that he would envisage the hand-over of cash, probably to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] or to him, as the procedure which they would wish to adopt.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 12 THAI. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Unger. Copies sent Eyes Only to Hannah, Hamilton, Jantzen, and Godley. A report of a preliminary conversation is in an August 8 memorandum of conversation. (Ibid.)

402. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Department of State 402. Telegram From the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger) to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, August 10, 1968.

[telegram number not declassified] Ambassador Unger has requested following message be transmitted:

“For Bundy and Godley from Unger.

1. I understand Norman Hannah will be bringing Washingtonʼs views concerning our possible assistance to government party in coming elections. As soon as I have this in hand and have digested it in the context of several recent conversations and other developments here, I will submit my recommendations as to whether or not we should offer help.

2. In this connection I should emphasize that we should not contemplate any arrangements entailing detailed accounting for use of funds or extensive consultation with political leaders about choice of candidates or election tactics. While I believe that contribution from us would open the way to more knowledge of and influence on elections process, insistence in advance on certain conditions or procedures will be rejected.

3. [7–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]2 However, my considered judgement on this and other matters will await my further message following Hannahʼs return.

4. In order facilitate traffic on this subject, and strengthen security, suggest we adopt code name Lotus.)

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret. [text not declassified] A note on the telegram indicates that Bundy saw it.

2 See Document 401.

403. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 403. Telegram From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 1

Bangkok, August 15, 1968, 1041Z.

18940. Department also pass SecDef for action. Subject: Future of US Military Establishment in Thailand. State for Secretary Bundy.

1. Once hostilities in Vietnam have substantially declined, we assume that (a) a large proportion of US forces now in the region will be needed for commitments elsewhere, in addition to important political and financial reasons for a phasedown, and (b) there will remain serious grounds for concern about renewal by North Vietnam of actions like those which led to our SEA involvement in the first place, including increased threats to Thailand, Laos and/or Cambodia.

2. US interest in deterring (b) indicates the need for retaining a credible force in SEA, whereas (a) will require that the force be carefully tailored, located and politically emplaced so as to meet the new regional environment, which often will be made as difficult by our friends as by our enemies, not to speak of undefinables like Sihanouk.

3. The obvious, political, diplomatic, and financial requirements for a lean post-hostilities US force—lean especially in terms of numbers of US personnel—from the perspective of Thailand argue against US deployment of ground combat forces in garrisons on the SEA mainland, in the post-hostilities period. In the case of Thailand they argue also against continued reliance on ground-force oriented contingency plans, such as OPlan 1–66 of Project 22. While in 1966 it probably seemed logical to plan for four US brigades and supporting forces to occupy Laotian bridgehead towns in the Mekong lowlands, in response to a NVN attack, with the Thai having lesser roles on the flanks, we have a somewhat more sober concept today of what is really involved in engaging North Vietnamese ground forces 300 miles from the nearest seaport, from a base area already affected by the Thai insurgency. We suspect that Thai leaders have also been chastened by their experience with the insurgency in North Thailand, in contemplating the costs of the major Thai movement and there into neighboring Laos called for in Oplan 1–66. While this plan is useful for the present, especially while a shooting war continues in VN, not only as a factor of reassurance to the Thai but as a factor of uncertainty in the schemes of Hanoi, and while we should not sow doubts in Thai minds about OPlan 1–66 until we have something better in hand, we believe our own forward planning should be developing alternative, more realistic ways of reassuring our allies and deterring the Communists in the Thai-Lao area.

4. The US posture in Thailand—post-Vietnam hostilities—should be premised on a Thailand able to carry a major share of the military defense burden itself, given what are the probable threats, with the US helping out in special fields (principally air) where Thai capability is not developed. Given this premise it is essential that US help RTG build up effective defense forces, through MAP materiel assistance and training appropriate to Thai forces, which are geared to likely threats to Thai territory. On this basis the US posture which takes the best account of many conflicting local and regional considerations, as we now see it, is retention of a substantial though reduced US aviation capability on the less-exposed Thai bases, in support of what are likely to be at least sporadic operating requirements in Laos. Surveillance of any settlement in Vietnam, and visible demonstration to Hanoi of US readiness to support Asian resistance to renewed aggression in SEA. Frequent major ground force exercises (probably in rear areas), involving hyper-modern air and naval capability for fast deployment from Pacific bases, would add the necessary ground force substance to our deterrence, while retaining great flexibility for the US in determining how and when any actual US involvement should occur.

5. At present the Thai Government is very prudent about forward deployment of its land forces. Washington is well aware of the limitations of the Thai armed forces which prevent the RTG from assuming a major share of any contingency role in Laos in response to an NVN attack. We cannot, of course, say that the RTG would not immediately demand full implementation of OPlan 1–66 if its triggering assumptions were enacted by NVN: What we do observe is that RTG budget priorities, military dispositions and readiness posture are not today aimed in this direction, and the RTG may be amenable to a new approach to contingency planning.

6. All factors considered, therefore, a post-Vietnam posture in Thailand of continued presence of substantial US air assets, backed by occasional demonstrations of fast troop deployment capability, in support of contingency planning which envisages primarily (a) supporting Thai efforts to contain an NVN intrusion into Thailand and (b) US-Thai efforts in support of Laotian contingencies emphasizing material assistance to RLG and clandestine operations would best answer US strategic requirements, following a Vietnam settlement, as we can now foresee them. This does not overlook JUSMAG type activities and maintenance of logistic infrastructure which would continue.

7. New military command arrangements would be desirable to emphasize the factors of strength in this new approach, and to develop RTG support for it, lest it be seen as merely a way-stop in retreating from any commitment to Thai security. In order to represent most effectively the US forces which would be the resident expression of US security support for Thailand and Laos, and the new orientation contingency planning, designation of a USAF General officer as the next COMUSMACTHAI would appear desirable. (Naturally the selectee should have had broad politico-military experience.) I would also raise for consideration the carrying of the proposal one step further, in the interest of rationalizing the US Command structure in Thailand, by according him authority over US Air Forces in the pattern of the US Command in Japan.

8. MACTHAI has had since its inception three US Army Generals at its head, who with their special skills answered many valid needs of the period, including setting up the training of the Thai troop commitment to Vietnam, modernization of the RTA, and development of OPlan 1–66. However, indefinite succession of leadership from a single service is not conducive to development of MACTHAI as a truly Joint Command, which it must be increasingly in the 1969–71 period, and alternation of MACTHAI Command among US services would reinforce this broader view. I do not believe that the RTG would take amiss such a change, particularly, if, as I believe is essential, we had very able, experienced US Army general officer as deputy COMUSMACTHAI to continue MACTHAIʼs efforts to modernize the RTA, in conjunction with the Army Advisory Group, and to assist in the smooth transition of contingency plans.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 ASIA SE-US. Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral McCain and Vientiane for Ambassador only.

404. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 404. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, August 20, 1968.

SUBJECT

Presidential Clearance for Covert Operation in Thailand: For Luncheon Action

As I told you this morning, the 303 Committee last week reviewed the long-standing commitment we made in 1965 to give covert financial support to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] in the Thai elections.

This commitment was originally made in 1965 on the express authority of the President, and was renewed on the same basis when Unger went out a year ago. The only new element is that the money would now go to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and this worried us briefly in the sense that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be cut out. However, after careful consideration, all hands have concluded that the essence of the commitment remains valid and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] has assured us that if necessary [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be brought in—and that in any event he would not have any significant adverse reaction. This leaves us still with the risk of disclosure, but the Thai are at least as concerned about this as we, and Unger rightly points out that their record of security in such matters is excellent.

The matter does require decision today. Walt Rostow, Dick Helms, Paul Nitze, and I have all gone over it with care and recommend final approval. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] tells me that there will be a need for an allocation from the Bureau of the Budget, and this is another reason for getting express Presidential reaffirmation at this time. However, he anticipates no difficulty, but would be prepared to speak to this point.

Walt Rostow recommends that you be prepared to bring this up at the close of the luncheon today,2 with Dick and Walt available as needed. I am alerting Clark Clifford.

For any further detail, I attach, as Tab A,3 Ungerʼs recommendation, and as Tab B the proposed action message—which might be tinkered with, but which contains all the essentials.

Attachment B4

Draft Telegram From the Department of State to the Ambassador to Thailand (Unger)

DRAFT TELEGRAM TO AMBASSADOR UNGER

You are authorized inform [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that we are prepared to assist financially in development his political party. One half of funds would be available prior September 10, with remainder available by November 10. You may indicate that we assume funds would be used in manner to maintain cohesion within the governing group and help develop an effective political mechanism that can discharge its responsibilities under the new constitution. This has always been our thought and was the basis on which original commitment made, and we recognize the skill with which [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] have pursued these objectives.

We recognize difficulty of requesting detailed accounting for funds. We do not press this point but believe we are justified in being kept informed along lines outlined para 8 your message August 15.5

Re increments set forth above, you may if you wish point out [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that we are obliged to know in general terms use to which U.S. funds are placed and that availability second tranche will depend upon some indication that the first tranche used within the framework of our basic commitment.

Hope foregoing is not too restrictive and we do not believe you need follow it to the letter, particularly as to size or dates of payments. We have, however, set forth certain guidelines and would hope that they can be used as you deem appropriate to establish our objectives which continue to be (a) unity and balance within group; (b) effective use of funds; (c) security of operation.

1 Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Lotus File, 1968–69. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 According to a memorandum for the record by Godley, April 20, Rusk discussed the issue with the President at the luncheon meeting and obtained Johnsonʼs approval for the action. Bundy and Godley checked the draft of the attached message which was then sent to Unger. [text not declassified] also was informed of the Presidentʼs decision. (Ibid., Thailand 1968) On September 4 Bundy prepared a memorandum for the record that corrected Godleyʼs memorandum. Rusk did not raise the issue with the President at lunch. Bundy saw Rusk at 4 p.m. that day and obtained his “firm and clear approval.” Bundy also called Rostow who decided that since the President had approved the action in 1965 and reaffirmed it in 1967, and since there were no real changes, the issue did not require another Presidential decision. (Ibid.)

3 Dated August 15. (Ibid.)

4 Top Secret; Lotus.

5 In paragraph 8 of this message, Unger stated that once he informed [text not declassified] of U.S. support, they would work to an understanding about the type of activities to be supported. Unger suggested that the United States could not only learn about but perhaps influence the course of the campaign and the elections themselves. (Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968)

405. Telegram 3329 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State 405. Telegram 3329 From the Embassy in Thailand to the Department of State

Bangkok, August 23, 1968.

[Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Thailand 1968. Secret; Eyes Only. 5 pages of source text not declassified.]

406. Memorandum for the Record 406. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, October 16, 1968.

SUBJECT

Conversation with General Praphat, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Interior, and Commander in Chief, Royal Thai Army

1. (TS) General Praphat sent word in advance of his trip that he would like to have an extended conversation with me. Accordingly, he came to Walter Reed Hospital at 0930, 16 October, and we talked for approximately one hour. After exchanging pleasantries and a discussion of the Olympic Games, which he had attended during the opening ceremony, the discussion turned to more substantive items of interest. a. The Thai Volunteer Division should deploy on schedule and is making great progress in its training. It will be known as the “Black Panther Division.” Praphat is pleased with the performance of the Thai troops in Vietnam and proud of the volunteer division.

b. The situation in Vietnam is now favorable to our side, but Praphat cautions that resistance against communist insurgency is a long-term undertaking.

c. The communist insurgency in Northeast Thailand has declined, which situation he attributes to the difficulty the insurgents are having in getting supplies during the rainy season and the psychological impact of political problems in Communist China and the dilemma in which the leadership in Hanoi now finds itself.

d. The communists have established a major guerrilla training base along the Lao-Cambodian border and near Thailand, close to the Lao-Thai-Cambodian border juncture. The camp is located at a segment of the Lao-Cambodian border that is under dispute. The training cadre consists of Thai, Lao, and Vietnamese personnel assisted by Chicom advisors. Thai pilots have seen the communist flag flying over this extensive installation. The camp has thus far trained four battalions of 800 men each, consisting of Thais and Thailand-born Chinese.

e. Prince Sihanouk is an unpredictable individual who is attempting to play both ends against the middle and stay in power. The Free Cambodians (Khmer Serei) have a force of approximately 10,000, whose objective is to overthrow Sihanouk, and it would be timely to give this group encouragement and support. The Free Cambodians have been able to get arms and ammunition by looting Cambodian Army storage areas.

f. The Thais have learned from agents that they have in Sihanoukville and Phnom Penh and through the Japanese Embassy in Bangkok that there is a regular flow of arms and ammunition of Chinese manufacture through Sihanoukville and thence to the communists in Vietnam. This flow of military stores and supplies increased at the time we restricted our bombing but has since reduced. These military stores are moved in boxes from merchant ships into a warehouse built for the Cambodians by the Russians. From there the stores are moved by truck during both day and night to storage points near the Vietnamese border. The cargo is camouflaged while enroute. From these storage points, the materiel is turned over to the North Vietnamese or Viet Cong, who move it across the border to their troops in South Vietnam.

g. It is believed that this supply of military stores moving through Cambodia is based on an agreement between the Royal Cambodian Government and the Government of Communist China. Most certainly, Sihanouk knows about these arrangements. At the same time, Cambodian officers are profiting from the enterprise.

2. (S) I have noted that the proposal to support the Khmer Serei was also mentioned to Admiral McCain by Praphat. Needless to say, I did not respond to his proposal.

W.C. Westmoreland
General, United States Army
Chief of Staff

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VIII, Memos 7/68–12/68. Top Secret. Drafted by Chief of Staff of the Army, General William Westmoreland.

407. Special Report by the Central Intelligence Agency 407. Special Report by the Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, October 18, 1968.

SC No. 000792/68A

THAILAND: THE PRESENT POLITICAL PHASE

Thailand is entering a new phase of its political life. After ten years of rule by martial law, the military leadership is moving to legitimize its rule. A new constitution has been promulgated as the first step in this process, but the document virtually ensures that there will be no major changes, at least in the near future, in the way Thailand is governed.

The constitution does provide for the first nationwide elections in over a decade. Although the elections are now less than five months away, the government so far has done little to organize itself for them. Opposition forces are also divided and weak, but they may prove strong enough to deny the government a clear-cut majority in the lower house. Whatever the outcome, the present leaders will continue to rule Thailand after the elections and, at least for the short term, there is not likely to be any important change in Thai domestic and foreign policies.

Background to Transition

There is a timelessness about modern Thai politics that is as comforting as it may be misleading. On the surface, nothing important seems to change. For 36 years, Thailand has been ruled by a tight coterie of military officers. In order to run the country, the military has maintained a profitable alliance with civilian politicians and bureaucrats, with whom it joined in 1932 to bring down the absolute monarchy. The civilians have exercised considerable influence, but the relationship has always been fundamentally one-sided. With the exception of a few short periods, the military establishment has called the tune.

Autocratic without being despotic, conservative without being reactionary, the ruling establishment has brought a reasonable share of economic progress and social change to Thailand. With a minimum of serious disruption, it has guided the country through factional strife and foreign occupation, changes in personalities, and the inevitable upsets of an evolving social system.

The promulgation on 20 June of a new and long-delayed constitution appears to have inaugurated a new phase rather than a new era in Thai political life. The constitution was the product of five years of gentle agitation by civilian elements in the establishment, and the realization on the part of more enlightened military officers that after ten years of “martial law” the regime needed to legitimize its rule. It was not meant, nor has it been interpreted, as a sharp departure from past practice. On the contrary, Thailand has had seven constitutions since 1932, each establishing the rules of the game only until new players appeared, new sides were chosen, and new rules were needed. Although nine years in the writing, there is little in the present document that distinguishes it greatly from its predecessors.

A crazy quilt of parliamentary and presidential systems, the constitution of Prime Minister Thanom is designed to perpetuate the rule of the military-civilian establishment. It virtually ensures that the present leaders will be in power for the foreseeable future. The document provides for a strong executive appointed by the King on the advice of the upper house of the legislature, or Senate. To complete the tight circle, the Senate is appointed by the executive (with the Kingʼs blessing). The Senate was chosen shortly after promulgation and, although the bodyʼs president is a civilian, 90 out of 120 seats are filled by military officers.

Almost all of the new senators held seats in the old constituent assembly, whose loyalty to the government was amply demonstrated during the nine years it spent drafting a new constitution. Any doubt about the purpose or political complexion of the Senate, moreover, is dispelled by the presence of several prominent generals, including Saiyud, who is in charge of the counterinsurgency effort; Kriangsak, from the supreme command headquarters; and, perhaps most revealing of all, General Samran, commander of the First Army, whose troops control Bangkok.

The only real departure from the quasiconstitutional arrangement under which the late Marshal Sarit and Prime Minister Thanom set up their rule in 1958 is the lower house, whose members will be chosen in nationwide elections early next year. It will mirror, however imperfectly, long submerged political differences in the country, and will serve as an outlet for the expression of regional grievances. It will also provide a forum for those civilian politicians who have been on the outside looking in for the past ten years. Caught between a powerful executive and a stacked and dominant Senate, and without authority to vote no confidence in the government, the lower houseʼs powers under the constitution are carefully circumscribed.

Despite these strong elements of political continuity Thailand is entering a period of transition. The ten-year interregnum is about to end, and a different, albeit far from new, set of arrangements will follow in its wake. Against its better instincts, the military oligarchy is taking its case to the Thai people. Although there is every reason to believe the military leaders can negotiate the transitional period with their hold on power intact, the subtle pressures that brought them this far may take them a good deal farther than they are presently prepared to go. A great deal will depend on how they run the elections, and, finally, on how well they do.

Bangkok Municipal Elections

If the outcome of the Bangkok municipal elections in September is any sign, the government may be in for a harder time than it anticipated in next yearʼs elections. The Democratic Party, the only nationwide opposition party currently active, took 22 of 24 seats in the municipal assembly. Three recognized government slates managed to elect only two progovernment candidates. The first meaningful election in Thailand in ten years, the municipal election was touted as an important political barometer.

The Democrats have always been strong in Bangkok, but their sweep came as a surprise to supporters and opponents alike. There are a number of reasons for the Democratsʼ extraordinary showing. For one thing, Bangkok has long been a party stronghold, and the Democrats apparently mounted a low-key but effective campaign there. The other causes, however, cut closer to the bone and have wider implications for next yearʼs elections. In addition to rallying their normal supporters, the Democrats were the beneficiaries of an antiadministration vote that stemmed from local issues.

It would be a mistake to dismiss the importance of the Democratic sweep because it was based, in part, on local issues, however. Rising pork prices and increased bus fares may not have much impact in the countryside, but every area of Thailand has local grievances and the regime is in trouble if voters cast ballots on the basis of fixing responsibility for local ills. The low turnout in Bangkok is a fairly good sign that a major voter revolt is not in the cards, but the voting does suggest that there may be more antigovernment sentiment in the country than has been recognized heretofore.

The Democratic victory can also be traced to the indecisiveness, disunity, and apparent complacency of the government. Administration strength was dissipated by the fielding of three slates, and organizers failed to get out the vote of those who might be expected to back the regime. If some elements thought that last-minute chicanery might carry the day, they had not counted on student poll watchers who saw to it that the election was one of the countryʼs cleanest.

Whatever the reasons for the Democratic sweep, it may have an important bearing on next yearʼs legislative elections. For the Democrats, the victory provides a much-needed psychological boost. Out of the limelight for ten years and weakened by the death of their leading public figure, the Democrats are suddenly in the position of running, at least nominally, the nationʼs largest and most important city.

The greatest impact, however, may be on the government side. The election is a major disappointment to those elements who had hoped that a Democratic Party defeat in Bangkok would clear the way for any easy victory in the legislative elections. The Bangkok skirmish may prove to be a rude but much-needed awakening for complacent Thai leaders. The election results are a disquieting sign that the ruling oligarchy will have to put aside its squabbling and marshal its considerable resources if it hopes to gain a clear-cut victory in next yearʼs elections.

The Government Prepares For Elections

With the opening round in the constitutional process already over, with nationwide elections less than five months away, and with three years of planning and organizing under its belt, the government still does not have a political party. There are a number of reasons for this, including the fact that the individuals with the best organizational ability in the government are precisely the ones who have been against elections from the start.

The major problem the government faces in forming a unified political party, however, is simply that the government itself is not unified. The prospect of elections has aroused rather than soothed long-standing factional differences within the ruling oligarchy. On the one hand, there is the fundamental split between civilian “liberal” elements, exemplified by Foreign Minister Thanat and Minister of National Development Pote Sarasin, and the old-guard military establishment. And on the other hand, there are the more important divisions within the military group itself. The breakdown is roughly between Prime Minister Thanom and Deputy Prime Minister Praphat, the two men whose working relationship has kept the country stable since Marshal Saritʼs death in 1963.

These factional differences will have to be sorted out and some acceptable understanding reached before the governmentʼs political activity can move into high gear. Much of the responsibility for the slow progress belongs to Prime Minister Thanom. For all of his virtues, Thanom has shown little inclination or ability to harness the ambitions of the other factional leaders behind a unified effort. Indecisive and colorless, the prime minister has done little during the five years he has at least nominally ruled Thailand to build either a political organization responsive to him or the regime, or a following in the country that can be translated into political power in an election year.

The military leaders hope to create a political party broad enough to include all of the factions that have helped rule the country for the past ten years. At the same time, they would like to bring under the party umbrella those political elements with some following in the country whose ties to Bangkok and the levers of power have been negligible. The faction associated with Prime Minister Thanom has been trying since late last year to line up former members of the National Assembly. Independents, or former members of moribund parties, they are the professional politicians with local connections whose support could prove indispensable in the legislative elections. The effort has been half-hearted and has not gone particularly well. One problem is that many of these politicians, although flattered by their new-found importance and eager to collaborate with the establishment, are confused by conflicting instructions and leadership from Bangkok. Their difficulty has been in determining who speaks for the government.

After an initial period of studied detachment, Deputy Prime Minister Praphat has moved forcefully into the vacuum left by Thanom and his associates. Praphat is in an enviable position to organize grass-roots support for the regime. When he acts as minister of interior, Praphat commands an extensive and far-reaching bureaucracy that stretches from provincial capitals to isolated villages. Whatever its weaknesses, it is the best apparatus in the country.

Praphatʼs vehicle is the Free Peopleʼs League of Thailand, a quasi-official, anti-Communist group set up last year by him and his crony, Director of the Department of Local Affairs Chamnan. The league will soon have a spinoff Free Peopleʼs Party (FPP), and Praphat has already signed up an impressive array of supporters. Ironically, they include several well-known leftists such as Sang Patanothai and Buddhist leader Phra Pi Montham. Neither Praphat nor the leftists apparently intend to let ideology stand in the way of good politics.

Praphat has assured other government leaders that his Free Peopleʼs Party will merge with the government party once the latter gets off the ground. A shrewd political infighter, there is good reason to believe, as many of his opponents suspect, that Praphat intends to use the FPP to further his own ambitions.

The Opposition

The ruling group is going into the elections divided and lacking a leader who can, on his own, command much support in the country. The regimeʼs deficiencies, however, must be weighed against the fact that it still has far more resources at its disposal than do its opponents and that for a variety of reasons they are hardly in a comfortable position to take advantage of their opportunities.

The Democratic Party is the only opposition group that comes out of the ten-year hiatus with a dedicated leadership, a small but loyal following, and a strong sense of identity. The party is the oldest in Thailand. Established in 1946 by a group of former followers of leftist leader Pridi Phanomyong, the Democrats are conservative monarchists, with strong ties to the royal family. The party has been an important factor in every Thai election, and although its strength is concentrated in Bangkok, it has some backing in both the northeast and the north. Even the partyʼs most optimistic supporters do not believe it can muster much more than one-third of the seats in the lower house. It is possible, however, that the Democrats and other opposition parties of the center and the left can together win enough seats to deny the government party a clear majority.

The Left

Of all the political groups that are now surfacing in Thailand, none faces the upcoming elections more dispirited, fragmented, or with slighter hopes than the Thai left. Harassed by the government and associated in the public mind with foreign interests, there is good reason to question whether once-influential leftist figures and parties can pull themselves together in time to be a factor in the elections. A number of the more prominent leftists, including some who have spent long years in government prisons for alleged Communist activities, will join government forces in the near future. Other leftists, like Thep Chotinuchit, leader of the socialist United Front, are keeping the faith. Thep has been working with old-time politicians and socialists, particularly in the northeast, in an effort to get the Economist Party ready for the elections. By all accounts, he has had a hard time getting financial support, and organizational efforts on behalf of the party are making little progress.

It is possible, however, that the left may do better in next yearʼs elections than its current strength would suggest. Most of the leftist politicians come from the northeast, where regional identity is strongest in Thailand, and have managed through the years to identify themselves with the regionʼs aspirations. Some of these politicians paid a high personal price during the 1950s for airing the northeastʼs grievances in Bangkok. It is entirely possible that they will reap their reward at the polls next year.

The position of former Prime Minister Pridi Phanomyong, last of the promoters of the 1932 coup, is one additional factor on the left that could conceivably have some bearing on next yearʼs election. Despite the fact he has spent the past 20 years exiled in Communist China, Pridi is still a name that has to be reckoned with in Thailand. As the countryʼs best-known leftist, and the founder of its leading university, Pridi has become something of a legendary figure among intellectual circles in the capital. The amount of pro-Pridi sentiment in the country as a whole is difficult to determine, but judging by the regimeʼs refusal to permit him to return to Thailand, it may still be a political factor. The revival of political activity in the country may give fresh inspiration to Pridiʼs periodic thoughts of leaving China. If he gets out, even if only to Western Europe, the weight of his voice and activities on behalf of opposition elements may exert some influence on the way the voting goes.

Amorphous Center

It is still too early to determine how many political parties will field candidates in the upcoming election. The governmentʼs political party law prohibits independent candidates, however, and therefore between now and the elections there may be a proliferation of small parties with little ideological standing and few direct ties to the past. In addition, there may be a number of second-echelon politicians with past connections to pro-Phibun and pro-Sarit parties who, not finding a home in the governmentʼs party, strike out on their own in the hope they can make a better deal after the elections. The electoral fortunes of these elements will depend on the local appeal of their candidates. Despite an electoral law that minimizes the influences of local-based politicians, splinter parties will probably manage to elect a few lower house representatives.

The Issues

The way the Thai voter casts his ballot next year is likely to be determined more by the personalities of the candidates and the impact of local or regional interests than by anything else. If past elections are any guide, the influence of substantive issues will be all but lost as the voting moves from Bangkok into the villages. Thai political parties have never managed to generate issues or a sense of dissatisfaction with the status quo that could precipitate a voter rebellion in the countryside. There is no indication, at this stage of the game at least, that they will be more successful this time.

This estimate, however, is not as firmly based as it may appear. First, a number of important if not revolutionary changes in the countryside have taken place in the ten years since Thailandʼs last election. New roads have opened up isolated areas, new markets have been created, mass communications methods have been introduced, and new patterns of living and perhaps of desires have been created in the villages. Even though the impact of these changes on the substance of rural life should not be overstated, there is little doubt that some of the insularity of the average Thai villager has been worn away in the past ten years.

It is reasonable to assume, however, that although personalities and local interests will still be the most important factor in the voting, next yearʼs election is likely to be more issue-oriented than any in the past. And the opposition, whether or not it is able to exploit them, has several reasonably good issues. By all odds, the most damaging to the government will be corruption. No one issue seems to evoke a more universal and deeply felt response among the Thai people than that of corrupt practices of Thai officials. Young or old, villager or urbanite, educated or illiterate, everybody is against corruption, and everybody thinks the government—from the wayward constable to the venal cabinet officer—is riddled with it.

Prime Minister Thanom has a reputation for being an honest man, but in going to the country, the Thanom government will be also judged by the unsavory reputation of Deputy Prime Minister Praphat and his followers. There is a general consensus that the deputy prime minister has gone too far. The Bangkok municipal election results are an exaggerated but pointed illustration of the risk the ruling group runs if it is unable to dissociate itself from the unsavory reputation of some of its membership.

There are also a number of domestic issues relating to the allocation of economic resources and the establishment of developmental priorities that may provide grist for the oppositionʼs mill. Although Thailand has made considerable economic progress under the military regime, and its growth rate compares favorably with that of other nations, the fact remains that its per capita income is still extremely low. There are some people in Thailand, although they are few in number and exercise only marginal influence, who are asking whether the countryʼs economic gains are being made in the right areas and are reaching the right people. It seems likely that some of the opposition politicians will try to make profit in next yearʼs election by suggesting that there is more to economic progress than a building boom in Bangkok.

The opposition will almost certainly argue the economic issues along the long-standing battle lines separating Bangkok and the central plain from the other major regions. As a general rule, the farther one gets from Bangkok, the easier it becomes to translate differences in economic policies into regional quarrels. Regional differences and attitudes appear to have yielded only grudgingly, if at all, to the considerable changes that have taken place in the countryside since the last election.

In the south, for example, observers have noted that local politicians, businessmen, and teachers—precisely the kind of people who normally would back the establishment—are growing increasingly bitter over what they regard as Bangkokʼs indifference and neglect. A decline in the price of rubber—a mainstay of the southʼs economy—has not helped matters, nor has the example of Bangkokʼs relatively new-found interest in the northeast sat particularly well. Even in the northeast, where Bangkok has mounted its strongest developmental effort over the past five years, there is little reason for believing that the areaʼs strong sense of regional identity will not be a large factor in the lower house elections.

Foreign Policy and the US

Despite the fact that Thailand is on the periphery of the Vietnam war, that its bases have been used for bombing attacks against North Vietnam, and that both Hanoi and Peking have backed an insurgent movement in the countryside to underline warnings about the consequences of maintaining close relations with the US, Bangkokʼs foreign policy will probably not come under close scrutiny during the election campaign. The reasons for this are that the major opposition groups are in general agreement with the direction of the regimeʼs foreign policy, and more importantly, because they probably calculate that there is not much political mileage in the foreign policy issue. This does not mean, however, that the ruling groupʼs relations with the US will fail to generate debate or interest in the upcoming elections.

Close to 50,000 US military personnel have been moved to bases in Thailand in the relatively short period of three years. This has led to a growing uneasiness over what the Thai regard as the unfortunate by-products of the American presence. The sense of cultural shock, especially strong for a people who take pride in their independence and who simply have not come into contact with large numbers of Westerners before, has been felt throughout the society, including the ruling group itself.

The publication of a bitter anti-US diatribe in one of Bangkokʼs most respected newspapers, the tongue-lashing US officials recently received from young Thai newspapermen, and exaggerated stories of the offenses of US soldiers, all point to a nascent anti-American sentiment in the country. Although difficult to gauge, such sentiment does not appear to be sufficiently strong or widespread to have a major impact on the elections, but it is likely that even conservative opposition groups, like the Democrats, will argue that the ruling establishment has gone too far in accommodating the US and has not been sufficiently solicitous of Thai interests.

Prospects

The government may well fail to secure a clear-cut majority in the lower house. Certainly, the record of legislative elections in past years, and the slow progress the government has made organizing for the upcoming one, suggest that the military group may have to settle for something less. The failure to win a majority of the 219 lower house seats will make the governmentʼs job somewhat more difficult, but with all of the considerable assets of both friendly and unfriendly persuasion at their disposal, the military leaders should have little trouble patching together a working parliamentary majority from among fragmented and, in all likelihood, opportunistic opposition elements.

Even if such an arrangement is not forthcoming or there is some major surprise in the election results, it is not likely that the lower house will prove overly obstreperous. Whatever their other traits, the opposition politicians currently on the scene are neither idealistic enough to push for fundamental changes in the way the country is ruled, nor foolish enough to think that they could possibly succeed.

Although they may not enjoy quite as much freedom of choice as they once did, the present leaders will continue to rule Thailand after the elections and, at least for the short term, in pretty much the same way. The new constitution and the elections, then, are not likely to bring any important changes in Thai domestic or foreign policies in the near future. The larger question, which cannot yet be answered, is whether the new constitutional arrangement proves to be a first step toward fundamental change in the power system that has been in force since 1932, or only more of the same. Only time will tell.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Country File, Thailand, Vol. VIII, Memos 7/68–12/68. Secret; No Foreign Dissem. This was a “Weekly Review.” A photograph on p. 3 of the source text showing Prime Minister Thanom casting his ballot in the Bangkok municipal elections and a photograph of Deputy Prime Minister Praphat are not reproduced.

408. Memorandum of Conversation 408. Memorandum of Conversation1

Bangkok, November 16, 1968.

SUBJECT

Politics in Thailand

PARTICIPANTS

H.E. Pote Sarasin, Minister of National Development

Ambassador Unger

Replying to my question Pote explained the origin of the policy statement and the rules of procedure which the SPT (Saha Pracha Thai) Party submitted on October 24 when the Party applied for registration and which were also distributed for discussion at the Party seminar this week. He said that about 2–1/2 years ago, when the decision to form a government party had first been made, he had agreed to undertake the preparation of some basic documents to set forth the policies of the projected party. He had called together a group of academic people and experienced civil servants and they had produced a thick set of documents, a copy of which he said he would send me if I wished; I replied affirmatively. Pote added that these documents represented a distillation of experience on constitutions and parliamentary governments around the world and were not specifically related to Thailandʼs situation.

More recently, according to Pote, General Sawaeng was given the task by the Party of taking the raw material mentioned above and distilling out of it party procedures and policy which would be appropriate to Thailand and the SPT Party. It is this which was submitted on October 24 at the time of registration. Pote added that Gen. Sawaeng was assisted in his efforts by Ari of the police and also by a former fellow-traveler, Prasert Sapsunthorn, who could supply language which would preempt possible propaganda points the Communists might try to score. Pote hastened to add that he wouldnʼt consider using an established Communist like Saeng Phatthanothai no matter how much he seems to have recanted, but a reformed fellow-traveler could be helpful. Referring to criticism over recent days of some of the borrowings from Communist models detected in the SPT documents, Pote said he was reminded of Bernard Shawʼs saying that just because your enemy goes to heaven, it doesnʼt mean you have to go to hell! The types of rules which he cited as having been criticized on these grounds sounded quite innocuous and seemed to bear out his point.

I then asked Pote what was his own view of all of the documents in question and he confessed that he had not yet read them. I promptly gave him to read an excerpt from “The Policies of the SPT Party”: Part II C, Foreign Affairs. He stopped at the reference in sentence one to the Revolutionary Party and seemed concerned that that Party was mentioned by name in the document; he professed to believe there had been an earlier agreement with Praphat and Thanom that the Revolutionary Party was no longer pertinent once the Constitution had come into effect and it should not figure in the policy documents. In due course Pote read on, finished the paper, expressed his general satisfaction with it and asked me what was the matter.

Although I had not said anything was the matter, I replied that it seemed strange to me that there would be no mention in a foreign affairs policy document of the Government Party of Thailand of the Thai effort to support the Government of South Vietnam, including the sending of more than 10,000 Thai troops. Pote promptly dismissed my doubts on the grounds that this was a basic policy statement expected to be pertinent over the long range and not to address itself to questions such as Viet-Nam which apply to the situation of the moment.

This brought us around to the question of the status of the documents submitted by the SPT Party on October 24. According to Pote they were then and still remain drafts, subject to some further revision, presumably by the Party leadership. He said that he had prevailed on the Prime Minister to agree to give further consideration to some of the complaints that had been raised at this weekʼs seminar and take them into account in the final drafting of the documents. Pote felt that the Party membership had been treated quite cavalierly and that at least some of their objections should be taken into account. When I mentioned Sanong he confirmed that he had been the cause of much of the complaining; Sanong, he remarked, is from Sawaengʼs office and has little understanding of how to deal with people in politics. Before we left this subject Pote made the point that at this stage when the Party is new, all the membership should be given an opportunity to express their views on party policy and some account of this should be taken in the final draft of the Partyʼs policy documents; later on anyone who wishes to join the Party will have to read the final documents and agree to abide by them or not join.

Pote gave me the impression that he had attended some of the seminar session. However, in reply to my question he said he had not attended Party leader Thanomʼs dinner and probably not the final meeting of the Party which immediately preceded. Pote explained that the dinner had originally been set for Friday and when it was advanced to Thursday it conflicted with an earlier engagement of his.

I then referred to the recent Senate decision on the electoral law in which several key provisions advocated by the Government had been rejected. In particular I stressed the proposal to which Pote himself had attached fundamental importance, i.e., that candidates, in order to qualify, had to stand for election as members of a registered political party. I expressed some astonishment that a Senate appointed by the Government should have been able to flaunt the clearly expressed wishes of the Governmentʼs leadership. Pote acknowledged that this should not have happened and noted his concern that candidates will now be able to play the old Thai game of running as independents and then, if successful, exacting their price for joining up and supporting a party after election; Pote also noted how unreliable that association and support was likely to be. Commenting on the Senateʼs action on the Governmentʼs proposals, he observed that both he and General Praphat had been absent and that they were the principal supporters of the requirement for party membership; he also identified Sanong as partly responsible for the Governmentʼs defeat because of his free-wheeling activities with the Senators.

At this point I delivered a brief lecture on how much more difficult it was to make a representative form of government work than an autocracy. I reviewed some of the operating practices followed in politics in the United States, noting the importance of political leaders maintaining constant touch with the legislative process, lining up support for bills, being sure the party leadersʼ wishes are known and that speakers and arguments are lined up in advance. I remarked that the Thai Government may turn out to have created a Frankenstein for itself unless the leadership gets down to the hard work of making parliamentary government work in the way it wished. There were others—notably the Communists—who would be happy to step in and take full advantage of the democratic machinery. In my view representative government would in the long run make a great contribution to stability in Thailand, particularly because of the role of an elected assembly as a watch-dog on public officials and a kind of “ombudsman” for the public. These benefits wouldnʼt be realized, however, unless political leaders worked hard to get the new system into effective operation.

Pote acknowledged this and said that the Senate action has taught the SPT Party a lesson and they will have to organize themselves better in the future. He remarked, however, that he couldnʼt be the kind of politician I was describing, available 24 hours a day for visiting provincial delegations, back-slapping and the like; he noted ruefully that this had been Khuang Aphaiwongseʼs great talent and he mentioned Dawee as having an ability to get along well with the politicians and to speak entertainingly at length (and say little or nothing). I said he, Pote, couldnʼt be expected to play this role but it was up to him and the other SPT leaders to see that capable people were selected to carry on the business of political organization and contact as a full-time job. Having in mind all his other responsibilities I wondered whether Dawee could also do his job as Secretary-General of the Party. While I recognized that the leading positions had to be staffed in name by prestigious persons, it was essential that full-time, hard-working and experienced people, perhaps younger men, do the every-day indispensable work.

Pote reverted to the problem of selection of candidates for the limited number of assembly seats out of the 900-odd individuals who have presented themselves, all claiming to have sure-fire vote-getting credentials. He mentioned specifically a 70-man farmersʼ group which has been urging its members on him. When he failed to promise them places on the SPT ticket the group then suggested he break away from the SPT Party and join them in a new party. Pote cited this as typical of Thai politics where the idea of continuing parties with clear policies, an organization and a body of supporters beyond the candidates themselves was virtually unknown. He took some satisfaction from the fact that the SPT Party has organized itself in advance of the elections contrary to the prevalent practice of the past in which parties really got organized only after the election was over and it was clear who had won.

As an aside Pote expressed the view that the Democrat Party will not do well outside of Bangkok. He continues to regard Seni as a largely unsuccessful successor of Khuang—“a professor rather than a politician”.

Pote asked me at one point what was the trouble with Thanat, pre-sumably with reference to his aloofness from the political scene; he wondered whether he was contemplating leaving the government. I said that Thanat, in my opinion, has not a great taste for politics and in any case he probably prefers to wait and see how this first round comes out. I noted, however, that Thanat on at least one occasion had indicated a willingness to continue to serve Thai governments in his present capacity. Pote acknowledged this and observed only that he guessed Thanat was primarily a professional man.

Pote also commented on his continuing satisfaction with Prime Minister Thanom, above all because of his continuing loyalty to King and religion, the prime cements of the Thai nation. He reminisced about Phibunʼs alienation from the King and said even Sarit had shown signs of beginning to feel above the monarchy toward the close of his regime. Thanom remains absolutely loyal.

Comment: Pote betrays a woeful lack of understanding of what must be done to make a democratic system work constructively and also a lack of disposition to involve himself very deeply in the process. Since this is true in large degree of most of the other top SPT Party leaders it suggests problems ahead for Thailandʼs first venture into parliamentary democracy in more than ten years. If, as seems to have been the case recently, matters are left largely to Gen. Sawaeng and his cohorts, some ill-considered decisions may be made and the differences between Praphatʼs group and the rest of the SPT Party leadership will be exacerbated. Pote was clearly shaken both by the Senate action and by the dissension evident at the SPT Party sessions and it is hoped that with continuous prodding he, and the other leaders, will begin at once to exert themselves more to exercise a guiding hand and to get some competent Party activists into operation.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 THAI. Secret. Copies were sent to Hannah, Hamilton, Jantzen, Godley, and Spear. Drafted by Unger. The meeting was held at Poteʼs residence.

Index Index

Abrams, Gen. Creighton, 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252], 555n [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 570n [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

Acheson, David C., 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Acheson, Dean G., 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Adermann, C. F., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Aiken, George D., 371n [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183]

Aldrich, George H., 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 208], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228], 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]

Alexander, Clifford L., 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Alphand, Herve, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 49], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Alsop, Joseph, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Anand Panyarachun, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]

Anderson, Robert, 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]

ANZUS Treaty Organization: Council meeting of 1964, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Council meeting of 1965, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Council meeting of 1966, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Council meeting of 1967, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22]

Council meeting of 1968, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Malaysia and Singapore defense issue, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 29]-71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 32]

Mutual defense obligations, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Security consultations, 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Vietnam War, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Arends, Leslie C., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Arun Panupong, 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364]

Asian and Pacific Council (ASPAC), 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]

Asian Development Bank, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 56], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 57], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95] Capitalization of, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83]

Charter negotiations, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 67]

Concessional loan fund, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 92]

Inauguration of governors, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 91], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Asian regional institutions, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Askew, Laurin B., 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]

Association of Southeast Asia (ASA), 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75]

Australia (see also ANZUS Treaty Organization; U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez): Asian relations, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 23]

Cambodia: Border disputes with Thailand and RVN, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 231]

Cambodian-Australian relations, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Cambodian-U.S. relations and, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 201], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212]-468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 212], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

China, relations with, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Cliffordʼs meetings with Gorton, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

Gortonʼs performance as Prime Minister, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40]

Gortonʼs U.S. visit, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

Harrimanʼs meetings with Menzies, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10]-18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Holtʼs U.S. visits, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Indonesia, relations with, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Interest equalization tax, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

Johnson-Holt correspondence, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Johnsonʼs address to Australian Cabinet following Holtʼs death, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Gorton, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Hasluck, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Holt, 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Menzies, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Johnsonʼs visits, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Hasluck, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Holt, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15]

Prek Thnot Dam project in Cambodia, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Ruskʼs meetings with Gorton, 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Ruskʼs meetings with Hasluck, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Ruskʼs meetings with Holt, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Southeast Asia role, policy on, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 41]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Trade with U.S., 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 23], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

U.S. Defense procurement from, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, intelligence role re, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Vietnam War involvement, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36] Johnsonʼs criticism of Australian effort, 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Vietnam War policy, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10]

Australia-New Zealand-United States (ANZUS) Pact. See ANZUS Treaty Organization.

Ayub Khan, Mohammad, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Bacon, Ruth E., 183n [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 187n [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 73], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 94]

Ball, George W., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 687n [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316] Burma, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodian-U.S. relations: Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

Congressional visits to Cambodia, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

“Fresh ideas” program, 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 185]

Presidential emissary proposal, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia: JCS program for interdiction, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 176]

Johnsonʼs communications with Sihanouk re, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Self-defense measures, 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, ICC actions re, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 167], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

Vietnam War, SEATO policy toward, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Barbis, George M., 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Barbour, Robert E., 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]

Barnes, C. F., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Barnett, Robert W., 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 183n [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387]

Barr, Joseph W., 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 92]

Bator, Francis M., 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 67]

Beaumarchais, Jacques de, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]

Bell, David E., 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 67], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Bellman, Murray J., 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Bennett, 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 552n [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260], 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262]

Bennett, Josiah W., 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]

Berger, Samuel D., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 100], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 103], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360]

Bergesen, Alf E., 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Bhumibol Adulyadej, King of Thailand, 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360], 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 381]

Johnsonʼs meetings with, 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Thai communist insurgency, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Black, Cyril E., 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]

Black, Eugene R., 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169] Asian Development Bank, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65] Capitalization of, 177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83]

Charter negotiations, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 67]

Concessional loan fund, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 92]

Cambodia visit, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Presidential emissary to Cambodia proposal, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Southeast Asia economic development program: Blackʼs appointment to, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Blackʼs meetings with Asian leaders, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95]

Blackʼs progress report, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 91]

Southeast Asian Educational Organization, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Blair, William McC., Jr., 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197]

Blakers, G. E., 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]

Blau, Clarence, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81]

Blouin, Rear Adm. F. J., 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269]-581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Boggs, Hale, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Bohlen, Charles E., 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339]

Bonsal, Phillip W., 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 150], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 151], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]

Boonchoo, Marshal, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312]

Bo Setkya, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Bowles, Chester (see also Bowles Mission to Cambodia under Cambodian-U.S. relations), 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259] Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 152], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 189]

Cambodian-U.S. reconciliation issue, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230]

Bradley, Gen. Omar, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 52], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53]

Brooke, Edward, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240]

Brooks, Sir Norman, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Brower, Carleton C., 104n [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Brown, George, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 21]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206]

Brown, Winthrop G., 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 44], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 398], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Bruce, David K. E., 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]

Bryant, Farris, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Buffum, William B., 302n [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 308n [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 312n [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]

Bullitt, John C., 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 369], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 382]

Bunchana Atthakor, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Bunche, Ralph, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Bundy, McGeorge, 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 172n [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 67], 173n [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 114], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 158], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269], 597n [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 611n [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310] Australia, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Burma, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 151], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156]-350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 57], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 58]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 62]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Vietnam War, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 53]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53]

Bundy, William P., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 11n [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 107n [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82], 278n [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 281n [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121], 286n [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 302n [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 150], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 369n [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 394n [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 450n [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231], 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260], 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269], 597n [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 715n [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334], 740n [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334], 743n [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 336], 749n [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 345], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369], 823n [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 836n [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 840n [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 842n [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394] Australia, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Burma, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]

Cambodia, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 449n [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 128], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 203]-442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 73] Vietnam War policy, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 64]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 382], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384] Helicopters for, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 354] U.S. military assistance to Thailand and, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 299]

Thailand, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322] Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356]-793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanom, 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Thanomʼs U.S. visit, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356]

U.S.-Thai relations, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 164], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258]-563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 305], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400], 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 295]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 295], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314] Delivery of equipment, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341]-756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341]

Fiscal year 1965 add-ons, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289], 624n [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 290], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291]

Fiscal year 1967 program, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322]

Fiscal year 1968 program, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341]

Political stability in Thailand and, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356]-791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356]-793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356]

U.S.-Thai relations and, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366] Base occupancy and land cost arrangements, 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 270], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384], 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 403]

B–52 bombing campaigns originating from Thailand, 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 346], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 180]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252]

Vietnam War, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53] Cambodian conference as possible means of initiating settlement, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

SEATO policy toward, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 64]

U.S.-Thai discussions re, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384]

Bunker, Ellsworth, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 232]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Bunting, Edward J., 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Bunting, Sir John, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

Burchinal, Lt. Gen. David A., 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278]

Burdett, William C., 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Burke, John R., 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]

Burma, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313] China, relations with, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 103], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 104]

Domestic and foreign policies, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 101]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 101], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 103]

Insurgency problem, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 103]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 103], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 104]

Ne Winʼs mistrust of U.S., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 97]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 101]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101]

Ne Winʼs U.S. visit, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

U.S. economic assistance, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 103]

U.S. military assistance, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 101]

Bury, L. H. E., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Butler, Richard A., 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122]

Byrne, Patricia M., 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 308n [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]

Byroade, Henry A., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 97]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 101]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 101]

Cambodia (see also Cambodian neutrality issue; Cambodian-U.S. relations; Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft; Khmer Serei; U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia; Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia), 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379] Border control program by UN, proposed, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 133], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Border disputes with Thailand and RVN, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 140], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184]-402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 184], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 227] Australian recognition of Cambodiaʼs borders, 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231]-513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 231]

Intelligence reports on, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 249]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 249]

U.S. declaration on Cambodiaʼs territorial integrity, proposed, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 231], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248]

China, relations with, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 158], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229]

Domestic situation, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 195]

DʼOrlandiʼs meeting with Sihanouk, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

DRV, relations with, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]-393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229]

Foreign policy, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 163]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 195]

France, relations with, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 163]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 163], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66]

Soviet Union, relations with, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Vietnamese threat, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 249]

Cambodian neutrality issue: Geneva conference proposal, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Intelligence reports on, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 163]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Quadripartite conference proposal, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 108]-266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 112], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 114], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 124], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129]

RVN position, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

Sihanoukʼs motives in advocating neutrality, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 123]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 123]

Sihanoukʼs postponement of action, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Thai position, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

U.S.-French consultations, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

U.S. position, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 290n [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 123], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S.-Soviet consultations, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S.-U.K. consultations, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Vietnam War negotiations at possible Cambodian conference, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Cambodian Study Group, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 205], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250]

Cambodian-U.S. relations (see also Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft), 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182] Australian role in, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 201], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212]-468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 212], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Blackʼs visit to Cambodia, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Bohlenʼs meeting with Sihanouk, 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Bonsal-Son Sann talks, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 150]-339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 150]

Bowles Mission to Cambodia, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226]-505, 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 236], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 152], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 189]

Break in relations, 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156]

Complexity of, 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Congressional visits to Cambodia, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

“Custodian” for Cambodian Embassy in Washington, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Demonstrations at U.S. Embassy, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115]-276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

French involvement, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

“Fresh ideas” program, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 185]

Harrimanʼs proposed meeting with Sihanouk, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]-417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Intermediary channel to Sihanouk, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Johnsonʼs letter to Sihanouk, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Kidderʼs appointment as Ambassador, 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 142]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Nong Kimnyʼs departure from U.S., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Opposition figures, U.S. contacts with, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157]

Presidential emissary proposal, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Press coverage of Sihanouk in U.S., 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 142]

Reconciliation issue, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 189], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 201], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 226], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 232], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 257]

SEACOORD recommendations, 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 232]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 232]

Sihanoukʼs letter-to-the-editor, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 151]

Sihanoukʼs press interview, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Sihanouk visit to U.S., proposed, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 128]

Status report of December, 1964, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 150]

U.S. administrative responsibility for matters relating to Cambodia, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 232]

U.S. mission staff reductions, 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262] Blackʼs visit to Cambodia and, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 244], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248]

Diplomatic measures to achieve release of personnel, 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242], 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Release of personnel, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

U.S. position statement to Cambodia, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Canada, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Cannon, Howard, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 52]

Caplan, Benjamin, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70]

Carter, Albert E., 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Carter, Gen. Marshall S., 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 310n [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 717n [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328] Thai communist insurgency, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 321]-697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 868n [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]-881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

Thai political scene in 1968, 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 407]

Chamnan Yuwabun, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 381]-845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 381], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 407]

Chantrea incident, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 120], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Chan Youran, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115]

Charles, Prince of Wales, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]

Chau Seng, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 117]

Chen Yi, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344]

China, Peopleʼs Republic of, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] Australia, relations with, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Burma, relations with, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 103], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 104]

Cambodia, relations with, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 158], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229]

Communist victory in Vietnam scenarios, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 313]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 77]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77]

Soviet Southeast Asia policy and, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnam War, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

China, Republic of, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4]

Chitti Nawisathien, Gen., 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283]

Chou En-lai, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 99]

Christian, George, 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 536n [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Church, Frank, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52]

Clarac, Achille, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Clark, Edward, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

Clay, Lucius DuB., 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 52], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53]

Cleveland, J. Harlan, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137], 327n [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]

Clifford, Clark M., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404] Australia, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251]

Thai communist insurgency, 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]-864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388]

Thailand, 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]-866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216]-478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388]-865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Vietnam War, 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]-862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388]

Clough, Ralph, 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]

Cobb, J. O., 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33]

Cohen, Louis A., 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]

Colby, William E., 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360]

Coleman, John C., 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Colm, Peter W., 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 94]

Commonwealth Prime Ministers conference (1964), 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Communist insurgency in Thailand. See Thai communist insurgency.

Congress, U.S.: Asian Development Bank, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act for FY 1967, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 91], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 91]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Southeast Asian Educational Organization, 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 90]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 697n [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 329], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 329]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 346]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Vietnam War, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 52]-128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52]

Conlon, Thomas F., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 11n [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Conner, John T., 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Cooper, Chester L., 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 57]-148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 340n [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 150], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Cooper, Frank, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Corcoran, Thomas J., 330n [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 534n [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 552n [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251], 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258], 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260], 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262]

Corner, Frank H., 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 44], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 44], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 44]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 44], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]

Correia, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 49], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Cowherd, Col. Robert M., 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Creel, Robert C., 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Cronk, E. M., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226]

Crook, William H., 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]

Cuthell, David C., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 11n [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Dakleow Susilvorn, Capt., 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations. See under U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia.

Dauge (French), 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Davis, Richard, 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]

Dawee Chulasapya, Marshal, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 365], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 408]-918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 408] Thai counterinsurgency program, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296]

Thailand, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278] McNamaraʼs meetings with Dawee, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 337]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 337]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 268], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 268], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 269], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283]

De Gaulle, Charles, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323]

De Silva, Peer, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 344]-766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 344], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]-785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Dean, Lt. Gen. Fred M., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Dean, Sir Patrick, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]

Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 266], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV). See Vietnam, Democratic Republic of.

Denney, George F., 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Denny, George C., Jr., 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 200]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 200], 780n [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 893n [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Depuy, Bill, 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 236]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252]

Deschamps, Noel St. Charles, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 212], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 240], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Devine, James B., 840n [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384], 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Dexter, John B., 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Dirksen, Everett M., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52]

Dobrynin, Anatoliy F., 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]

DʼOrlandi (Italian), 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Drachnik, Capt. J. B., 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

Duke, Angier Biddle, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38], 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Dulles, John Foster, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 327]

Economic and social development in Southeast Asia. See Southeast Asia economic development program.

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE), 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 61], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]

Edminister, David, 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52]

Eisenhower, Mamie, 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101]

Emrick, Maj. Gen. P. S., 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 280]

Enthoven, Alain, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 318], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 325], 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Evans, Allan, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 780n [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 893n [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Evenou, Adm., 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46]

Ewing, Richard T., 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 240n [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201], 439n [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Fairbairn, David, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Fairhall, Allen, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36]

Falk, Richard A., 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]

Feldman, Mark B., 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Feldman, Meyer, 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]

Felt, Adm. Harry D., 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273]-592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 275], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 276], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278]

Flickinger, D.C., 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 275]

Flowerree, Charles C., 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84], 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262]

Fluker, Robert J., 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 317]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 317]

Forrestal, Michael V., 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 327n [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143] U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 120], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269]

Fortas, Abe, 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234]

Fowler, Henry, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 67], 177n [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Fox, Eric L., 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

France, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 323] Cambodia, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190] Cambodian-French relations, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 163]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 163], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Cambodian-U.S. relations and, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54]-140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]

Francis, Al, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 290]

Freeman, Orville, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 44], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Friedman, Al, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 290]

Fuey Ungphakorn, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 56]

Fukunaga, Kenji, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Fulbright, J. William, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] Thai government, criticism of, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 329]

Furlonger, Robert W., 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174]

Gandhi, Indira, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 223], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Garthoff, Raymond L., 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Gaud, William S., 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 687n [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 345], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]

Geneva Agreements (1954), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Gillet, Robert, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]

Gilmore (U.K.), 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206]

Gleysteen, William, 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 103]

Glick, B. G., 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262]

Godley, G. McMurtrie, 562n [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258], 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 352], 849n [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 894n [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401], 902n [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404], 915n [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Goh (Singapore), 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22]

Goldberg, Arthur J., 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 162]

Goldschmidt, Tex, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81]

Goldwater, Barry, 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52]

Goodwin, 164n [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Gordon, Kermit, 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Gore-Booth, Sir Paul, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17]

Gorton, John G., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Graham, James, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 254], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

Grandy, Gen. John, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Great Britain. See United Kingdom.

Green, Fred, 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Green, Marshall, 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105]-256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 277n [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 327n [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143], 330n [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282]

Gromyko, Andrei, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]

Gruening, Ernest, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52]

Gussing, Niles, 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Habib, Philip C., 448n [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 492n [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 236], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 823n [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370] U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 209]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Hadley, William J., 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Halleck, Charles A., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Halls, Michael, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]

Halperin, Morton, 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Hamilton, William C., 842n [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 894n [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401], 915n [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Hand, Lloyd N., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]

Hannah, Norman B., 255n [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 265n [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 111], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 361], 842n [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400], 894n [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401], 915n [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D., 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Harriman, W. Averell, 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 255n [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 265n [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 111], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228], 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392] Australia, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10]-18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Burma, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodia, 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]-417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 57], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 58]

Thailand, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308]-662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 221]

Hartman, Arthur A., 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 873n [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Hasluck, Paul M. C., 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201] ANZUS Treaty Organization, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Australia: Cambodian-U.S. relations and, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 174], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Hasluck, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Hasluck, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Ruskʼs meetings with Hasluck, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Vietnam War involvement, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 239], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 240]-532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240]

Malaysia-Indonesia confrontation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 32]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45] Quadripartite discussions, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 221]

Vietnam War, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Hayden, Carl, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

Heald, Henry, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]

Healey, Denis, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 21], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 72]

Heath, Edward, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]

Helms, Richard M., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 214], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 536n [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 249], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 687n [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404] Thai communist insurgency, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 307]

Henty, Denham, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Herbert, Eugene, 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]

Herz, 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Hewitt, Cyrus, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39], 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52]

Hicks, Sir Edwin, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 265n [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 111], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269]

Hirschfeld, Thomas J., 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 277n [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Hitchcox, Wilber W., 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 88]

Ho Chi Minh, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 90]

Holdridge, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96]

Holt, Harold E., 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35] Australia, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24] Cambodian-U.S. relations and, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 201], 437n [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 201], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 203]

Holtʼs U.S. visits, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Johnson-Holt correspondence, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Johnsonʼs address to Australian Cabinet following Holtʼs death, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Holt, 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Holt, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15]

Ruskʼs meetings with Holt, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Trade with U.S., 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Vietnam War involvement, 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 77n [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 31]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

Vietnam War, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23] Australian involvement, 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 77n [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 31]

Holyoake, Sir Keith, 5n [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204] ANZUS Treaty Organization, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

New Zealand, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34],104–111

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 90]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Vietnam War, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 42]

Hong Kong, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24]

Hoopes, Townsend, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 287], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Hoover, Lawrence, Jr., 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]

Hughes, Thomas L., 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]-836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 893n [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Hull, Field Marshal Sir Richard Amyatt, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22]

Hulme, A. S., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312]

Huot Sambath, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115], 272n [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 273n [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 116], 290n [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 123], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 142]

Hutchin, Lt. Gen., 570n [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

Hyland, Adm., 570n [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

Ignatius, Paul, 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388]

India, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15] 39–40 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Indonesia, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313] Malaysia, confrontation with, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66]

Inouye, Daniel, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183]

Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

International Control and Supervision Commission (ICC), 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 180]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 223], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 226]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 229]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 232], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 243]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Isham, Heyward, 213n [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Ivory Coast, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 145]

Jackson, Col. H. S., 598n [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Jacobson, Jake, 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79]

Jacobson, Jerome, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Jantzen, Robert J., 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 894n [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401], 915n [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Japan, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13] Aid for Southeast Asia, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95]

Asian stability and, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]-35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15]

New Zealand, relations with, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 44]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79] Prek Thnot Dam project in Cambodia, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 91], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 91]

Jessup, Peter, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 48n [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 102n [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 173n [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 232], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358] ANZUS Treaty Organization, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Asian Development Bank,, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67] 177, 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Australia, 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10] Johnson-Holt correspondence, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Johnsonʼs address to Australian Cabinet following Holtʼs death, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Gorton, 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Hasluck, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Holt, 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Menzies, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Johnsonʼs visits, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]-89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35]

Trade with U.S., 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Vietnam War involvement, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Burma, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 100], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 101], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodia, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 158], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 151], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] Blackʼs visit to Cambodia, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Congressional visits to Cambodia, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

“Fresh ideas” program, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 183], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Johnsonʼs letter to Sihanouk, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Kidderʼs appointment as Ambassador, 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 142]

Presidential emissary proposal, 389n [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Reconciliation issue, 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197]

Status report of December, 1964, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

New Zealand, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42]-107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 58], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65] Blackʼs meetings with Asian leaders, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 199n [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80]

U.S. Task Force, appointment of, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 62]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 62]

Southeast Asian Educational Organization, 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 86], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 90]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Thailand, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387] Johnsonʼs correspondence with Thanom, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Bhumibol, 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Praphat, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat and Pote, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357]-795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanom, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]-873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Johnsonʼs visit, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

U.S. economic assistance, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War: Equipping and training concerns, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 375], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378]

Speedup in deployment, 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 829n [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 372], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378]

10,000-man commitment, 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 808n [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 364], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223] Air strikes, proposed, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 214], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 215], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 216], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

Cambodian villages and civilians as accidental victims, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155]

Johnsonʼs communications with Sihanouk re, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 902n [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387] Fiscal year 1967 program, 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 329], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 732n [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 331], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242]

Vietnam War: Australian involvement, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Johnson-McGeorge Bundy analysis of, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 53]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53]

Johnson-Russell analysis of, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 52]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 52]

Johnsonʼs views on, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 90]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 90]

Lippmannʼs views on, 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53]

New Zealand involvement, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34]

Paris peace talks, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 387]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]

SEATO policy toward, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51]

SEATO Treaty as basis for U.S. air strikes against DRV, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 86]

Summit conference among troop-contributing nations, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

U.S.-Thai discussions re, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 387]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Johnson, Russell, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189]

Johnson, Tom, 104n [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 536n [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 265n [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 111], 277n [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 281n [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 268], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 694n [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 323] Thailand, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 324], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251], 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262] Thai counterinsurgency program, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Thailand, 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 275]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 276], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 280]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 375]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164] Air strikes, proposed, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 216], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216]

Cambodian personnel for, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations, 447n [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 205], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 210]

JCS program for interdiction, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 176], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 198]-431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 250]

Water-borne infiltration, focus on, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 177]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 177]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 290], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Jones, 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

Jones, Jim, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Jones, Marshall P., 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Jones, William G., 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]

Jorden, William J., 44n [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 217n [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 796n [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 823n [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Kaiser, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]

Kane, John M., 383n [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]

Kantol. See Norodom Kantol.

Karnow, Stanley, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]

Katz, Julius L., 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 100n [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 39], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 879n [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395] New Zealand, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42]-107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Thai counterinsurgency program, U.S. reevaluation of, 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 382]-849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394]-879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Thailand, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339], 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205], 445n [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 205], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250] Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 210], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258]

Diplomatic measures in support of, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 209], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 209]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Kaul, Triloki Nath, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Kennedy, John F., 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274]

Kennedy, Robert F., 100n [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 39], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Kent, Sherman, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Khanh. See Nguyen Khanh .

Khmer Serei, 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 150], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 192] Thai-RVN support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 183]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406]-905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 257], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

Khuang Aphaiwong, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 917 [Pg. 917 is part of Doc. 408]

Kidder, Randolph A., 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 140], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 142]

Kimball, John W., 312n [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 327n [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143], 330n [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

King, Samuel, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]

Kirnassovsky, Boris Yefimovich, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 68]

Kiselyak, Charles A., 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]

Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22]

Klausner, Bill, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 298]

Knaur, P. R., 579n [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269]

Knorr, Klaus, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]

Kohler, Foy D., 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351]

Komer, Robert W., 19n [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 239n [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 100], 276n [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 182], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 611n [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Kong Le, Gen., 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 113]

Konthi Suphamongkhon, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Koren, Henry L. T., 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 150], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Kotschnig, Walter M., 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81]

Koun Wick, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156]

Kou Roun, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Kreisburg, Paul H., 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Kriangsak Chomanom, Lt. Gen., 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 407]

Krit Siwara, Gen., 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396]

Kuchel, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Kuhler, 444n [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205]

Kuhn, Commander, 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Ky. See Nguyen Cao Ky.

Lacey, John A., 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 460n [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 209], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 492n [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Lakeland, Albert A., 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]

Laking, G. R., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 44], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Lang, William E., 743n [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 336]

Laos, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 165], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 261], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313] Cambodian neutrality issue, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Soviet policy toward, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 68]-175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 68], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69]-177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Thai military intervention. See under Thailand.

Larking, G.R., 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Lausche, Frank J., 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77]

Lawler, Peter J., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Lee Kuan Yew, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 30], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75]

LeMay, Gen. Curtis E., 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Leonhart, William, 519n [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Liang Chayakarn, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376]

Lindley, Ernest K., 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Lindquist, Robert S., 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]

Linen, James, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Lippmann, Walter, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 53]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52]-130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 165], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Loftus, S. A., Jr., 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 271]

Lon Nol, Gen., 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 241]

Lopez, Fernando, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 49]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49]

Lucet, Charles, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]-417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Macapagal, Diosdado, 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76]

MacArthur, Douglas A., 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77]

McCain, Adm. John S., 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 261], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263], 899n [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 403]

McCloy, John J., 57n [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]

McConaughy, Walter, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

McCone, John A., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286] Cambodian-U.S. relations, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 139]

McConnell, Gen., 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

McCormack, John, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

McCown, Gen., 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365]

McDonald, David L., 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

MacDonald, Ronald, 65n [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

McEwen, J., 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36]

McKillip, David H., 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

McMahon, William, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]

McNamara, Robert S., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 697n [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 840n [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380] Australia, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-35, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Cambodia, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Thai communist insurgency, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 318], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332]

Thailand, 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364] Coup concerns, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284]

Laos, military intervention in, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Dawee, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 337]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 337]

Military forces, 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War:

Equipping and training concerns, 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 375]-834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378]

10,000-man commitment, 797 [Pg. 797 is part of Doc. 359]-798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 805n [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 363], 806n [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 363], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 808n [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 364], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 815n [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 367], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 367], 817n [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 367], 818n [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand and, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 299], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 177], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192] Air strikes, proposed, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 214], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 216], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 216]

Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 465n [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211]

JCS program for interdiction, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 198]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand 629–631, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332] Fiscal year 1965 add-ons, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 290], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 290]

Fiscal year 1967 program, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 329]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 329], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Vietnam War, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 52], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 53], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53] Status reports, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

McNaughton, John T., 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 687n [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356] U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 271], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332] Counterinsurgency orientation, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 295], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Fiscal year 1965 add-ons, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296]

Fiscal year 1967 program, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322]

Macomber, William B., Jr., 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240]

McReynolds, Frances, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Malai Huvanandana, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279]

Malaysia (see also under U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313] Indonesia, confrontation with, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46]-117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66]

Malik, Adam, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75]

Manacʼh, Etinne Manoel, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255]

Manhard, Philip W., 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 213n [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Mann, Thomas C., 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Mansfield, Mike, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 53], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 101], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240], 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324] Cambodian-U.S. relations, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169], 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 243]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Marcos, Ferdinand, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197]

Marcy, Carl, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187]

Marks, Leonard H., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Martin, Graham A., 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 317], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344] Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 85]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Thai communist insurgency, 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 298], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308] “Czar” for coordination of, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 352], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 352]

Helicopters for, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 312], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341]

Thailand, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273]-592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274] Coup concerns, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 267]

Economic situation, 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 343]

Humphreyʼs visit, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312]

Johnsonʼs visit, 742n [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Khmer Serei, support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 378n [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 325]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 353], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

Thanom government, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S.-Thai relations, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 299], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 305], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 398]-889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341] Delivery of equipment, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341]-756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341]

Economic situation in Thailand and, 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 343]

Fiscal year 1965 add-ons, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296]

Fiscal year 1967 program, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 325]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 329], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 330]-730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Fiscal year 1968 program, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341]

Fiscal year 1969 program, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 337], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 751n [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 338]

Increased assistance, proposals for, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 288]

Reforms in Thai military required by U.S., 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 301]

Reorientation of U.S. policy, need for, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308]-662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309] B–52 bombing campaigns originating from Thailand, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341]-757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341]

Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 336], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 346]

Support facilities for troops, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 288]

Troop deployments for purpose of deterrence, proposed, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 268]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 268], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 270], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Martin, Paul, 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 167]

Meeker, Leonard C., 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Mekong River Convention (1955), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]

Mendenhall, Joseph A., 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 162n [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]

Menzies, Sir Robert G., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10]-18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 31], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 35]

Meyer, Maj. Gen. John C., 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 177]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 177]

Miki, Takeo, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Miller, Paul M., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Milton, Gen., 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282]

Mobley, J. H., 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250]

Mongkhon Na Nakhon, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Moody, C. G., Jr., 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Moore, Jonathan, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 290], 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Moore, Robert W., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 44], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]

Moorsteen, Richard H., 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Morocco, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 145]

Morris, Robert J., 11n [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Morse, Wayne, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52]-128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 323], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 330]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 330]

Motono, Moriyuki, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Moyers, Bill, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 329], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 330]

Murray, Peter, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Narasimhan, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 50–68, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96]

NIE 52–66, 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316]

NIE 52–68, 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

NIE 57–56, 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 195]

National Security Action Memoranda: No. 329, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 62]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 62]

National Security Agency (NSA), 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 868n [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

National Security Council (NSC), 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Nazzaro, Gen., 570n [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

Netherlands, 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Neubert, J. W., 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia (see also Cambodian neutrality issue), 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Ne Win, Gen., 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 99] Burma, 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102] Domestic and foreign policies, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 101]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 101]

Ne Winʼs mistrust of U.S., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 97]-235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 101]-244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101]

Vietnam War policy, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 101]

Ne Win, Madame, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

New Zealand (see also ANZUS Treaty Organization; U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez), 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 44], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 270] Johnsonʼs meetings with Holyoake, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42]-107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Ruskʼs meetings with Holyoake, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 44]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Special treatment from U.S., expectation of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 44]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 44]

Trade with U.S., 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 42]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 44]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 44]

U.S. defense procurement from, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 44]

Vietnam War involvement, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 42]

Ngo Dinh Diem, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 140], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 163]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163]

Nguyen Cao Ky, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Nguyen Khanh, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121]

Nguyen Van Thieu, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]

Nhiek Tioulong, Gen., 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230]

Niblock, Thomas C., 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]

Nitze, Paul H., 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 44], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404]

Nixon, Richard M., 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52]

Nkrumah, Kwame, 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Noble, Marshall H., 213n [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Nong Kimny, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 142], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 563n [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259] Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 152], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 189]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 239], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 239], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240]

Departure from U.S., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Norodom Kantol, 381n [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174]

Norodom Phurissia, 557n [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255], 558n [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 327]

Nu, U, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 101]

Nuclear proliferation, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17]-40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Nuechterlein, Donald E., 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 78n [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

Nyun, U, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56]

Ochs, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Ohn Khin, U, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 101]

Opium production, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Ormsby-Gore, Sir David, 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Orwat, Gen., 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Outlaw, Col., 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 346]

Owen, William M., 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]

Pakistan, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84] Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Paliser, Michael, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]

Paranjpe, 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 229]

Park Chung Hee, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]

Peace Corps, 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Pearson, Lester B., 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]

Pedersen, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

Pell, Claiborne, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183]

Penn Nouth, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 240], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]

Perkin, Graham, 65n [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26]

Perry, Douglas R., 440n [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 203], 460n [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 209], 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 210], 492n [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 512n [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231]

Peters, Charlotte, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]

Petty, John R., 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Phan Huy Quat, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 49], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 154]

Phayom Chulanond, 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Phibun Songkhram, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281]

Philippines, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Phillips, Richard I., 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Phoumi Nosavan, Gen., 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278]

Phra Pi Montham, 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 407]

Pichai Kunlawanit, 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396]

Pickering, Laurence G., 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 597n [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 604n [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 606n [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297], 642n [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304], 715n [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327], 749n [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 777n [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347] Thailand visit and report, 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Thai Working Group report, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344]

Pinckney, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Plimpton, Francis T. P., 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

Plimsoll, Sir James, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Poats, Rutherford M., 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 61], 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 183n [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 201n [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Pompidou, Georges, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46]

Pont, James K., 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]

Pote Sarasin, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 353], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396] Thailand, 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364] Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat and Pote, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357]-795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Political scene in 1968, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 407], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]-919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 408]

Ruskʼs meetings with Pote, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366]-814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388]

Vietnam War, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366]

Powell, Herbert B., 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Praphat Charusathien, Gen. (Prapass Charusathiara), 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 318], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396] Thai counterinsurgency program, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 298], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 308]-661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 344]

Thailand, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281] Political scene in 1968, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 407]-910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 407]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 353], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356]-793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Westmorelandʼs meetings with Praphat, 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406]-905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Prasert, 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 401]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Pridi Phanomyong, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 407], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 407]

Puey, 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 401]

Quadripartite discussions. See under U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez.

Quat. See Phan Huy Quat.

Raborn, William F., Jr., 375n [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 171], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Ramos, Narciso, 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196]

Ramundo, Col., 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]

Razak, Tun Abzul, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35]

Read, Benjamin H., 4n [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 57n [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23], 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 76n [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 77n [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 31], 92n [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 215n [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 492n [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 231], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312]

Reichner, Col. H. H., 594n [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 275], 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 280]

Reischauer, Edwin O., 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71]

Renouf, Alan, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Republic of Vietnam (RVN). See Vietnam, Republic of.

Rhodesia, 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Ritchie, A. E., 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 167], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 218]

Roberts, George, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Roberts, Peter, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]

Robertson, Robert H., 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206]

Roche, John P., 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383]

Rockefeller, Nelson, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 52]

Ropa, Donald W., 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 74], 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157]

Rostow, Walt W., 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 48n [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 77n [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 31], 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 77], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 466n [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 232], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 389], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] Australia, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40] Johnsonʼs meetings with Holt, 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 23], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 25]

Burma, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodia, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184] 512, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 249]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 421n [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193] Blackʼs visit to Cambodia, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 244], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248]

Bowles Mission to Cambodia, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226]

Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

“Custodian” for Cambodian Embassy in Washington, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Presidential emissary proposal, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 407n [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Sihanoukʼs press interview, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56]-145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 56] Blackʼs meetings with Asian leaders, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 79], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83]

Southeast Asian Educational Organization, 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Thailand, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 326], 742n [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 353], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 808n [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 364], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 372], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 215], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 216]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216], 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 331]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252]

Rowan, Carl, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Roxas, Sixto, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 56]

Roy, J. Stapleton, 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69]

Ruser, Claus, 846n [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 382], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Rusk, Dean, 5n [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 104n [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 42], 124n [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53], 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 88], 229n [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 94], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 428n [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197], 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213], 566n [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 597n [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 611n [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 637n [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 764n [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362] ANZUS Treaty Organization, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Asian regional institutions, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Australia, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 36]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37] Vietnam War involvement, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36]

Burma, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 97], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 101]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 101], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodia: Border control program by UN, proposed, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 133], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Border disputes with Thailand and RVN, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228]

Opposition figures, Thai-RVN support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Cambodian neutrality issue: Geneva conference proposal, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]

Quadripartite conference proposal, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 109], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 111], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 114], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 124], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129]

RVN position, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

Sihanoukʼs postponement of action, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Thai position, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

U.S.-French consultations, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

U.S. position, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 121], 290n [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 123], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S.-Soviet consultations, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S.-U.K. consultations, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Vietnam War negotiations at possible Cambodian conference, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 128], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 183], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 534 [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241] Australian role in, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204]

Blackʼs visit to Cambodia, 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]

Bowles-Nong Kimny talks, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 152]

Demonstrations at U.S. Embassy, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

French involvement, 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]-333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Intermediary channel to Sihanouk, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 139]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Johnsonʼs letter to Sihanouk, 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Nong Kimnyʼs departure from U.S., 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119]

Reconciliation issue, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

U.S. mission staff reductions, 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 251], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262] Diplomatic measures to achieve release of personnel, 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 537n [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242]

Malaysia-Indonesia confrontation, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Neutralization of Southeast Asia, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]

New Zealand, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 44]

Nuclear proliferation, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17]-40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 17], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63] Prek Thnot Dam project, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 80], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 81], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization: Council meeting of 1964, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Council meeting of 1965, 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Council meeting of 1966, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76]

Council meeting of 1968, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93]

Economic and social development programs, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 63], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

French withdrawal issue, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54]-140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Johnsonʼs meeting with SEATO delegates, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

U.K. policy toward, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76]

Vietnamese participation, 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Vietnam troop contributorsʼ conference as alternative to, 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 85]

Vietnam War airstrikes and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 86]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 86], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Vietnam War policy, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Thai communist insurgency, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 385]-856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Thailand, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273]-592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387] Coup concerns, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 610n [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanom, 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 742n [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Political liberalization issue, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

Ruskʼs meetings with Pote, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanat, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 839n [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanom, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

U.S. economic assistance, 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 345]-775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 377]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45] Quadripartite discussions, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262] Air strikes, proposed, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]-471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 214], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 216], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 216], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 216], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Authorization for actions, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 166]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Cambodian villages and civilians as accidental victims, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155]

UN actions re, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 338] Fiscal year 1967 program, 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 329], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Reforms in Thai military required by U.S., 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385] B–52 bombing campaigns originating from Thailand, 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 760n [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 761n [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 336]-745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]-828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 200], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 201], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238]

ICC actions re, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 243]

U.S.-Cambodian communications re, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212]-468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 212], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Vietnam War, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 52], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 385] Australian involvement, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36]

SEATO policy toward, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

SEATO Treaty as basis for U.S. air strikes against DRV, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 86]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 86], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Status reports, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Russell, Richard, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 52]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 52]

Saburo, Okita, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 56]

Saeng Phatthanothai, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Saiyud, Gen., 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 407]

Saiyuth, Gen., 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Salans, Carl F., 140n [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 213n [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87], 262n [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152], 505n [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228], 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]

Sambath. See Huot Sambath.

Samran, Gen., 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 407]

Sanderson, Fred H., 106n [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Sang Patanothai, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 407]

Sanong, 916 [Pg. 916 is part of Doc. 408]

Sarit Thanarat, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 113], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273]

Sarris, Louis G., 232n [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]

Sato, Eisaku, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Sawaeng Senanarong, Lt. Gen., 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Scammon, Dick, 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383]

Scherger, Air Chief Marshal, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Schmitz, Charles A., 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Schnittker, John, 62n [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25]

Schultze, Charles L., 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 67], 207n [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Schwebel, Stephen M., 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]

SEATO. See Southeast Asia Treaty Organization.

Seignious, Brig. Gen. John, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Seith, Gen., 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 399]

Seni, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 408]

Senior Interdepartmental Group (SIG), 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 389]-868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]-879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Seydoux, Roger, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134]

Shaplen, Robert, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189]

Sharp, Adm. U. S. Grant, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 165], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 447n [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 205], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213], 478n [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 491n [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 222], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 280]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Shenstone, Michael, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]

Shepard, Rear Adm., 569n [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262]

Shepherd, Jack, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 44], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45]

Sherrer, Maj. Gen. Edward C. D., 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 183]

Shriver, Robert Sargent, Jr., 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255]

Shumate, William M., 64n [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26]

Sieverts, Frank A., 166n [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406] Cambodia, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178] Border control program by UN, proposed, 330n [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Border disputes with Thailand and RVN, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 129]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 129], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 140], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184]-402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 184], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 249]-549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 249]

China, relations with, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163]

Domestic situation, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 195]

DʼOrlandiʼs meeting with Sihanouk, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

DRV, relations with, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]-393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Foreign policy, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 163]-364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 195]

Soviet Union, relations with, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124] Geneva conference proposal, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]

Quadripartite conference proposal, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 108], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 109], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 112], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Sihanoukʼs motives in advocating neutrality, 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 123]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 123]

Sihanoukʼs postponement of action, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 128], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 135]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 142], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 148], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 151], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201] Blackʼs visit to Cambodia, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 244], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Bohlenʼs meeting with Sihanouk, 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Bowles Mission to Cambodia, 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229], 523 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 236], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Demonstrations at U.S. Embassy, 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 117]-276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

Harrimanʼs proposed meeting with Sihanouk, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190]-417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Intermediary channel to Sihanouk, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 144]-330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Johnsonʼs letter to Sihanouk, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 259], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Mansfieldʼs assessment of, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 168]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Presidential emissary proposal, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

Reconciliation issue, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 189], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 196], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 197], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230]

Sihanoukʼs press interview, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

Cambodiaʼs seizure of U.S. landing craft, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 239], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 240] Release of personnel, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 255], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Deschampsʼs assessment of, 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Khrushchev and, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 257]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 91]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247] Sihanoukʼs tacit approval of, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 162], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 261] Cambodian policy toward, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 208]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 208], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

ICC actions re, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Sihanoukʼs acknowledgment of VC/NVA presence, 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 241]

Vietnam War, Sihanoukʼs views on, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 142], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Singapore (see also U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez), 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 75], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 313]

Sirik Matak, Prince, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 203]

Sisco, Joseph J., 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81], 302n [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 327n [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Smith, Bromley, 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 450n [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242], 565n [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 260]

Smith, Joseph, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Smith, R. J., 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Smith, Robert, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70]

Smith, Col. Truman, 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 312]

Soe Tin, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 99]

Solbert, Peter, 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 269], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 290], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

Sompong Sucharitkul, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 373]

Sonn, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]

Son Ngoc Thanh, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157]

Son Sann, 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 150], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 206], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 228], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]-508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 229], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 230], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 241]

Souphanouvong, Prince, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Southeast Asia After Vietnam report, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96]

Southeast Asia Coordinating Committee (SEACOORD), 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 232]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Southeast Asia economic development program (see also Asian Development Bank), 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101] Blackʼs meetings with Asian leaders, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 95]

Blackʼs progress report, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Prek Thnot Dam project, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71], 198 [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 84]-207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]-225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

Proposal for, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56]-150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Purpose and organization, 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 57]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 57], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 61]

Thantʼs attitude toward, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59]

U.S. Task Force, appointment of, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 62]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 62]

Southeast Asian Educational Organization, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 84]

Southeast Asian Ministerial Conference on Economic Development, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 71]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 327] Council meeting of 1964, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 50]

Council meeting of 1965, 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Council meeting of 1966, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 73]-188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76]

Council meeting of 1967, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 88]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 90]

Council meeting of 1968, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93]-230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Economic and social development programs, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 63], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 73]

French withdrawal issue, 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54]-140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Johnsonʼs meeting with SEATO delegates, 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 90]

U.K. policy toward, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76]

Vietnamese participation, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Vietnam troop contributorsʼ conference as alternative to, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 85]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Vietnam War airstrikes and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Vietnam War policy, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Souvanna Phouma, Prince, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 68], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 270], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278] Cambodian neutrality issue, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 112], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Soviet Union: Cambodia, 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 163], 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 121], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 122], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

DRV, relations with, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 68]

Southeast Asia economic development program

Southeast Asia policy, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68]-177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]

Vietnam War policy, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52]

Spear, Moncrieff J., 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 823n [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 825n [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371], 836n [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 849n [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384], 854n [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400], 915n [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]

Special Group (CI), 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 307], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 51–68, 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 104]

SNIE 57/1–67, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

SNIE 57–67, 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 200], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 208]

Spiers, Ronald I., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]

Spivack, Herb, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 112], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 123]-290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 123], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Sprouse, Philip D., 258n [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 108]-261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 108], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 140]

Steadman, Richard C., 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 317]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 317], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 363], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 823n [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374] Thailand visit and report, 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 365]-812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 365]

Steakley, Col. Ralph D., 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Stewart, Ian L. G., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22], 442 [Pg. 442 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Stewart, Michael, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 167], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323] U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Stilwell, Gen. Richard, 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 329], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 338], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 352]

Stuart, Richard K., 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Subandrio, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1]

Sukarno, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7]

Sukich Nimmanheminda, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323], 712n [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Sullivan, William H., 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68]-175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 68], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69], 277n [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 306n [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 133], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201]

Symington, James, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Symington, Stuart, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

Taft, Robert, 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323]

Tange, Sir Arthur, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 154], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 536n [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285] Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 276]

Thai Communist insurgency, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 287], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 298], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 308], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 318], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 369], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394]-876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 394], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]-881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406] Bhumibolʼs assessment of, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Intelligence reports on, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 307], 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 321]-697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

Special Group (CI) discussions re, 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]

Thai Working Group report on, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344]-766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 344]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 318], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 344]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 344], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 360] Accomplishments of, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 318], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Border security, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Civil component, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 311], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]

Communications, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293]

“Czar” for coordination of, 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 311]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]-785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

De Silvaʼs report on, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]-785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Helicopters for, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 72], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 308]-661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312]-673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 312], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 313]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 344], 811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 365], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]-864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388]

Integrated 09–10 security operations, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 344]-767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 344]

Intelligence reports on, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351]

“Maximum effort” issue, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314]

Police program, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 298], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 310]-667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 310], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 344], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 382]

Project 22, 625n [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 295], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

Road construction, 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 298]-639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 298], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388]

Rural development program, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 298], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 344]-768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 344], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 382]

Special Group (CI) discussions re, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]-615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Thai Working Group report on, 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 344]-770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 344]

U.S. equipment for (see also Helicopters above), 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 307], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 308]-661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 317], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 385]-856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

U.S. policy statement on, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

U.S. reevaluation of, 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 382]-849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394]-879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

U.S. reporting requirements, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 318]-694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Thailand (see also Thai Communist insurgency; Thai counterinsurgency program; Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War; U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections; U.S. military assistance to Thailand; U.S. military presence in Thailand; Border subheadings under Cambodia), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 83], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 298], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 305], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388]

Balance of payments program, 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387]

Bangkok municipal elections of 1968, 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 407]-908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 407]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 109], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 114], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

Cliffordʼs meetings with Thanom, 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]-866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388]

Coup concerns (see also Praphatʼs possible government takeover below), 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 267], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394]

Economic situation, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273], 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 343], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]-823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394], 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 407]-913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 407]

Fulbrightʼs criticism of government, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323], 703 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 323], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327], 724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 329]

Humphreyʼs visit, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308]-664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312]

Johnsonʼs correspondence with Thanom, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Bhumibol, 777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]-779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Praphat, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat and Pote, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357]-795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanom, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]-873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Johnsonʼs visit, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

U. A. Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat, 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 324]

Khmer Serei, support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 183]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406]-905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Laos, military intervention in (see also U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning below), 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273]-592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Dawee, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 337]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 337]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Praphat, 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 279]

McNamaraʼs meetings with Thanat and Pote, 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364]

Military forces, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 271], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 295]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 295], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 298], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 324], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 325]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 742n [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Opium production, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 339]-753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Pickeringʼs visit and report, 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Political liberalization issue, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Political scene in 1968 (see also U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections), 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]-836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 408]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 353], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356]-793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Ruskʼs meetings with Pote, 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 327]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanat, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 839n [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanom, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Senate of, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 396], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 407]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 63], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Steadmanʼs visit and report, 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 365]-812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 365]

Thanom government, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Thanomʼs U.S. visit, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Ungerʼs appointment as Ambassador, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355]

United Kingdom, relations with, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323]

U.S. economic assistance, 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 344]-771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 344], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 345]-775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]-823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

U.S. information programs, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 344]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

U.S. press coverage of Thai leaders, 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning (see also Project 22 under Thai counterinsurgency program), 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 280]-604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282]-607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S.-Thai relations, 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 273], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 298], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 365], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 394]-875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394]

Vietnamʼs fall to Communists, possible impact of, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 313]

Westmorelandʼs meetings with Praphat, 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406]-905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] Equipping and training concerns, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 375]-834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 377], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 380], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388]-863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]

Financial implications, 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 354]-788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Marine forces for, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334]-740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334]

Speedup in deployment, 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 372], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 377], 838 [Pg. 838 is part of Doc. 378]

10,000-man commitment, 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 354]-789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 362]-808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 364], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 365]-810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand and, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 299], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]

Thai Working Group, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 344]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344]

Thanat Khoman, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 85], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 401] Asian regional institutions, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

Cambodia, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 109], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 114], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 314]

Thailand, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 324], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 334]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 407], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 408] Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanat and Pote, 712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357]-795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 324], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 325]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanat, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 75]-192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315], 701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 323]-705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 839n [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 362], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388]-863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 268], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 269], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 324] Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 373], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 373], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388]

Vietnam War, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Thanh, 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238]

Thanom Kitticachorn, 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 266], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 293], 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 305], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 318], 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 882 [Pg. 882 is part of Doc. 396] Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 46], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 46]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 308], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]

Thailand, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 361], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 396], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 407] Cliffordʼs meetings with Thanom, 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388]-866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388]

Johnsonʼs correspondence with Thanom, 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277]-598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Johnsonʼs meetings with Thanom, 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]-873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Johnsonʼs visit, 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]-742 [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Khmer Serei, support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 378n [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Mutual security treaty with U.S., proposed, 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 322], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 326], 742n [Pg. 742 is part of Doc. 335]

Ruskʼs meetings with Thanom, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Thanom government, 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 273]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 273], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Thanomʼs U.S. visit, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 869 [Pg. 869 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

U.S.-Thai bilateral military planning, 587 [Pg. 587 is part of Doc. 272]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 272], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 274], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 269], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 270], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 283], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 324]

Vietnam War, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 387]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Thanpuying Vichitra Thanarat, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281]

Thant, U: Cambodia, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Southeast Asia economic development program, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 57], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 57], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 58], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 71], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 81]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 81], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 91]

Thawi Chulasap, Air Marshal, 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 281], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282]-607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Thay Sok, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Thep Chotinuchit, 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 376], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 407]

Thi Han, U, 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Thomas, William W., Jr., 851n [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 124], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225], 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]-561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 257], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 655n [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 305], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Thomson, George, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]

Thomson, James C., Jr., 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 279], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Cambodian neutrality issue, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Cambodian-U.S. relations, 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 150], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 157], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 183]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Thrasher, Edward J., 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4] 303 Committee, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304], 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 305]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Tim Dong, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 115]

Tito, Marshal, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229]

Tolbert, H. G., Jr., 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Toon, Malcolm, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69]-177 [Pg. 177 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Toumanoff, Vladimir I., 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 69]

Tran Van Do, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 19], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 90]

Trench, Nigel, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105], 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Trend, Sir Burke, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]

Trent, M.V., 530n [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 534n [Pg. 534 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Trued, Merlyn, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 70]

Trueheart, William C., 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 269n [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 277n [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 296n [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 128], 304n [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132], 314n [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 138], 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 142], 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 152], 377n [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]-393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 597n [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 277], 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 282]-607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 624n [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 290], 648n [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]-782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 893n [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

Truman, Harry, 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 323]

Tunku Abdul Rahman, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 108]

Tyler, William R., 139n [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 54], 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]

U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez, 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 23], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 24]-61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 24], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 25], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 72] ANZUS discussions re, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22]

Australian position, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22]

Australian-U.S. discussions re, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 12]

Malaysia and Singapore defense issue, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 21], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 22], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28]

ANZUS and, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 29]-71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 29], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 32], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 45]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45]

Australian policy statement, 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 32]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

U.S. support for Australian forces, 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 32], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 33], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37]-94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 37], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 39]

Quadripartite discussions, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]-27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 13]-30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 36 [Pg. 36 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Rationale for, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 21], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 21], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 22]

Underhill, Francis T. 780

Unger, Leonard, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 113]-269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 205], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 270], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 278], 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394] Thai communist insurgency, 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394]-876 [Pg. 876 is part of Doc. 394], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

Thai counterinsurgency program, 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]

Thailand, 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]-823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394]

Political scene in 1968, 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 408]-919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 408]

Praphatʼs possible government takeover, 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 357], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 361]-801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Ungerʼs appointment as Ambassador, 789n [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355]

U.S. economic assistance, 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]-823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

U.S.-Thai relations, 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 394]-875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 394]

Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 354]-788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 363], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 815 [Pg. 815 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351], 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 404], 903n [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405] Renewal of request for funds, 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381]-845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 381], 849n [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]-885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401]-897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 401]

Ungerʼs recommendations, 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 402]

U.S. consideration of renewed request, 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]-886 [Pg. 886 is part of Doc. 397], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366]-814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 394]-878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394], 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 403]-901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404] Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 373]-832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 394]

Vietnam War, 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366]

United Kingdom (see also U.K. withdrawal from East of Suez), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 270], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 323], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 323] Cambodian neutrality issue, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 105]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 106], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 121]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 122], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Cambodiaʼs border disputes with Thailand and RVN, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 66], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 76], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

United Nations (see also Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East), 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52] Cambodian border patrol program, proposed, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 132]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 133], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 137]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Southeast Asia economic development program and, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 56], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 57], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 324n [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 142],, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143]

United States Intelligence Board (USIB), 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96], 253n [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 104], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159], 425n [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 431n [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 205], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 209], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 223], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 868n [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 123], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 142], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 221], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]-569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 262] Air strikes, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 165]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 165], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Authorization for actions, 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 164], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 166]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

Cambodian personnel for, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Cambodian Study Group recommendations, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205]-447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 205], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211]

Cambodian villages and civilians as accidental victims, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 120], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 121], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 156], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 190]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 190], 526n [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238]

Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 198], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 205], 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 205], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 208], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 208]-456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 208], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 208], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 208], 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 209], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 210]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 232]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 232], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258]-563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Diplomatic measures in support of, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 208]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 208], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 209]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 209], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Graham group investigation re, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 254], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]

JCS program for interdiction, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 176], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 198]-431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 250]

Johnsonʼs communications with Sihanouk re, 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Legal analysis of, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 208]

Logistic systems, focus on, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 263]

MACV study group recommendations, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 194]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Nonmilitary alternatives, 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 219]

Political costs, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 208]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 208], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 219]

Prisoner-taking, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258]-563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

SEACOORD recommendations, 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 232]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Self-defense measures, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]-373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 208]-457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 208]

Sihanoukʼs tacit approval of, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

U.N. actions re, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 131], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134]-310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 136], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 143]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 143]

U.S.-Cambodian communications re, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 226]

Water-borne infiltration, focus on, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 177]-386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 177]

U.S. covert financial involvement in Thai elections, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 351]-782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352] Authorization for, 656n [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-903 [Pg. 903 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

Initial request for funds, 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 304]

Renewal of request for funds, 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 381]-845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 381], 849n [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]-885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 401]-897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 401]

Ungerʼs recommendations, 849 [Pg. 849 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 383], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 402]

U.S. consideration of renewed request, 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]-889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 400]

U.S. proposal in support of, 652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 305]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 344]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 344]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand (see also Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War), 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 293], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388] Basic policy choices for U.S., 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Construction projects, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

Counterinsurgency orientation, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 300]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

Delivery of equipment, 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 293]-631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341]-756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341]

Economic situation in Thailand and, 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 343]

Fiscal year 1965 add-ons, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 296]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296]

Fiscal year 1966 program, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 296], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Fiscal year 1967 program, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 317]-689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 317], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 322], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 325]-712 [Pg. 712 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 331], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333]

Fiscal year 1968 program, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 338], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 341], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 341], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 363]-805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 363], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365]-811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 365], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367]

Fiscal year 1969 program, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 337], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 338]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 338], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 363]-805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 363], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 365]-811 [Pg. 811 is part of Doc. 365], 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388]

Frigate for Thai Navy, 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]

Increased assistance, proposals for, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 271]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 271], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 288]

Political stability in Thailand and, 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 356]-791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 356], 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 356]-793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 356]

Reforms in Thai military required by U.S., 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 297]-637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 301], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]

Reorientation of U.S. policy, need for, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Thai attitude toward, 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 290]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 290]

Thai Working Group report on, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 344]-772 [Pg. 772 is part of Doc. 344]

U.S. policy statement re, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

U.S.-Thai relations and, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 291]-626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 291], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 301]

U.S. military presence in Thailand, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 298], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 394] Anti-American backlash, 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 407]-914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 407]

Authority to conduct operations outside Thailand, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 308]-662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 324]

Base occupancy and land cost arrangements, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341]-760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

B–52 bombing campaigns originating from Thailand, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 287], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 341], 760 [Pg. 760 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 365], 823 [Pg. 823 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 370]

Communist attacks on U.S. facilities, 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

Excess personnel concerns, 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Ground combat forces, Thai rejection of, 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366]-814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Phase-down in post-Vietnam period, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 389], 899 [Pg. 899 is part of Doc. 403]-901 [Pg. 901 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Rural areas, impact on, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 298]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 298]

Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 315]-686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 336]-745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 341], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]-777 [Pg. 777 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 371]-828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 830 [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 373]-832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 379]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 384]-852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 388], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 388], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 394]

Support facilities for troops, 618 [Pg. 618 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 288]

Thai attitude toward, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]-677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 394]-878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 394]

Thai role in military initiatives and, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 298]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Troop deployments for purpose of deterrence, proposed, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 264]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 268]-583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 270], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

Valenti, Jack, 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Vance, Cyrus R., 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 205], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 520n [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 255], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 620n [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 289], 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 674n [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313], 687n [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 316], 697n [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]

Vargas, Jesus, 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 73], 185 [Pg. 185 is part of Doc. 73], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 73], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 217 [Pg. 217 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 90], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 93]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia (see also U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia), 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 261], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407] Aerial pictures of, 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242]

Blackʼs consultations with Cambodians re, 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 244], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 246]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 247], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 248]

Cambodian policy toward, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 208]-456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 208], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 220], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 226], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 241]-536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

ICC actions re, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 167], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 174], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 180]-391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 187], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 189], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 223], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 225]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 226]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 226], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 229]-510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 232], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 243]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Intelligence reports on, 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 159], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 162], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 200], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Significance of Cambodia to Vietnamese Communist war effort, 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]-434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 200], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 220]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 254]

Sihanoukʼs acknowledgment of VC/NVA presence, 417 [Pg. 417 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 438n [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 238], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 241]

U.S.-Cambodian communications re, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 212]-468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 212], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Westmorelandʼs assessment of, 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 194]

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (DRV) (see also Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia), 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 68], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 68], 276 [Pg. 276 includes portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 119], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181]-393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 206], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 229]

Vietnam, Republic of (RVN) (see also Border subheadings under Cambodia), 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 49], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93]

Cambodian neutrality issue, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 107]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 107], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 109], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 110], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 121]

Khmer Serei, support for, 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]-378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 387n [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 183]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 183], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 185]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 46]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 46], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Vietnam War (see also Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War; U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia; Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia), 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 23], 138n [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 355] Australian involvement, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 15], 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]-49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 26], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 27], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 28]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 201]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 201], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 204]

Burmese policy toward, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 101], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 101]

Cambodian conference as possible means of initiating settlement, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

China and, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 52], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 52]-131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 52]

Communist victory scenarios, 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]-680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 313]

Johnson-McGeorge Bundy analysis of, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 53]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 53]

Johnson-Russell analysis of, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 52]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 52]

Johnsonʼs views on, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]-47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 19], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 90]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 90]

New Zealand involvement, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 4], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 34], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 42]

Paris peace talks, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 387]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]-862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]

Post-war situation in Southeast Asia, U.S. estimate re, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 96]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 96]

SEATO policy toward, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 6], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 49], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 51], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 55], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 64]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

SEATO Treaty as basis for U.S. air strikes against DRV, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 87]

Sihanoukʼs views on, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 142]-326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 142], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 181], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 191]

Soviet policy toward, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 52]

Status reports, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 11], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 30]-76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Summit conference among troop-contributing nations, 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 23], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 28]-69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 30]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 30]

U.K. policy toward, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]-34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S.-Thai discussions re, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 285]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 285], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 309], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 333], 813 [Pg. 813 is part of Doc. 366], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 384]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 384], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 385], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 387]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 387], 861 [Pg. 861 is part of Doc. 388]-862 [Pg. 862 is part of Doc. 388], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

Vu Van Mau, 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Walker, Gordon, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 154]

Waller, John, 656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 306]

Waller, Sir John Keith, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 89 [Pg. 89 is part of Doc. 35], 93 [Pg. 93 is part of Doc. 37], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 45], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 45], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 218], 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Walsh, John P., 69n [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Walston, Lord, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 184]

Wan, Prince, 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 381]

Warnke, Paul C., 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 32], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 211], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 250]-551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 250], 559n [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 258], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 364], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 365], 863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 388], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 388] Thai troop contribution to Vietnam War, 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 363], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-841 [Pg. 841 is part of Doc. 380]

Watanabe, Makoto, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Watson, Marvin, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 19]

Watters, Richard A., 160n [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 63]

Westmoreland, Gen. William C., 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 52], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 93], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 162], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 226], 522n [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 292], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 312], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 334] Thailand, 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 406]-905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 155], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 194]-425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195] Air strikes, proposed, 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 165]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 165], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213]-470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 216], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 222]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 194], 905 [Pg. 905 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 356n [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 422n [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 213], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 753 [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 664n [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 840n [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380] Thai counterinsurgency program, 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Thailand, coup concerns in, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 284]

U.S./ARVN operations against VC/NVA forces in Cambodia, 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 263] Air strikes, proposed, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 214], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 216], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 216]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 216], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 216], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 216], 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 222], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 234]

Daniel Boone reconnaissance operations, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Emergency extractions of teams under fire, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 256]-560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 256 and Doc. 257]

Graham group investigation re, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 254]

JCS program for interdiction, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 198]-431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

U.S. military assistance to Thailand, 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 332]-737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Viet Cong/NVA use of Cambodia, 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 242]

White, John P., 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 91]

Whiting, Allen S., 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 686n [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Whitlam, Edward Gough, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 23], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 36]

Widnall, Willian B., 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 92]

Williamson, Larry C., 198n [Pg. 198 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

Wilson, Harold, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 11], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 12], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 22], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 26], 86n [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 35], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 65] Cambodian neutrality issue, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 72]-183 [Pg. 183 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Wilson, James M., Jr., 659n [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 308], 662n [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]

Wilton, Sir John, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

World Bank, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 59], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 343]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 343], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 369]

Wright, Marshall, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 38], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 40], 482 [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 219], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 252]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 389]-868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Wright, Oliver, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 153]

Yasukawa, Takeshi, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Yost, Charlie, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 134], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 162]

Young, Oran, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 77]

Zurhellen, J. Owen, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 82]

Errata Errata

The following error has been identified in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume XXVII, Mainland Southeast Asia; Regional Affairs. Please be aware that printed volumes have not been revised.

1. Document 368 (date of errata entry: January 3, 2013)

The volume skips from Document 367 to 369 (see pages 818 [Pg. 818 is part of Doc. 367]-19 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 369]).
