Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume VIII, National Security Policy (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1996)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1961-63v08).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

National Security Policy (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume VIII)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963

Volume VIII

National Security Policy

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

National Security Policy (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume VIII)Contents

Preface

Kennedy Administration Volumes

Sources

Abbreviations

Persons

National Security Policy (Documents 1-154)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102-138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102-138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editor is convinced that this volume, which was compiled in 1990-1991, meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years (1961-1963) of the administration of John F. Kennedy. The subseries presents in 25 print volumes and 5 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Kennedy's administration.

This volume presents the documentary record of major national security policies. A separate microfiche supplement will comprise additional documentation on national security policies regarded by the editor as significant but not warranting inclusion in the printed volume.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary. Some general decisions are also made regarding issues for which space does not exist in the volume but which will be included in a microfiche supplement.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies, including relevant National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates as may be declassified;

10. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

11. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

12. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

13. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

14. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume VIII

The editor of this volume has defined a “major issue” to be a national security policy or problem that received high-level attention within the U.S. Government; from the President, key White House aides, or Cabinet-level officials; and/or had long-range repercussions for U.S. foreign policy and interests. While it was impossible to include the details of U.S. policy on every national security issue, documentation has been included, either in the print volume or the microfiche supplement, that delineates basic U.S. policies toward the subjects in question.

The primary focus of the documents in this volume is on the foreign policymaking process of the U.S. Government, including documentation illuminating policy formulation and major aspects and repercussions of its execution. Emphasis is placed on official memoranda that reveal policy positions, show differences within the U.S. Government over policy formulation, summarize developments and positions regarding an issue, contain intelligence or military assessments, and describe decisions or actions taken in the National Security Council.

Documentation selected by the editor for inclusion in the microfiche supplement provides additional details on the major issues covered in this volume. The annotation to printed documents contains references to related documents included in the microfiche supplement. The supplement also includes several lengthy attachments to printed documents. In these cases, the printed document contains editorial references to the microfiche supplement. The volume may be used without the supplement, but the microfiche should be used in conjunction with the printed volume.

The editor sought principally to cover four interrelated developments in U.S. national security policy: 1. Upon taking office, the Kennedy administration dismantled much of the existing policymaking machinery of the National Security Council (NSC) and substituted a more unstructured policymaking style. The President met less frequently with the full NSC than had been the case in the preceding Eisenhower administration. In the 1958-1960 triennium, the Council met 125 times, while under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson during 1961-1963, it met formally only 46 times. The change was progressive; while the Council convened 21 times under Kennedy in 1961, it met only 13 times in 1963. At the same time, the role of the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs was enhanced and the administration continuously created issue-oriented, ad hoc bodies to deal with specific countries and crises. From time to time McGeorge Bundy attempted to reintroduce more regularized policymaking procedures. The NSC Standing Group was one result of these efforts. Documentation providing some additional details on the transformed administrative role of the National Security Council is scheduled for volume XXV.

2. Leading Kennedy administration policymakers in the White House, the Department of State, and the Department of Defense, but not the President himself, worked to frame a basic national security policy (BNSP), which would replace NSC 5906/1 of July 1959, the last such statement of policy in the preceding administration. While he had little interest in an umbrella BNSP paper, President Kennedy did from time to time set forth a multi-subject overview of U.S. policy, either in the full NSC meetings or with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

3. President Kennedy took a special interest in strengthening U.S. counterinsurgency capabilities. Aided by Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, he constantly prodded policymakers to do more in this area.

4. Under the leadership of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, the United States gradually formulated a comprehensive set of doctrines on strategic military posture, particularly with regard to the role of nuclear weapons and of conventional land-based forces. These policies evolved throughout the triennium and were most definitively expressed in a series of Draft Presidential Memoranda, or DPMs, from McNamara to the President.

Other developments pertinent to national security policy are covered in the volume but not as extensively, for the following reasons: 1. Public and previously declassified materials substantially document the main course of civil defense policy in the period. Moreover, the policy was never implemented on the scale originally contemplated. Substantial materials are available in published Congressional materials and in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Subjects Series, Civil Defense.

2. Internal security policy, for which the President assigned oversight to Robert Kennedy in National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) No. 161, “U.S. Internal Security Programs,” June 9, 1962, is outside the scope of the Foreign Relations series. NSAM No. 161 is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 161.

3. Because this volume was compiled when the Central Intelligence Agency was just beginning to provide expanded access to Department historians to high-level intelligence collections still in the custody of the Agency, the documentation printed here concerning developments in the intelligence field, while exploring several issues, is not extensive and is included particularly in the microfiche supplement. Moreover, the editor did not consult the historical files of the Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, access to which was granted to Department historians only subsequently. Like most other volumes in the series, however, this compilation does include intelligence estimates that had a direct effect on general policymaking.

4. Because of the very close relationship between national security and arms control policies, some documents pertaining to both subjects are included in volume VII, Arms Control and Disarmament.

5. Documentation concerning the stockpiling of non-nuclear strategic materials is presented in a compilation in volume IX, Foreign Economic Policy.

For all topics the major criterion for selection of materials was to document the decisions taken. Where debate over policy occurred, the first priority was to use available materials to set forth discussion at the interagency and White House levels. Where controversy was exceptionally intense and involved a topic of outstanding importance, intra-agency discussion, such as between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, was included as space permitted. Documents were selected for publication for the following reasons: 1. Materials on the reorganization of the National Security Council are intended to illustrate major reasons for the institutional changes without covering administrative detail.

2. Documentation on the efforts to form a BNSP provides insight into the thinking of important individuals and agencies. The scope of coverage takes into account several considerations. Because no BNSP was ever adopted during the triennium, the editor gave preference to actual adopted policy in the competition for space, and he selected materials more for the clarity with which they set forth individual or agency viewpoints than for their comprehensiveness. Where available, Presidential multi-subject policy reviews on major subjects are invariably included.

3. Documents on counterinsurgency policy set forth the measures taken and the reasons for the President's interest in them. Documentation on the implementation of these policies, however, is included in regional and bilateral compilations in other volumes of the Foreign Relations series, on Southeast Asia, Laos, Vietnam, Latin America, and Cuba, for instance.

4. The materials selected on global military strategy are those that treat the subject with maximum comprehensiveness and that bear most directly on foreign policy considerations. The editor made every effort to include materials that show how these policies influenced or were influenced by the foreign policy community as a whole. Certain materials were included that concern the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) because they contain influential statements of global strategic policy. Documentation concerning the reaction of the NATO powers to the reformulation of nuclear strategy, and the interaction of the United States with its Western allies on these issues, is in volume XIII, Western Europe and Canada.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

An unnumbered source note to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

The Advisory Committee has not reviewed this volume.

Declassification Review

The final declassification review of this volume, which was completed in 1995, resulted in the decision to withhold 1.5 percent of the documentation selected. No documents were denied in full. The remaining documentation provides an accurate account of the national security policy of the U.S. Government during this period.

The Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information, which was superseded by Executive Order 1528 on April 20, 1995, and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgements

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the John F. Kennedy Library of the National Archives and Records Administration, in particular Suzanne Forbes, and other officials of specialized repositories who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume.

David W. Mabon collected, selected, and edited the volume, under the general supervision of former Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. Rita M. Baker and Deb Godfrey did the copy and technical editing and Barbara-Ann Bacon of the Publishing Services Division oversaw the production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

July 1996

Kennedy Administration Volumes Kennedy Administration Volumes

Following is a list of the volumes in the Foreign Relations series for the administration of President John F. Kennedy. The year of publication is in parentheses after the title.

Print Volumes

I Vietnam, 1961 (1988)

II Vietnam, 1962 (1990)

III Vietnam, January-August 1963 (1991)

IV Vietnam, August-December 1963 (1991)

V Soviet Union

VI Kennedy-Khrushchev Exchanges (1996)

VII Arms Control and Disarmament (1995)

VIII National Security Policy (1996)

IX Foreign Economic Policy (1995)

X Cuba. January 1961–September 1962

XI Cuba, October 1962–December 1963

XII American Republics (1996)

XIII Western Europe and Canada (1994)

XIV Berlin Crisis, 1961–1962 (1994)

XV Berlin Crisis, 1962–1963 (1994)

XVI Eastern Europe: Cyprus: Greece; Turkey (1994)

XVII Near East. 1961–1962 (1995)

XVIII Near East, 1962–1963 (1995)

XIX South Asia (1996)

XX Congo Crisis (1995)

XXI Africa (1996)

XXII Northeast Asia (1996)

XXIII Southeast Asia (1995)

XXIV Laos Crisis (1994)

XXV General; United Nations

Microfiche Supplements

Arms Control; National Security Policy; Foreign Economic Policy; General and United Nations (Volumes VII, VIII, IX, XXV)

Cuba; American Republics (Volumes X, XI, XII)

Western Europe; Berlin (Volumes XIII, XIV, XV) (1995)

Near East; Congo; Africa (Volumes XVII, XVIII, XX, XXI) Northeast Asia; Laos (Volumes XXII, XXIV)

Sources Sources

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute.

The editor had complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. Certain intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research became available to the Department historians only after this volume was compiled. Arrangements have been made for Department historians to have full and timely access to these records for future volumes.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Eisenhower and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants.

Since 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency has provided expanded access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency. This access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding. This access arrangement was developed in connection with the research of volumes for the 1961-1963 triennium and in order to enlarge the scope of coverage as required by the 1991 law. Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out improved procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record.

All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies, the assistance of their staffs, and especially the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

Sources for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume VIII

All sources for this volume, including a few significant ones that the editor consulted but from which he made no selection, are briefly identified in the list below.

Collections in the Kennedy Library were the preeminent sources for this compilation, but the editor made use of valuable materials in the files of the Department of State, the Office of the Secretary of Defense and its subdivisions, the Joint Chiefs of Staff (including the Chairman's File), the Papers of Maxwell D. Taylor and Lyman L. Lemnitzer at the National Defense University, the Papers of Arleigh A. Burke at the Naval Historical Center, the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas (for the beginning of 1961), and the Lyndon B. Johnson Library in Austin, Texas (for the close of 1963).

Among Kennedy Library materials, the single most important collection was the National Security Files (NSF), which represent the office files of McGeorge Bundy. Within it the Department of Defense subsection of the Departments and Agencies Series was especially useful, and the subsections for the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force, and the Central Intelligence Agency were also consulted. The few minutes or memoranda of formal National Security Council meetings are from the Meetings and Memoranda Series of the NSF, as are some of the ancillary materials to the National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs). The latter are brief memoranda used by the President, or Bundy on his behalf, to issue policy directives or to inform leading officials of decisions taken, either by means of or without the full National Security Council. The Meetings and Memoranda Series also has folders containing papers of key members of the White House Staff: Walt W. Rostow, Carl Kaysen, Robert Komer, Lawrence J. Legere, and Chester V. Clifton. The files of Clifton, who was Military Aide to the President, include the memoranda of most of the President's meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Some of these materials are also available in Department of State files. The most valuable Department of State materials were the lot (office) files, as described below. Also consulted and listed below were several relevant files in the Department's decimal and subject-numeric indexed central files.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Central Files 396.1-PA: International conferences at Paris

711.5: U.S. national defense

711.5611: Atomic weapons in the U.S.

DEF 1 US: Defense affairs, U.S. policy, plans, readiness

DEF 12: Defense affairs, armaments

Lot Files INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110 NIEs and SNIEs on East Asia and the Pacific, 1952-1985, maintained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

INR Historical Files Records of the 5412 Special Group, 1954-1964, maintained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research

INR-NIE Files Files retained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research containing copies of National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates

S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548 Files of the Policy Planning Staff for 1961-1964

S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121 Files of the Policy Planning Staff for 1961-1964

S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 Files of the Policy Planning Council for 1963-1964

S/P-NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1 Serial and subject master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence for the years 1948-1961, as maintained by the Policy Planning Staff

Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451 Minutes and memoranda of the Special Group, Counterinsurgency, January 1962-December 1963

Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 70 D 258 Master file of counterinsurgency plans, including memoranda, airgrams, cables, and correspondence on various countries

S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147 Records of the Secretary of State's Staff Meetings, 1961-1964

S/S Files: Lot 70 D 328 Records of State-JCS meetings, 1959-1963

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, and administrative documents for the years 1961-1966

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961-1968, maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation, including NSC Records of Action, 1947-1963, maintained by the Executive Secretariat

Vietnam Working Group File: Lot 66 D 193 Files of the Vietnam Working Group, 1960-1962

National Archives and Records Administration Record Group 218, Records of the Joint Staff and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff JCS Records

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense OASD/ISA Files:FRC 64 A 2382 Decimal files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1961

OASD/ISA Files:FRC 65 B 3501 Decimal files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs for 1962

OSD Files: FRC 65 A 2464 Subject decimal files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense for 1961

OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3463 Subject decimal files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense for 1961

OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464 Subject decimal files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense for 1961

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542 Subject decimal files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense for 1962

OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3543 Subject decimal files of the Office of the Secretary of Defense for 1962

OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470 Files of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara for 1961-1968

Central Intelligence Agency DCI (McCone) Files: Job 80-B01285A Files of Director John A. McCone, 1962-1965

Job 79-R0102A, ODDI Registry Files Files containing copies of National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates

Job 80-B01676R, DCI Executive Registry Files

Job 83-00036R, CIA History Staff Files

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955-1959; the President's Military Representative, 1961-1962; and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1962-1964

Lemnitzer Papers Papers of Lyman Lemnitzer, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1959-1960, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1960-1962

Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas Office of the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Records White House Special Files, Records of the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Robert Cutler, Dillon Anderson, and Gordon Gray), 1952-1961

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts Bromley Smith Papers

National Security Files Carl Kaysen Series

Chester V. Clifton Series

Countries Series

Departments and Agencies Series

Meetings and Memoranda Series

Subjects Series

President's Appointment Books

President's Office Files

Roger Hilsman Papers Official papers of Director of Intelligence and Research and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, 1961-1964

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas National Security File Agency File

Memos to the President

National Intelligence Estimates

National Security Council Meetings File

Subject File

Vice Presidential Security File

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, D.C. Harriman Papers Special files of W. Averell Harriman, Public Service, Kennedy and Johnson administrations

Naval Historical Center, Washington, D.C. Burke Papers Papers of Admiral Arleigh A. Burke, Chief of Naval Operations, 1955-1961

Published Sources

Government Publications and Documentary Collections Jackson, Henry M., ed. The National Security Council: Jackson Subcommittee Papers on Policy-Making at the Presidential Level (New York: Praeger, 1965)

Sagan, Scott. “SIOP-62: The Nuclear War Plan Briefing to President Kennedy,” International Security, 12 (Summer 1987), pages 22-51

U.S. Congress, Senate. Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Together with Joint Sessions with the Senate Armed Services Committee (Historical Series), Volume XIV, Eighty-seventh Congress, Second Session, 1962 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1986)

————. Organizing for National Security: Inquiry of the Subcommittee on National Policy Machinery of the Committee on Government Operations, United States Senate, 3 vols. (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1961)

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, 1962, 1963 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

————. Department of State Bulletin, 1961, 1962, 1963 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program. Vol. I, Organizing for Exploration (The NASA history series, NASA SP-4218) (n.p.: 1995)

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, 1962, 1963 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

————. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963-64 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965)

Memoirs, Diaries, and Histories by Participants Enthoven, Alain, and K. Wayne Smith. How Much Is Enough? Shaping the Defense Program, 1961-1969 (New York: Harper and Row, 1971)

Garthoff, Raymond L. Intelligence Assessment and Policymaking: A Decision Point in the Kennedy Administration (Washington: Brookings, 1984)

Kaplan, Fred. The Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983)

Maechling, Charles, Jr. “Counterinsurgency: The First Ordeal by Fire,” in Klare, Michael T. and Peter Kornbluh (eds.). Low-Intensity Warfare: Counterinsurgency, and Antiterrorism in the Eighties (New York: Pantheon Books, 1992), pages 21-48

Millikan, Max F. and Walt W. Rostow. A Proposal: Key to an Effective Foreign Policy (New York: Harper and Row, 1957)

Nitze, Paul H. From Hiroshima to Glasnost: At the Center of Decision: A Memoir (New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1989)

Poole, Walter S. The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, Vol. VIII: 1961-1964, Parts I-III (Classified study, Historical Division, Joint Secretariat, Joint Chiefs of Staff)

Rostow, Walt W. The Diffusion of Power: An Essay in Recent History (New York: Macmillan, 1972)

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965)

Smith, Bromley K. Organizational History of the National Security Council During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations (n.p.: n.p., n.d. [1988])

Sorensen, Theodore C. Kennedy (New York: Harper & Row, 1965)

Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972)

Abbreviations Abbreviations

ABM, anti-ballistic missile

ABNCP, airborne command posts

ACE, Allied Command, Europe

ADM, atomic demolition munitions

AEC, Atomic Energy Commission

AF, Air Force

AID, Agency for International Development

AJCBM, air-launched intercontinental ballistic missile

ALBM, air-launched ballistic missile

ANZUS, Australia-New Zealand-United States (treaty organization)

ASW, anti-submarine warfare

BAOR, British Army on the Rhine

BMEWS, Ballistic Missile Early Warning System

BNSP, basic national security policy

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

BOMARC, Boeing-Michigan Aeronautical Test Center missile; U.S. Air Force surface-to-air delta winged area defense missile

C, Office of the Counselor, Department of State

CBR, chemical, biological, and radiological warfare

CENTO, Central Treaty Organization

CEP, circular error probable

CI, Counter-Insurgency (Special Group)

CIA, Central intelligence Agency

ClNCEUR, Commander in Chief, Europe

CINCNORAD, Commander in Chief, North American Air Defense Command

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCSAC, Commander in Chief, Strategic Air Command

CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

CM, Chairman's Memorandum

CNO, Chief of Naval Operations

CONUS, Continental United States

CSAF, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force

CSD, Commodities Division, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

CST, Central Standard Time

CW, chemical warhead; chemical warfare

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DEW, distant early warning

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DGZ, Designated Ground Zero

DOD, Department of Defense

DPM, draft Presidential memorandum

DSTP, Director of Strategy Target Planning

ECM, electronic countermeasures

FBM, forward-based missile

FRC, Federal Records Center

FRG, Federal Republic of Germany

FY, fiscal year

GCI, ground controlled interception

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

H and D, hardened and dispersed

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICBM, intercontinental ballistic missile

ICE, Index of Combat Effectiveness

ICF, Index of Comparative Firepower

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IRBM, intermediate-range ballistic missile

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum

JSCAP, Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan

JSOP, Joint Strategic Operations Plan

JSTPS, Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff

KT, kiloton

LOC, line of communication

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MATS, Military Air Transport Service

MLF, Multilateral Force

MM, Minuteman

MMT, Military Mobile Training Team

MRBM, medium-range ballistic missile

MSTS, Military Sea Transportation Service

MT, megaton

NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NESC, Net Evaluation Subcommittee

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

nm, nautical mile

NMCC, National Military Command Center

NOA, new obligational authority

NORAD, North American Air Defense Command

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NSTL, National Strategic Target List

OAS, Organization of American States

OCB, Operations Coordinating Board

OCDM, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization

OPNAV, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

PACCS, Post-Attack Command and Control System

PPC, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

PPS, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

PSI, pounds per square inch

R & D, research and development

RCT, Regimental Combat Team

RDT&E, Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation

RG, Record Group

ROAD, Reorganization Objective, Army Division

ROK, Republic of Korea

S, Office of the Secretary of State

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SACEUR, Supreme Allied Commander, Europe

SAGE, semi-automatic ground environment system

SAM, surface-to-air missile

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

SG, Standing Group

SHAPE, Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe

SIOP, Single Integrated Operational Plan

SLAM, Supersonic Low Altitude Missile

SLBM, submarine-launched ballistic missile

SOSUS, Sound Surveillance Undersea System

S/P, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State

SRG, Strategic Resources Group

SSBN, ballistic missile nuclear submarine

SSN, nuclear attack submarine

STP, Strategic Target Planning

STRAC, Strategic Air Command

TAC, Tactical Air Command

UN, United Nations

USA, United States Army

USAF, United States Air Force

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIB, United States Intelligence Board

USMC, United States Marine Corps

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

VTOL, vertical takeoff and landing

WH, White House

WSEG, Weapons Systems Evaluation Group

Persons Persons

Acheson, Dean, former Secretary of State; adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson

Anderson, Admiral George W., Jr., Chief of Naval Operations, August 1, 1961-August 1, 1963

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February 1-December 3, 1961; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Bell, David E., Director of the Bureau of the Budget, January 1961-December 1962; Administrator of the Agency for International Development from December 21, 1962

Bissell, Richard M., Jr., Deputy Director (Plans), Central Intelligence Agency, and Chairman of the NSC Counter-Guerilla Warfare Task Force until February 17, 1962

Bohlen, Charles E., Special Assistant to the Secretary of State until September 4, 1962; Ambassador to France from October 27, 1962

Bowles, Chester B., Under Secretary of State, January 25-December 3, 1961; President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian, and Latin American Affairs, December 4, 1961-June 9, 1963; Ambassador to India from July 19, 1963

Brown, Harold, Director, Defense Research and Engineering, Department of Defense, from May 8, 1961

Bruce, David K.E., Ambassador to the United Kingdom from March 17, 1961

Bundy, McGeorge, President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs from January 20, 1961

Burke, Admiral Arleigh A., Chief of Naval Operations until August 1, 1961

Cleveland, Harlan, Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs from February 23, 1961

Clifton, Major General Chester V., President's Military Aide from January 1961

Coffin, Frank M., Manager Director, Development Loan Fund, February-September 1961; thereafter Deputy Administrator, Agency for International Development

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

Decker, General George H., Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, until September 30, 1962

Dillon, C. Douglas, Under Secretary of State until January 4, 1961; Secretary of the Treasury from January 21, 1961

Dirksen, Everett M., Republican Senator from Illinois

Dungan, Ralph A., President's Special Assistant from January 1961

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States until January 20, 1961

Enthoven, Alain C., Deputy Comptroller of the Department of Defense

Evans, Allan, Deputy Director for Research, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from June 25, 1961

Feldman, Myer, President's Deputy Special Counsel from January 1961

Ford, John, Executive Secretary of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Forrestal, Michael V., member, National Security Council Staff, from January 1962

Fowler, Henry H., Under Secretary of the Treasury from January 1961

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense from January 24, 1961

Good, Robert C., Director, Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from September 18, 1961

Goodpaster, General Andrew J., Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Hamilton, Fowler, Administrator of the Agency for International Development, October 3, 1961-December 7, 1962

Harriman, W. Averell, Ambassador at Large, February 13-December 3, 1961; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, December 4, 1961-April 3, 1963; thereafter Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Harkins, General Paul D., Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Haworth, Leland J., Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until April 25, 1963; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Hitch, Charles J., Assistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) from February 17, 1961

Hughes, Thomas L., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, until April 28, 1963; thereafter Director

Jackson, Henry M., Democratic Senator from Washington

Johnson, Robert H., member, National Security Council Staff, until February 1962; member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State, after August 1963

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from May 2, 1961

Kaysen, Carl, President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs from November 1961

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States, January 20, 1961, until his assassination on November 22, 1963

Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney General from January 1961

Kent, Sherman, Assistant Director and Chairman, Board of National Estimates, Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Khrushchev, Nikita Sergeivich, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union and First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

Komer, Robert W., member, National Security Council Staff, from January 1961

Lansdale, Major General Edward G., Secretary of Defense's Deputy Assistant for Special Operations until May 1961; thereafter Special Assistant for Special Operations

LeMay, General Curtis E., Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, from June 30, 1961

Lemnitzer, General Lyman L., Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, until September 30, 1962; Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, from November 1, 1962

Macmillan, Harold, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom until October 20, 1963

Maechling, Charles W., Jr., Director for Internal Defense, Office of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State, from February 6, 1962

McCloy, John J., President's Adviser on Disarmament

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence from November 29, 1961

McGhee, George C., Counselor of the Department of State and Chairman, Policy Planning Council, February 16-December 3, 1961; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, December 4, 1961-March 27, 1963; Ambassador to Germany from May 18, 1963

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense from January 21, 1961

Murrow, Edward R., Director of the U.S. Information Agency from March 15, 1961

Nitze, Paul H., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, January 29, 1961-November 29, 1963; thereafter Secretary of the Navy

Norstad, General Lauris C., Supreme Allied Commander, Europe, until November 1, 1962

Owen, Henry, member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until November 25, 1962; thereafter Vice Chairman

Parsons, J. Graham, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until March 30, 1961

Ramsey, Henry C., member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Riley, Vice Admiral Herbert D., Director, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, from February 25, 1962

Rosson, William B., Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff for Special Warfare, Department of Defense

Rostow, Walt Whitman, President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, January-November 1961; Counselor of the Department of State until December 14, 1961; thereafter Chairman, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Rowen, Henry S., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State from January 21, 1961

Salinger, Pierre E.G., President's Press Secretary from January 1961

Schaetzel, J. Robert, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, February 3-August 20, 1961; Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State, March 27-September 15, 1962; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., President's Special Assistant from January 1961

Shoup, General David M., Commandant, U.S. Marine Corps

Smith, Bromley, Executive Officer, Operations Coordinating Board, until February 1961; Acting Executive Secretary, National Security Council, June-August 1961; thereafter Executive Secretary

Smith, Major (later Colonel) William Y., Assistant to General Maxwell D. Taylor

Sorensen, Theodore C., President's Special Counsel from January 1961

Staats, Elmer B., Deputy Director, Bureau of the Budget

Stahr, Elvis J., Jr., Secretary of the Army, January 24, 1961-June 30, 1962

Stevenson, Adlai E., II, U.S. Permanent Representative to the United Nations from January 23, 1961

Taylor, General Maxwell D., President's Military Representative, July 1, 1961-October 1, 1962; thereafter Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Ambassador to the Soviet Union until July 27, 1962; Ambassador at Large from October 3, 1962

Wheeler, General Earle G., Director, Joint Staff, Joint Chiefs of Staff, until February 24, 1962; Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, from October 1, 1962

White, Lee C., President's Assistant Special Counsel from January 1961

Wiesner, Jerome B., President's Special Assistant for Science and Technology and Director of the White House Office of Science and Technology from January 1961

National Security PolicyNational Security Policy

1. Editorial Note

2. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, January 17, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Secret. For full text of NIE 1-61, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet indicates the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in drafting it. The U.S. Intelligence Board concurred on January 17, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

3. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, January 24, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 18 Jan 61. Top Secret.

4. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, January 25, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on January 27.

5. Editorial Note

6. Draft Paper by the Executive Assistant of the Operations Coordinating Board (Johnson)

Washington, undated.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, NSC Organization and Administration 1/26/61-1/29/61. No classification marking. A January 27 covering note from Bromley Smith to Bundy is not printed.

7. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, January 30, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, No. 475. Top Secret.

8. Record of Actions Taken at the 475th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, February 1, 1961.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on February 2. The source text has minor revisions as of February 6.

9. Letter From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 3, 1961.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, NSAMs. Top Secret Attachment.

10. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, February 4, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/2-461. Secret. Drafted by Henry Owen of the Policy Planning Council and cleared in EUR and FE. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, State 2/2/61-2/16/61.

11. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, February 6, 1961, 11:05 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

12. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 6, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, JCS General 1961. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

13. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting

Washington, February 6, 1961, 9:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Staff Meetings. Secret. Drafted by Stoessel.

14. Editorial Note

15. Record of Actions Taken at the 476th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, February 9, 1961.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on February 11.

16. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting

Washington, February 14, 1961, 9:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Staff Meetings. Secret. Drafted by Stoessel.

17. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, February 20, 1961

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Volume I, Review FY 1961 & 1962 Mil Prog and Budgets, 2/21/61. Top Secret.

18. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, February 23, 1961, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton. Documentation on the JCS response to a number of President Kennedy's requests for information made at this meeting is ibid., Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume I.

19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Press Secretary (Salinger)

Washington, February 28, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, McGeorge Bundy 2/61-4/61. No classification marking. Copies were sent to the President and Larry O'Donnell.

20. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Bell) to President Kennedy

Washington, March 10, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 3/61. Secret.

21. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)

Washington, March 13, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 3/61. Secret.

22. Editorial Note

23. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 7, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 65 A 3464, 381 4 Feb 61. Top Secret. Attached to an April 11 memorandum from Gilpatric to the JCS.

24. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, April 15, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5611/4-1561. Top Secret.

25. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 18, 1961

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3020 (3 Apr 61) Sec 2. Top Secret.

26. Record of Actions Taken at the 478th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 22, 1961.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on April 24.

27. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, May 10, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD Study on Conventional Forces 1961. Secret.

28. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 25, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Carl Kaysen Series, BNSP 1/61-5/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Kaysen on May 27.

29. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 7, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. NIE 11-8-61 (46 pages), entitled “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack,” was published and distributed separately from Annex C, which is printed here. A cover sheet and a table of contents to Annex C are not printed. A note on the cover sheet indicates that Annex C was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction. NIE 11-8-61 is ibid.

30. Letter From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen)

Washington, June 16, 1961.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3001 (14 Apr 61) Pt. 1, Sec 3. Top Secret.

31. Memorandum for President Kennedy

Washington, June 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Organization and Administration 5/6/61-7/25/61. No classification marking. There is no drafting information on the source text.

32. National Security Action Memorandum No. 55

Washington, June 28, 1961.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Folder T-636-7. Secret. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 55. For an account of the origin of NSAM No. 55, see Maxwell D. Taylor, Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir (New York: W.W. Norton, 1972), p. 189. On June 26, President Kennedy appointed Taylor as his Military Representative. Concerning his assigned duties, see ibid., pp. 196-197.

33. National Security Action Memorandum No. 56

Washington, June 28, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 56. Secret. Copies were sent to Secretary Rusk, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor.

34. National Security Action Memorandum No. 57

Washington, June 28, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 57. Secret. A copy was sent to General Taylor.

35. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, July 9, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 BNSP 18 Apr 61. Secret. Another copy indicates the letter was drafted in S/P. (Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/7-961) Forwarded to Rusk under a June 27 memorandum from George McGhee. (Ibid. 711.5/6-2761)

36. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 11, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret. A dissemination notice and table of contents are not printed. According to a note on a covering page, the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in the drafting. The estimate was concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on January 17. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

37. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen)

Washington, July 17, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Carl Kaysen Series, BNSP 7/61-11/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

38. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 17, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/7-1461. Secret.

39. Editorial Note

40. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, July 27, 1961, 4 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

41. Editorial Note

42. Editorial Note

43. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 19, 1961.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, 38 500a Air Access. Top Secret.

44. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, September 20, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President 3/61-9/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton. According to an earlier draft of this memorandum, the fourth, fifth, and sixth paragraphs are based on notes taken by General Taylor. (Ibid.)

45. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, September 21, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, the Joint Staff, the National Security Agency, and the Atomic Energy Commission. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction. For complete text of NIE 11-8/1-61, see the Supplement.

46. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, September 23, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 63, 1/61-10/61. Top Secret. This draft memorandum was received in the White House shortly after September 23. It is Appendix I to Document 50.

47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to President Kennedy

Washington, September 27, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, JCS General 1961. Top Secret. Attached to a September 28 covering note from Clifton to Taylor which reads in part: “When the President returns from Newport we can give him as much material as he needs.” The President and his party arrived in Newport, Rhode Island, from New York on September 26 and returned to Washington on October 2.

48. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, September 30, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 63 1/61-10/61. Secret. This draft memorandum is Appendix II to Document 50, but was circulated in advance of it.

49. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, October 5, 1961.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 2210 (27 Sep 61). Top Secret; Restricted Data.

50. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, October 6, 1961.

51. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, October 7, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Budget 63, 1/61-10/61. Secret.

52. Paper Issued by the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington, undated.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, SIOP. Top Secret. This paper forms the appendix to an October 27 memorandum signed by Rear Admiral F. J. Blouin, Secretary of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which distributed it for implementation to the Joint Chiefs, major commanders, and to CINCSAC in his capacity as Director of Strategic Target Planning.

53. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, October 29, 1961.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-357-69. Top Secret. A copy of the attachment to this letter is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1963 1/61-10/61. According to a November 6 memorandum for the record by Major William Y. Smith of Taylor's staff, the attachment was drafted in S/P. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, FY 63 Budget #1)

54. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 17, 1961.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, Atomic 471.61 29 Aug 61. Top Secret.

55. Editorial Note

56. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, November 21, 1961.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; Formerly Restricted Data. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the special estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, the Joint Staff, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Security Agency. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

57. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61. Top Secret. Forwarded to the President with several other documents, including Document 58. In a November 22 covering memorandum, Bundy commented that this memorandum “sketches the argument for a much smaller strategic force than McNamara is arguing. This is well worth attention because the argument is not developed anywhere else in your papers.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/16-12/61)

58. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61. Secret. Forwarded to the President with several other documents, including Document 57. In his November 22 covering memorandum, Bundy commented concerning this memorandum: “Most of the rest of us do not agree with it, but his argument is interesting.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61)

59. National Security Action Memorandum No. 114

Washington, November 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 114. Secret. Copies were sent to McNamara, Robert Kennedy, Director of the Bureau of the Budget Bell, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor.

60. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 22, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD Budget 1963 11/61-12/61. Secret.

61. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 29, 1961.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/11-2961. Top Secret.

62. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council

Washington, December 5, 1961.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, BNSP 1961-1962. Secret. The complete paper is 78 pages long, in addition to the summary printed here. For text, see the Supplement. It forms the attachment to a memorandum from McGhee to the Under Secretary and most Assistant Secretaries, stating that the paper represented a “major effort of the entire Policy Planning Staff during recent months” but would need to “undergo many changes of detail before it can hope to meet general approval.” McGhee asked for comments.

63. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy

Washington, December 9, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD FY 1963 Defense Budget. Top Secret.

64. Editorial Note

65. National Security Action Memorandum No. 119

Washington, December 18, 1961.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 119. Secret. Copies were sent to Robert Kennedy, David Bell, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor. In a December 13 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Harold Saunders of the NSC Staff stated that a draft of this NSAM had been approved by General Taylor, DOD/ISA, the Bureau of the Budget, and the Department of State. In an attached memorandum for the President, Saunders argued that an NSAM was necessary because, although most Defense planners accepted the desirability of individual military civic action projects in underdeveloped countries, they lacked a concept for a broad program that would contribute to long-range development. In a December 18 memorandum to Bundy, Komer “agreed” that the NSAM was “marginal, and that we have too many little bits and pieces, largely overlapping, being issued as NSAMs on whole complex internal security problems,” but “nonetheless, a jog on civic action is desirable in general,” particularly while budget decisions were being made. The memorandum bears Bundy's handwritten approval. (All ibid.)

66. Memorandum for the Record

Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Top Secret. Drafted by Gilpatric on January 9.

67. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, January 11, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Defense 1/62-3/62. Secret.

68. National Security Action Memorandum No. 124

Washington, January 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 124. Secret.

69. Summary of President Kennedy's Remarks to the 496th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, January 18, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 496th NSC Meeting. Top Secret; No Distribution. The source text bears no drafting information. The President's remarks partially follow an outline prepared for him by McGeorge Bundy on January 17. (Ibid.) The other item discussed at this meeting was the military aid program.

70. Editorial Note

71. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, February 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 114. Secret. A copy was sent to Robert Komer.

72. National Security Action Memorandum No. 132

Washington, February 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Interdepartmental Committee on Police. Secret. Copies were sent to Rusk, McNamara, Robert Kennedy, McCone, Bell, General Taylor, and the Director of the Peace Corps. Another copy of this memorandum indicates that it apparently was sent as a letter to Fowler. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 114) Several NSAMs with lower numbers have later dates. A February 19 note from Komer to Bundy states that Komer drafted this text. Komer commented: “Frank Coffin's weak follow-up on police programs last Thursday convinces me that now is the time for a hortatory JFK prod to Hamilton.” Coffin was Deputy Administrator of AID. Parrott's memorandum for the record of the meeting of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) held on Thursday, February 15, is in Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI) 1/1-7/31/62.

73. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, March 5, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, State Department, General, Volume IV. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. Marked for the attention of Thomas L. Hughes, Deputy Director of Intelligence and Research, and Allan Evans, Deputy Director for Research.

74. Memorandum From Thomas A. Parrott to President Kennedy

Washington, March 22, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Special Warfare II 1962-1963. Secret.

75. Letter from the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

New York, April 9, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

76. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 12, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Folder 40A22. Secret. Forwarded to Taylor with a covering note from Vice Admiral Herbert D. Riley, Director of the Joint Staff. Another copy is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/52.

77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Washington, April 13, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 3/26/62. No classification marking.

78. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 14, 1962.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 2101/469, JMF 3001 (26 Mar 62). Secret. Enclosed with a note from the Secretaries of the Joint Staff to the JCS dated April 20.

79. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Washington, April 16, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

80. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Washington, April 23, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Secret.

81. Editorial Note

82. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council

Athens, May 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Europe. Top Secret. Attached to Instruction No. CW-9106, May 15. The Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council was held in Athens May 4-6. Secretary McNamara delivered a similar address in unclassified form in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on June 16. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, July 9, 1962, p. 64.

83. Editorial Note

84. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Washington, May 14, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, #11 Miscellaneous H. Secret.

85. Letter From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)

Belgrade, May 15, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

86. Memorandum From Secretary Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)

Washington, May 23, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tactical Nuclear Weapons Study. Top Secret.

87. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, May 25, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Maxwell D. Taylor 5/62. Top Secret.

88. Memorandum From Major William Y. Smith to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, May 31, 1962.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chronological File April-June 1962. Top Secret.

89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 5, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3543, 381 (Relo) BNSP (31 Mar 62). Secret. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Dep Sec has seen.”

90. Editorial Note

91. National Security Action Memorandum No. 162

Washington, June 19, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 162. Secret.

92. Editorial Note

93. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council

Washington, June 22, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 6/22/62. Secret. For information on previous drafts, see Documents 70, 83, and 90. The underlined text represents the portions that were intended to be included in short version of the paper, which was circulated on August 2. (Attachment to memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to McNamara, October 15; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 (Relo) BNSP 31 Mar 62)

94. Editorial Note

95. Editorial Note

96. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 6, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/62. Top Secret. A note on the cover sheet indicates the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The note reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

97. Editorial Note

98. Notes for Action

Washington, July 10, 1962.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files: Job 80-B01285A, Box 9, Folder 5, DCI Memoranda 3/1/62-4/30/65. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by McCone.

99. Memorandum From the Interagency Committee on Police Assistance Programs to President Kennedy

Washington, July 20, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Interdepartmental Committee on Police. Secret.

100. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)

Washington, July 28, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/62. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Also addressed to General Lemnitzer, Nitze, and Sherman Kent, Assistant Director for National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. Copies were sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Hilsman, General Holtoner, and Garthoff.

101. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 29, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/65. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Raymond L. Garthoff, Johnson's Special Assistant and Executive Secretary of the Special Committee. Copies were sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Kitchen, and Hilsman.

102. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, July 30, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Attached to an undated covering note from U. Alexis Johnson to the President. Also attached to the note is a similar memorandum from Taylor to the President dated June 2.

103. Memorandum for President Kennedy

Washington, undated.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Strategic Balance. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. The memorandum was sent jointly to the President by Rusk, McNamara, McCone, and Lemnitzer on August 23. The source text and its attachments are enclosures to a letter from U. Alexis Johnson to Taylor in which Johnson stated that he had accepted McNamara's language on the AICBM question but was “pointing this out to” Rusk in case he wanted to pursue the matter further. There is no record of Rusk having done so. Johnson concluded that he knew “of no other issues of substance except that of the Soviet MRBMs, and nobody has suggested exactly what additional we should do about this.”

104. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy

Washington, August 23, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 7/62-8/62. Top Secret.

105. National Security Action Memorandum No. 182

Washington, August 24, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 182. Secret.

106. Editorial Note

107. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 14, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964, Miscellaneous Volume I. Top Secret.

108. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, November 16, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, NSC Organization and Administration. No classification marking. This memorandum was apparently written in response to remarks by former President Eisenhower and in preparation for the President's news conference on November 20. The subject of the memorandum was not raised at the news conference.

109. Editorial Note

110. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 20, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 Package I—12 Apr 62. Top Secret.

111. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, November 20, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1964 Defense Budget Volume I. Top Secret.

112. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, November 21, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964 Volume I. Top Secret.

113. Memorandum for the Record

Hyannis Port, November 23, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 FY 64 (23 Nov 62). No classification marking. Drafted by Gilpatric.

114. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 28, 1962.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 452 10 Jan 62. Top Secret.

115. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, December 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964 Volume I. Top Secret. This memorandum is 70 double-spaced typewritten pages long.

116. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, December 3, 1962.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget 1964 Miscellaneous Volume I. Secret.

117. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, December 5, 1962.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110. Secret. A table of contents is not printed. A note on the source text reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

118. Editorial Note

119. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 7, 1962.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 1962. Top Secret. Another copy is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 (Relo) BNSP 31 Mar 62.

120. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council

Paris, December 14, 1962.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1-PA/12-2162. Top Secret. The source text is the enclosure to circular airgram CA-6769, December 21. The Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council was held December 13-15 in Paris.

121. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Palm Beach, Florida, December 27, 1962, 10:45 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, JCS/Kennedy 12/62-1/63. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton on January 10, 1963. A memorandum for the record by Clifton of the same date is attached to the source text. In the same file are several copies of a draft memorandum of the conference prepared by Clifton on January 2, which bear detailed corrections made by each of the Joint Chiefs. Most of these changes are incorporated in the memorandum printed here. McNamara wrote on his copy of the draft that “the ‘minutes' are not quite in accord with my recollection of the discussion but I see nothing so important as to require change.” A copy of McNamara's handwritten notes of the conference are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Palm Beach Notes on JCS Views. Kennedy's Appointment Book indicates that the President met with the Chiefs only from 10:15 to 10:40 a.m. (Kennedy Library) No record of this conference has been found.

122. Editorial Note

123. Editorial Note

124. Memorandum From Robert Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy

Washington, January 19, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 508th NSC Meeting. Secret.

125. Record of the 508th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, January 22, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 508th NSC Meeting. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information but it is on White House stationery. There are four other accounts of this meeting, which was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. An undated account labeled “Done by CIA rapporteur” is ibid. See the Supplement. Another, also undated and entitled “Mr. Hilsman's Remarks at Director's Meeting,” is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Hilsman Papers, National Security, Hilsman Summary of President's Views 1/22/63. The other two are cited in footnotes 2 and 3 below. See the Supplement.

126. Editorial Note

127. Editorial Note

128. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) (Johnson) to President Kennedy

Washington, March 14, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Special Group 7/3/62-5/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Thomas W. Davis of the White House Staff and Charles W. Maechling, Jr., Director for Internal Defense in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State. NSAM No. 204, November 7, 1962, designated U. Alexis Johnson as Chairman of the Special Group (CI). (Ibid., NSAM 204)

129. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant (Yarmolinsky) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 15, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Subjects Series, Missile Gap 2/63-5/63. Secret. Marked “weekend reading.”

130. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 22, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, National Intelligence Estimates. Top Secret; Limited Distribution; Controlled Dissemination. A table of contents and Annexes A, B, and C (30 pages of tables) are not printed. See the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

131. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy

Washington, April 2, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Standing Group Meetings, General 4/63-5/63. Secret.

132. Memorandum From the JCS Chairman's Special Assistant (Goodpaster) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)

Washington, April 20, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, BNSP. Top Secret. Attached to a covering note from Major Smith to Nitze.

133. Editorial Note

134. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 15, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Restricted Data; Limited Distribution. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement.

135. Editorial Note

136. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 23, 1963.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Basic National Security Policy. Secret.

137. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy

Washington, July 24, 1963, 10 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume II, 2/28/63-9/9/63. Top Secret.

138. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, July 24, 1963.

Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99. Secret. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

139. Memorandum From the Director for Internal Defense in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs (Maechling) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, July 29, 1963.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Internal Defense. Confidential. Attached to a covering note from Kitchens to Rostow and all the geographic Assistant Secretaries. A copy was sent to U. Alexis Johnson.

140. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, August 28, 1963.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Volume V, July-November 1963. Secret.

141. Summary Record of the 517th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, September 12, 1963, 11 a.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 517th NSC Meeting. Top Secret. Drafted by Smith. The 21 attendees at this meeting in the Cabinet Room included the President, Rusk, McNamara, Dillon, Robert Kennedy, Seaborg, McCone, Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, Sorensen, and eight members of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee headed by General Leon W. Johnson. (Ibid., President's Appointment Book)

142. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 17, 1963.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, National Security. Confidential. Other copies are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Subjects Series, Policy Planning 7/63- 9/63, and ibid., President's Office Files, Rostow 1962-1963.

143. Highlights From the Policy Planning Meeting

Washington, September 19, 1963.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Secretary's Policy Planning Meetings. Confidential. The source text, which is dated September 28, bears no drafting information. No list of participants is given, but they were customarily the Secretary, other principals of the Department, Assistant Secretaries, Bureau chiefs, and the heads or deputies of ACDA, AID, and USIA.

144. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, October 18, 1963.

Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; Restricted Data; Controlled Dissemination. A more highly classified version of this document is ibid. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

145. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy

Washington, November 14, 1963.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab II of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs,” dated December 19. Another copy is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US. An earlier version of the draft memorandum, which was circulated to the JCS for comment, is dated October 9. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1800/774, JMF 7000 (1 Oct 63))

146. Editorial Note

147. Memorandum From Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr., to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 22, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Defense Budget 1965 Section 2. Secret.

148. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, December 4, 1963.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman's Staff Group, December 1963. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Major Smith.

149. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, December 5, 1963.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Volume I. No classification marking.

150. Summary Record of the 520th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, December 5, 1963, 3 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

151. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, December 6, 1963.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab I of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs,” dated December 19. An earlier version of this draft memorandum, dated August 31, is ibid., JMF 7000 (31 Aug 63) Sec 1. Another, almost identical to that printed here, is marked “Final Draft” and is dated November 13. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US)

152. Editorial Note

153. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson

Washington, December 19, 1963.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab III of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs.” dated December 19. An early version of the draft memorandum, which was circulated to the JCS for comment, is dated October 10. (Ibid., JCS 1800/775, JMF 7000 (10 Oct 63) Sec 1) A later draft dated November 15, not identical to that printed here, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US.

154. Memorandum of Conference Between President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 30, 1963.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, CJCS 031.1, Meetings with the President. Top Secret. Attached to a note by Brigadier General M. J. Ingelido, Secretary of the JCS, who drafted the memorandum. McNamara's brief handwritten notes of this conference are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Budget Memos to the President. According to the notes, all the Joint Chiefs attended the meeting, as did McNamara, Gilpatric, Clifton, and Kermit Gordon, Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

1. Editorial Note 1. Editorial Note

On January 17, 1961, Theodore Sorensen enclosed with a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy the undated 27-page “Report to Senator Kennedy's National Security Policy Committee.” Paul H. Nitze headed this Committee, the other members of which were David K. E. Bruce and Roswell Gilpatric. The report opened with an analysis of defense policy issues. Concerning the first, “Basic Strategic Judgments,” the Committee stated in part:

“The most basic issue is between attempting to follow a politically meaningful ‘win’ capability in general war versus the creation of a secure retaliatory capability.

“Weapons systems and programs necessary for a ‘win’ capability may differ quite radically from those required for a secure retaliatory capability.

“A true ‘win’ capability would require accurate and powerful attack systems, first class target acquisition systems, elaborate active and passive defense systems, forces for the prosecution of the second and third phases of a general war and a good recuperation program. It is doubtful whether such a capability is possible within presently foreseeable technology. In any case it would be immensely expensive both economically and politically to make an all out drive toward achieving such a capability. It would also probably require a first or preemptive strike by our side to capitalize in its ‘win’ possibilities. Furthermore, such a capability would probably be destabilizing—in other words would increase the danger of nuclear war.

“On the other hand there are very great political and military dangers in having merely a punitive retaliatory capability with no possibility of a ‘win’. If deterrence were to fail, or threaten to fail, we would be left with no option for military action other than a self-defeating punitive attack.

“A pure retaliatory capability therefore undermines the credibility of the deterrent and gives little or no support to the political aspects of our policy.

“It would therefore seem that in addition to a secure deterrent posture, some admixture of possible ‘win’ capabilities is called for.

“A general approach to the ‘mix’ of general war capabilities to be striven for should be determined by the President-elect, as early as full briefing by those knowledgeable in the subject can be arranged.”

The Committee called for an early Presidential decision on the degree to which the United States should rely on nuclear weapons in limited wars. It stated that “judgments as to the circumstances under which nuclear war must be accepted as unavoidable, who should have his hand on the safety catches and the triggers of nuclear war and the nature of the original target systems, should deterrence fail, must all be made by the President. These judgments are inherently not delegatable.”

Other defense policy issues discussed in the report include specific defense programming decisions, NATO issues, the fiscal and organizational implications of defense policy, and the relationship of disarmament to defense.

The report identified several other issues as having national security implications: the gold drain and the U.S. balance of payments, U.S. representation at the United Nations, and a number of European and other area problems. The report emphasized that the Department of State needed “strengthening in its competence on military problems. State can't give intelligence guidance on politico-military questions unless it has people who in addition to political competence thoroughly understand military matters, including questions of military strategy, tactics and logistics.”

The Committee believed that “the top level coordination machinery in the White House [was] peculiarly a matter of the President's personal desires and needs.” It suggested that a number of existing interagency advisory committees be brought under the “NSC tent.” The Operations Coordinating Board “has been a great generator of useless paper work and might be scrapped and a new start made.” The report recommended “a series of ad hoc task forces to develop plans and direct operations on critical upcoming situations involving a high component of secret operations,” and mentioned potential groups dealing with Cuba, the Congo, and Indochina, and also a “central secretariat which would service the entire panoply of interagency committees associated with the NSC's work.” Such a body “would perform some of the functions of the British Cabinet Secretariat.” The full text of the report, which was completed in November 1960, is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, NSC Political Committee Report 1/17/61. For further information, see Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965), page 157.

2. National Intelligence Estimate 2. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, January 17, 1961.

NIE 1-61

ESTIMATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION

[Here follow sections entitled “Introduction,” “The Communist World,” “The Emerging Areas,” and “Problems of the Western Alliances,” comprising approximately two-thirds of the estimate.]

V. The Military Problem

A. The Evolving Strategic Situation

60. Despite a widespread feeling that allout nuclear war is unlikely, the problem posed by the accumulation of offensive weapons of mass destruction by the great powers will remain the major problem of the 1960's. Although we have been unable to agree upon an estimate of the size of the Soviet ICBM program (estimates range from 200—or perhaps even less—to 700 on launcher for mid-1963), the Soviet capability even at the lowest estimated figure will pose a grave threat to the US. To illustrate, if one assumes the number on launcher to be 200 and applies reasonable rates of reliability to the missile, the USSR could detonate in the US in the target area some 1,000 to 1,250 megatons. The even greater delivery capability provided by shorter range missiles and nuclear weapons deliverable by aircraft or submarines and ships poses an additional threat to the US, to US bases overseas, to US allies, and indeed to most of the northern hemisphere.

61. So far as we can see now, if the USSR undertook to deliver such an attack, the US could do little to prevent enormous damage. A US pre-emptive attack—that is, an attack delivered when a Soviet attack was believed to be imminent—would not prevent such damage unless the various types of Soviet missile launchers had been precisely located, and there is doubt that a high proportion could be so located. Antiballistic missile systems of presently unproven effectiveness will probably be available about the middle of the decade, but such early systems almost certainly will not be sufficiently developed or widely-enough deployed to give assurance of destroying or neutralizing more than a small proportion of the missiles which the USSR will be capable of launching.2

62. The US, however, will also almost certainly be able to do enormous damage to the USSR, even if attacked first by the USSR. It is true that during the next year or so the vulnerability of US retaliatory forces to a surprise missile attack and the uncertainties regarding the size of the Soviet ICBM force introduce some measure of doubt regarding the extent of the US retaliatory capability. It is very unlikely, however, that even during this period the USSR will acquire capabilities sufficient to give it confidence that it can prevent an unacceptable level of US retaliation.3 As the decade advances, the US program of maintaining a portion of the US bomber force on airborne alert and of dispersing missiles in hardened sites, aboard submarines at sea, and on railborne carriers should virtually assure the survival of a substantial retaliatory capability. The Soviets are pursuing a vigorous program for developing antimissile defenses, and we estimate that the USSR will probably begin to deploy an antimissile system of undetermined effectiveness by the period 1963-1966. The Soviet leaders probably believe that they will acquire a military advantage through protection of selected areas and through complicating the task of Western military planners. They almost certainly consider that the first nation to deploy such weapons will gain major psychological, political, and military advantages. Nevertheless, we believe it almost certain that these defenses throughout the period will remain inadequate to shield large areas of the USSR from widespread devastation.

63. Thus it appears likely that during most of the decade ahead the strategic situation will be one in which both the US and the USSR will possess relatively invulnerable nuclear weapons systems capable of inflicting enormous destruction upon the other. The world must face the possibility that a general nuclear war—brought to pass through accident, design, or miscalculation—would kill many millions of people, destroy the capital accumulation of many decades, render large sections of the earth virtually uninhabitable for a time, and destroy the power of most of the modern nations of the world.

64. This strategic situation does not make general nuclear war impossible, but it does make it a highly irrational response to international disputes. As long as this situation continues, each side will be deterred by fear of the consequences (if by nothing else) from deliberately initiating general war. It is almost certain, moreover, that each side will be deterred from action or policies which involve serious risk of general war. The crucial question is: how will the risks of a given action be judged in the context of circumstances which exists when the action is contemplated? To be more specific: how far will the Soviets—or the Chinese Communists—be emboldened by judging that Western reaction to some Communist aggression will be inhibited by Western aversion to incurring serious risk of general war? To what extent will the Western reaction actually be so inhibited? Such questions as these are likely to be decisive in any sharp international crisis.

65. But apart from the calculation of risks in times of crisis, this strategic situation poses other serious problems for policymakers. How long will it persist? Can either side achieve a clear military superiority? If the situation of mutual deterrence does persist, can nuclear war be prevented from occurring by accident? Can nuclear blackmail be countered? Can nuclear armaments be reduced or eliminated without creating unfair advantage or opportunities for evasion? We do not pretend to offer answers, but only to point out in the paragraphs below some of the military and political problems which we believe this strategic situation has created and will create in the decade ahead.

B. Military and Political Implications of the Evolving Strategic Situation4

66. There is much ignorance and uncertainty among military and civilian leaders throughout the world—in both Communist and non-Communist countries—about the present and future world military situation. This is due in part to security restrictions between governments and even within governments, in part to the complex technical and operational factors involved in modern military actions, and in part to the fact that the destructive potential of modern weapons is unprecedented in human history. Even among the politically and militarily sophisticated, there is considerable puzzlement and disagreement about the deterrent effect of present and future nuclear capabilities, about the probable behavior of states in critical situations, and about the most suitable and effective strategic doctrines and weapons systems to develop.

67. These problems must trouble the Soviet leaders as much as they trouble those of the West. We do not believe that the Soviet leaders conceive the ICBM to be the final answer to their military problems, and we doubt that they have formed definite ideas about their force structure ten years hence or about the precise role they will assign to military power in their campaign to establish world communism. They now see themselves as emerging from a period of strategic inferiority, and they surely consider it a prime objective not to let the US draw ahead once more. As long as the weapons race persists, they will not be content with a strategic equilibrium, or with the progress they have hitherto made in weapons development. Beyond that, they will continue to carry on scientific and weapons research and development programs with a high sense of urgency in order to find new weapons systems and defenses against existing ones. They would do this even without dream of vast military conquests, simply in the interest of defense. But if they developed a weapons system which gave promise of decided advantage over the US, they would certainly seek to gain maximum profit from it.

68. In the decade ahead some such weapons—for example, one providing defense against missiles—may achieve operational status and tend to upset the nuclear missile terror balance we have described. From what we know of Soviet ideas, however, we conclude that during the next five years—and perhaps longer—the Soviet leaders will conceive of their long-range striking capability in terms of deterrence and of employment in a heavy blow should they finally conclude that deterrence had failed, rather than in terms of the deliberate initiation of general war. In their view, a condition of mutual deterrence will provide an umbrella under which they can wage a vigorous campaign, using a wide variety of methods, throughout the non-Communist world.5

69. In such a circumstance the Soviet leaders will have substantial advantages. They can create crises and issue threats over comparatively minor matters with a reasonable degree of confidence that one or more of the Western powers will give way because of the risks of general war involved in resisting. In circumstances where they judge the risk is not too great they might engage in military action, possibly with Soviet forces but more probably with other bloc forces or with local revolutionary armed groups. In any case where it appeared that the choice for resisters was one between massive nuclear destruction and compromise of principle (including even surrender of territory), large numbers of people around the world would choose the latter.

70. It is now widely held that, in order to prevent such a paralyzing choice from being presented, it is necessary to have limited war capabilities, so that comparatively minor threats can be countered with appropriate means. But in recent years limited war capabilities in the West have been declining rather than rising. There has been a trend toward the reduction of budgetary allocations for the modernization and mobility of limited-war-capable forces. Two of the US allies, for reasons of national prestige, or because they fear that the US will not always support them, have carried on strategic nuclear weapons programs of their own and have reduced their conventional forces.

71. Even if substantial limited war forces should be available, many of the principles of their political and military use in a nuclear age remain to be developed and to be accepted. It is clear, for example, that only limited objectives can be won by limited means, and that pursuit of broad objectives or extension of the conflict beyond a well defined area of combat threatens expansion into a major war and poses for both sides the question of undertaking a large-scale pre-emptive attack on the enemy's homeland. Even when both parties accept limitations upon their objectives and upon the area of combat, the rules of combat within that established area still pose problems. One of these is that of using nuclear weapons for tactical advantage. The use of nuclear weapons in almost any form would greatly complicate both the military and political problem. It would almost certainly confuse the enemy and the neutrals as to the user's real intentions—as distinct from his announced ones—and alienate large and influential sectors of world opinion from the cause of the user, however just it may have been. The Soviets would presumably regard the use of nuclear weapons in the light of the proposition which they repeatedly assert and probably believe—that limited wars would carry particularly great risks of spreading into general war if nuclear weapons were introduced.

72. From a political point of view, there are also questions about the circumstances in which one can intervene with limited forces. As a general rule and as a result of the experience of Korea, the Communist powers will probably try to avoid clear-cut provocations which would permit the West to bring limited war capabilities to bear. They will instead attempt to use situations which are legally or politically anomalous, that is, situations in which they have a defensible color of right for the use of force or in which the political issue has become or can be made to appear so confused as to make Western intervention seem capricious or imperialistic. Much will depend upon the way in which the issue is presented to the world and is handled by both sides. In many circumstances fear of the spread of the conflict into a general nuclear war might be so great that the intervener would find himself severely condemned by large segments of world opinion.

73. A major problem during the next decade is also posed by the probability that additional nations will acquire a nuclear weapons capability. France already has a program underway, and Communist China and Israel almost certainly have started such weapons programs. Other nations might enter the field if only to counter the power and prestige which their rivals or their enemies might gain through the acquisition of a nuclear capability. Even a small increase in the number of nations possessing nuclear weapons will add to the dangers inherent in critical situations as they arise. An increase in the number of states capable of using nuclear weapons—even as a threat—will also increase the chances for irrational and desperate action. At a minimum, the spread of nuclear weapons capabilities will stir up additional political turmoil by encouraging intransigence in their possessors and by encouraging fear and counteraction among those who might consider themselves threatened.

74. Related to these problems of limited war and spread of nuclear capabilities is the problem of preventing miscalculations which might precipitate general war unintentionally. Whenever international disputes arise there is a natural tendency for the parties concerned to place their forces on an alert status and progressively to strengthen the alert by various forms of deployment. In some cases these might be normal precautions and in some cases they might be intended to frighten the adversary, or both. In any case, there is likely to be considerable concern among neutrals and US allies that the US and the USSR will act in too bellicose a fashion, that both the US and the USSR might become so committed that they would be unable to back down and thus would become involved in war, or that the state of alert on one side or both will become so advanced that, fearing a surprise attack, one would take pre-emptive action against the other. As the decade advances and surprise attack against retaliatory weapons systems loses much of its advantage, compelling reasons for launching a pre-emptive attack will no longer exist. Nevertheless, fear of surprise attack will probably persist and might weigh more heavily in the minds of policymakers than would in fact be justified.

75. Another concern is that general war may come about by sheer accident. The worry here is that with an increasing number and variety of space capsules in orbit or being fired into orbit, with an increasing number of missiles nuclear-armed and on the ready, with strategic air forces airborne and armed with nuclear weapons, with a new and untested ballistic missile early warning system in operation, war could come about through communications failures or anomalies, irrational action by local crews or commanders, or errors in judgment, without either side wishing this to happen. As the decade advances and surprise attack loses some of its advantages, there will no longer be compelling reasons to respond immediately to supposed or actual infringements of air space by presumably hostile missiles or aircraft. Nevertheless, fear of attack might in some circumstances be so great that general war could come about in ways we have noted.

76. In this situation of widespread fear of a general nuclear war, it is natural that the people of the world should look to arms control as a means of reducing the danger. Whatever its motivation, the USSR has carried on a many-sided campaign for general and complete disarmament. The Soviet leaders probably are interested in achieving some degree of disarmament, to an extent which would at least slow down or stop developments which might harm their strategic position or increase the danger of accidental war. During the decade, it is possible that both sides will become sufficiently concerned with stabilizing the balance of terror that some limited agreements may be reached. In any case, it is possible that—in order both to achieve stabilization and to meet world pressures for reducing the danger of war—the two sides will undertake tacit agreements resulting in some degree of arms limitation.

77. Also, the UN is likely to continue to be regarded by its members as an instrument for the prevention of war. If two nations are involved in dispute that threatens to result in a general war which they wish to avoid, the UN might provide a useful forum for airing the dispute and UN action a useful excuse for emerging from the dispute with less than full satisfaction. Moreover, the underdeveloped nations, who are likely to become an increasingly powerful voice in the UN, will almost certainly feel it in their interest to prevent a general war and will therefore exert their influence for the preservation of peace.

78. While there is some reason to expect, therefore, that the UN may play a role in preserving peace, that the present balance of forces will persist or become stabilized, that the limited war concept may be sufficiently capable of development to provide an escape from nuclear blackmail and general nuclear war, and that chances of general war coming about by accident or fear of surprise attack may be reduced, the decade ahead will still be an extremely dangerous one. The Soviets see increasing opportunities for political gains in their new strategic position, in their economic growth, and in the changing situation in the underdeveloped areas. They are almost certain to test these opportunities, and such tests could give rise to serious crises. Berlin and the Offshore Islands exemplify situations in which retreat may become impossible, and civil wars in such areas on the periphery of the Sino-Soviet Bloc as Laos could pose grave questions concerning the objectives and rules for the conduct of limited operations. The world contest in the decade ahead will necessarily be conducted in the shadow of this strategic situation, and it will affect the decisions of statesmen everywhere.

1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Secret. For full text of NIE 1-61, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet indicates the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in drafting it. The U.S. Intelligence Board concurred on January 17, except the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

2 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, concurs in the net judgment contained in this paragraph and the succeeding paragraphs that, so far as can now be seen, a general nuclear war would cause enormous damage to all major protagonists and that resort to general nuclear war, under these circumstances, is not a rational course of action. He believes, however, that the intelligence community is unable to adjudge the capability of the US to develop an effective defense against ballistic missiles. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur. As previously stated in his footnote to NIE 11-4-60, “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1960-1965,” dated 1 December 1960, he feels that we are entering a very critical twenty-four month period in which the USSR may well sense that it has the advantage. The Soviet leaders may press that advantage and offer the US the choice of war or of backing down on an issue heretofore considered vital to our national interests. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, believe that the tone of Section V, especially part B of this Section, compares a dynamic Communist Bloc to a static Free World. While emphasizing the capabilities of the Bloc, it gives little or no credit to the capability or determination of the West to shape the course of events.

For example: a. Paragraph 69 charges “large numbers of people around the world” with acceptance of the Bertrand Russell thesis of preferring Communist chains to nuclear war. The Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, doubt the validity of this assertion.

b. Paragraph 72 forecasts Communist political manipulation in crisis situations so as to try to make Western intervention seem “capricious or imperialistic.” Adroitness in the political arena by the West—believed by the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, to be equally possible—appears to be discounted as a factor for consideration. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in this paragraph. It is his belief that the evidence of offensive missile and bomber production and deployment shows a definite intent by the Soviet rulers to achieve a clear military superiority at the earliest practicable date. [Footnote in the source text.]

3. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 3. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 24, 1961.

You asked that I put in writing my recollection of the subjects discussed at the meeting with President Eisenhower at the White House on Thursday, January 19.2 My notes taken at the meeting are not complete, but they indicate that the following statements were made:

[Here follows discussion of Laos and Cuba.]

C. With respect to “limited war”:

1. Secretary Gates stated, “The United States can handle any number of small limited war situations at one time.”

2. Secretary Gates stated that the Defense Department had taken the funds authorized by the last Congress over and above what the Department had requested, and had committed these funds to additional airlift capacity and to the design of a new cargo plane.

3. Secretary Gates stated that major problems relating to airlift capacity were: a. the right to over-fly;

b. the congestion of landing fields.

D. With respect to the gold flow:

1. President Eisenhower stated the United States would be better prepared for limited war if we were to bring a division back from NATO and station the division within the continental limits of the United States. He pointed out that such action would ease the gold problem, but would require careful preparation with NATO.

2. President Eisenhower stated that if the order restricting travel of military dependents remains in effect, similar restrictions should apply to the dependents of personnel of other governmental departments, including the State Department.

Robert S. McNamara3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 18 Jan 61. Top Secret.

2 Reference is to a meeting between President Eisenhower and President-elect Kennedy. A memorandum for the record of the conversation is in the Eisenhower Library, Post-Presidential Papers, 1961-1969, John F. Kennedy 1960-1961 (2).

3 Printed from a copy that indicates McNamara signed the original.

4. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 4. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy1

Washington, January 25, 1961, 10:15 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Lemnitzer

General Decker

Admiral Burke

General White

General Shoup

General Clifton

General Goodpaster

The President first told the group that General Clifton would be taking over from me the Defense Liaison functions. He expressed appreciation for the help I have been enabled to give him by staying on for a short while. He said he would hope to make use of General Clifton in order to stay in very close touch with the Chiefs. General Lemnitzer confirmed that it has been valuable to have someone here with whom the Chiefs could take up specific items, and whom they could get to take up questions with the President for them. The President said he is extremely anxious to keep in close contact with the Chiefs. He recognized that he would be seeing General Lemnitzer frequently when he comes to NSC meetings, attends meetings with the Secretary of State, etc.

The President cited as an instance of the kind of help he needed the suggestion that the timing of the SAMOS shot and the Baltic reconnaissance flight should be modified so as to remove them from the date of the release of the RB-47 flyers.

[Here follows discussion of Laos (see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XXIV, Document 12), Cuba (see ibid., vol. X, Document 26), and the Congo.]

The President referred to comments made by Mr. Gates at the meeting on January 19th regarding limited war,2 quoting the Chiefs as saying that we could handle requirements in two areas at once, providing they did not, together, exceed the scope of the Korean hostilities. General Shoup observed that the President has the authority to call in the reserve of one million men, but he noted that this could only serve a purpose if we had sea lift ready and the ability to support them. He said we would quickly exceed what could be done with air support. It was his view that we need more air transport than we now have. Admiral Burke noted that we have one division of Marines in the Pacific and one-half division in the Atlantic completely ready to go. General Lemnitzer said that what could be done would be to establish an initial position by air and quickly shift its support to sea traffic.

The President said he would like to have a memorandum bringing out what, if we were to decide to commit American troops in Laos, we could do in the way of a buildup, in 30 days. He asked that it cover how fast the Viet Minh could come into the situation. General Lemnitzer said they could come in fast, but we could cut their supply lines and limit what they could do.

General Lemnitzer said that if we took units out of our ready forces, we would want to replace them quickly with units from the reserves. General Decker said there are three divisions ready to go in STRAC. Also, the 25th Division, less one RCT, is in Hawaii, with the RCT in Okinawa. There are seven national guard divisions that have been designated to be called in to replace any units committed.

The President asked what efforts have been made to prevent the experience we had with our prisoners of war in Korea. General Decker reported that a code of conduct has been prepared and that there are programs of indoctrination. It is recognized that there would be brainwashing, but the men know much better what to do. General Lemnitzer confirmed that training has been intensive—on occasion involving the acting out of what can be done to maintain order and morale in a prison camp. Admiral Burke observed that those who believe in something can and will stand up in such a situation. General Lemnitzer said he thought the situation was infinitely better than in 1950, when the armed forces were at a very low ebb. The units committed in Korea from Japan were at a low state of training and readiness. The President asked what caliber of people are coming into the service. All present said that the caliber is extremely high. General White said it is proving hard to keep people of this degree of competence after they finish their required service, but he said that the personnel of the Air Force are far superior to what they have had before. General Shoup said the same is true of the Marine Corps. General Decker said that the officers and men of the Army are the best ever. General Lemnitzer added that the authority that was granted to the Army to reject drafted personnel has been of tremendous value. Through screening out the unfit, great savings have been made—for example, four of the Army's five disciplinary barracks have been closed. The President said he would like to have the group think about the problem of how to build up the status of the Army. He said that the other services have advantages which the Army does not seem to have. General Decker said he was delighted to hear this expression by the President and would certainly give it very great attention. Admiral Burke said that in many ways the Navy has the toughest problem, as is reflected now in its rate of reenlistment, which is the lowest in the whole Defense establishment. This arises out of the great amount of time the men must spend at sea. For example, last year the men of a carrier he named (Saratoga?) spent only twenty nights ashore.

The President asked for an expression of opinion regarding the actions that had been taken because of the gold outflow. He noted that this matter is under intensive review. All of the Chiefs said that this has had a very serious impact, extending all the way back into the rate of applications for entrance to the Academies. This has been very rough treatment for personnel, and has created a terrible problem.

The President asked whether the Deputy Director of CIA must be a military man. General Lemnitzer said he thought this was not required but was permissive. General Lemnitzer went on to mention a recent intelligence management study, out of which may soon develop a proposal for a Deputy Director of CIA, making it possible to separate the Director of Central Intelligence from the operating functions.

The President asked as to the status of the Coast Guard, and Admiral Burke told him that it is under the Treasury in peacetime.

The President said he wants to stay very close to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He said the American people are very bellicose in their attitudes and objectives with respect to Russia and Cuba, but at the same time, they very strongly do not want to go to war. He said he doubts that they can have this both ways. However, he is sure that, when we are spending $82 billion on our budget, we should be certain we have everything we really need in the military sphere.

As the President concluded the meeting, General Lemnitzer said the Chiefs would welcome very much the chance to continue to meet with the President, and would be very happy if he should visit them in the Pentagon. The President said he would hope to see them frequently, in addition to his meetings with General Lemnitzer. He concluded by saying he had been extremely well impressed with the appearance of the officers in the Inauguration parade. Now he thought it is important to get the non-commissioned officers to feeling that it is highly creditable to be in the service of their country.

G.
Brigadier General, USA

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on January 27.

2 See Document 3.

5. Editorial Note 5. Editorial Note

On January 26, 1961, members of the team that had prepared WSEG Report No. 50, “Evaluation of Strategic Offensive Weapons Systems,” dated December 27, 1960, gave Secretary McNamara a briefing on the Report. WSEG-50 concluded that intercontinental ballistic missiles would be the most effective strategic weapons by the mid-1960s, that “counterforce alone [did] not appear to be a high confidence measure for preventing unacceptable levels of damage to the U.S. in the event of war,” even if the United States struck first, and that the United States “should be able to maintain a strong retaliatory posture even in the face of threats larger by far than any indicated by intelligence estimates.” Therefore “both the U.S. and the Soviet Union should be able to maintain a retaliatory force capable of inflicting great damage, which cannot be neutralized by the other side without a major technological breakthrough.”

In the face of this “nuclear stalemate,” the United States should “develop and maintain a retaliatory force that clearly can do high levels of damage” regardless of how a war started, and should also reduce “the threat of use of strategic forces to issues that can be resolved in no other way.” To this end, the United States with its allies should “develop and deploy forces to meet local aggression locally, and in such a manner as to minimize the expansion of the limited war into general war.” The summary portion of WSEG-50 is attached to a March 3 covering note from Colonel Benjamin C. Chapla, of the Joint Staff, to McGeorge Bundy in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Bromley Smith Series. For a description of McNamara's briefing based on interview materials, see Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983), pages 258-262.

6. Draft Paper by the Executive Assistant of the Operations Coordinating Board (Johnson) 6. Draft Paper by the Executive Assistant of the Operations Coordinating Board (Johnson)1

Washington, undated.

POSSIBLE ACTIONS TO SIMPLIFY POLICY PLANNING AND OPERATIONS COORDINATION IN THE NATIONAL SECURITY AREA2

It is assumed that the President will make use of the statutory Council on an ad referendum basis and will endeavor to keep it clear of routine review of policies that can be adequately performed at lower levels in the government by planning and operating officials who are aware of and responsive to the over-all policy directions of the Administration. The intent, therefore, of the steps outlined below is to free up the time and attention of the President and his immediate advisors by relieving them of the burden of immediate supervision of the machinery for continuous policy review and adjustment and for insuring the coordinated implementation of such policies while, at the same time, preserving sufficient structure of an institutional character that will insure disciplined orderly performance of these functions with a minimum of personal administration. In addition, the objective is sought of promoting a maximum of lateral coordination among opposite numbers in the operating departments to provide a “nervous system” through which the impact of the President's personality and influence can be registered at the operating level in the various agencies, as well as to provide an alternative route on occasion for operating views to be flushed up to the attention of the top people in the Administration.

The following specific actions are suggested for consideration as a means of moving from the present situation to meet the express wishes of the new Administration with respect to simplifying the process of policy planning and operational coordination in the national security field: 1. Abolish the Planning Board, Planning Board Assistants, the Operations Coordinating Board and the OCB Assistants.3

2. Assign, by Presidential order, all functions of the Planning Board and the Operations Coordinating Board to the Special Assistant to the President (Mr. Bundy).4 In this regard make a specific assignment to him of all outstanding national security policies for review in consultation with the appropriate agencies and recommendation to the President as to the disposition of such policies. At the same time, these policies should be considered in force until changed to guard against the immediate resurrection of all the “dead cats” and overloading the policy-making officials with issues that have no real urgency.

3. Set up a weekly informal luncheon meeting at the Under Secretary level with the same officials as have been attending the OCB luncheon meeting (Consideration might be given to adding the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors and the Special Assistant to the President (Science and Technology). In addition, Mr. Salinger might be given a standing invitation to attend when he wishes. Consideration might also be given to having both Under Secretaries in the Department of State attend this meeting.).

4. Set up a regular formal weekly meeting of Departmental Representatives (Assistant Secretaries or comparable officers) which would be attended by representatives of the same agencies as are now represented on the Planning Board and the OCB under the chairmanship of a staff assistant to the Special Assistant to the President, who would be charged with the formal aspects of policy review and operational coordination. This weekly meeting would be the device by which the Special Assistant to the President would secure the concurrence of the appropriate agencies in steps to be taken to implement Presidential policy as set forth in formal Operations Plans or more informal interagency memoranda or “treaties.” It also would be the body that would secure departmental views as to the need for policy changes and recommendations for inclusion in revised policy statements. The Special Assistant to the President would have the responsibility of determining whether such recommendations need referral to the President or can be put into effect by the concurrence of the principal departments involved. The Special Assistant to the President would also refer policies to this group for recommendation or request them to initiate new statements in response to need.

5. Affirm the present working group setup pending review of the policies for which they have the present responsibility of evaluation in terms of operational requirements and for preparing drafts of Operations Plans. These working groups need re-invigoration. In this connection certain steps need to be taken as soon as the major adjustments described above have taken place. The more important of these steps are: (a) improved backstopping of the working group representation in the departments and agencies participating in the group; (b) improved representation on the working group; and (c) a clear expression of support for this process by the White House and by the heads of the agencies involved. The working groups would normally be chaired by the agency having the principal responsibility. On all geographic working groups this is the Department of State, which is concrete evidence of the primacy of the State Department's coordinating role in this area, but the working group, on the other hand, is part of a Presidentially-established mechanism responsible to and receiving its instructions from a representative of the President.

6. Review and issue a projected schedule of work for the working groups in order to maintain a balanced workload in the weekly meeting of Departmental Representatives and to maintain the principle that every formal statement of policy must be subject to regular review.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, NSC Organization and Administration 1/26/61-1/29/61. No classification marking. A January 27 covering note from Bromley Smith to Bundy is not printed.

2 On January 1 President-elect Kennedy appointed McGeorge Bundy to be his Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, stating that he intended to consolidate under his direction the NSC Secretariat, the OCB, and a “number of special projects staffs within the White House.” Kennedy continued: “I have asked Mr. Bundy to review with care existing staff organization and arrangements, and to simplify them wherever possible toward the end that we may have a single, small, but strongly organized staff unit to assist me in obtaining advice from, and coordinating operations of the government agencies concerned with national security affairs.” For full text of Kennedy's statement, see Henry M. Jackson, ed., The National Security Council: Jackson Subcommittee Papers on Policy-Making at the Presidential Level (New York: Praeger, 1965), pp. 302-303.

3 Transition adviser Richard E. Neustadt made a recommendation to abolish the OCB in a December 9, 1960, memorandum to Senator Kennedy. (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Neustadt, Richard E., 1960) On February 18 President Kennedy issued Executive Order No. 10920 abolishing the OCB (26 Federal Register 1463), and on February 19, he issued a statement regarding performance of tasks formerly assigned to the OCB. (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 104-105)

4 It is assumed that the staff and funds provided for the National Security Council will be made available to Mr. Bundy. [Footnote in the source text.]

7. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 7. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy1

Washington, January 30, 1961.

SUBJECT

Policies previously approved in NSC which need review

1. The most urgent need is for a review of basic military policy. What is our view of the kind of strategic force we need, the kinds of limited-war forces, the kind of defense for the continental U.S., and the strategy of NATO? What should be your thinking about the great decisions, at crisis moments, on levels of U.S. military action? The urgency of these matters arises from existing papers which in the view of nearly all your civilian advisers place a debatable emphasis (1) on strategic as against limited-war forces, (2) on “strike-first,” or “counter-force” strategic planning, as against a “deterrent” or “second-strike” posture, and (3) on decisions-in-advance, as against decisions in the light of all the circumstances. These three forces in combination have created a situation today in which a subordinate commander faced with a substantial Russian military action could start the thermonuclear holocaust on his own initiative if he could not reach you (by failure of communication at either end of the line). There are good arguments for the decisions which led to this situation, but there are arguments on the other side, and it seems absolutely essential that you satisfy yourself, as President, on these basic matters. Moreover, a review of this sort should include at all stages the relevant political questions, and it should go along the whole spectrum from thermonuclear weapons systems to guerrilla action and political infiltration. Our current troubles in Laos and other places seem to arise at least in part from too narrow and conventional thinking about “military” as opposed to “political” problems.

2. Our first problem is to decide how to get these matters studied out so that you personally can make the necessary decisions in the light of your own assessment of the complex issues involved. In the past these matters have generally been settled in the light of pressure and argument mainly from interested parties—the Air Force especially, but others too. All of us are agreed that a better way must be found.

3. My own preference is for an NSC staff study under your own direction, in steady consultation with Jerry Wiesner, and with selected advisors (Killian, Kissinger, Gavin?) from outside. But I think Bob McNamara wants to do this job in the Defense Department (not in the JCS, but in his own office). There is a good deal to be said, from your standpoint, in having two studies, especially if those in charge of them (Nitze and Bundy?) keep each other in full touch as they go along. The matter is of literally life-and-death importance, and it also has plenty of political dynamite in it, so that the more advice you get, the better off you will be.

4. Whatever method you choose, it will be essential (and new) that your men-in-charge have full and candid information about existing plans and thinking in the armed services, and instruction to this effect could usefully be given by you to McNamara and Lemnitzer at the first NSC. (Both of these, as individuals, are in favor of such communication, as far as I know.) And while in my judgment the initial studies should not be made by JCS, there should be full consultation with the military at all stages and a fully military comment to you before you decide anything.

5. While the largest and hardest questions in this can of worms are judgment questions, with a combined military-political-diplomatic meaning, there are also some technical issues which can be attacked best by Wiesner through special studies by qualified scientific leaders. We believe, for example, that Air Force planning is based on very doubtful technical judgments on the damage that will be done by given weapons exploded on given targets. This can be studied by George Kistiakowsky if you wish, and the result might show that we need much less expensive plans than we now have.

6. There are other policies currently active that need examination, but none is as important as the basic military-political policy. One neat little one that can be settled Wednesday2 is a rule, in our African policy, which has required that new countries seeking economic help be referred first to their former masters. This often makes sense, but not always, at all, and State will urge a change—there will be no opposition, I think. A second problem of some interest is NSC 5412/2,3 the paper which authorizes covert anti-Communist action under CIA. I myself do not think the paper bad, but I think Dean Rusk will raise a question on it, and my advice for now is to listen to what he says—I don't know just what his worry is.4

McG. B.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Meetings, No. 475. Top Secret.

2 February 1; see Document 8.

3 Entitled “Covert Operations,” dated December 28, 1955. (Eisenhower Library, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Records)

4 Also on January 30, Bundy prepared a summary of recommendations on techniques for creating task forces to deal with crises. It is described in Bromley K. Smith, Organizational History of the National Security Council During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations (n.p.: n.d. [1988]), pp. 10-11.

8. Record of Actions Taken at the 475th Meeting of the National Security Council 8. Record of Actions Taken at the 475th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, February 1, 1961.

[Here follows a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting.]

2396. Attendance at National Security Council Meetings

The President noted that he had invited certain officials other than the Statutory Members and Advisers for this initial NSC meeting of his Administration. He said that the list of those requested to attend any given meeting would be decided in the light of the business he wanted to discuss each time, but he emphasized his eagerness to keep such officers as Mr. Murrow2 fully informed of major issues.

2397. Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security

a. Noted and discussed an oral report by the Director of Central Intelligence3 which included discussion of the new President of Brazil; prospects for the Salazar regime in Portugal; the serious agricultural situation in Communist China; and recent developments regarding Indonesia and the Congo.

b. The Secretary of the Treasury4 stated that the Departments of State and Treasury were agreed that it would be desirable to make an early offer to the new President of Brazil of a $100 million Export-Import Bank loan. Mr. Dillon was hopeful that the Bank would agree to take this step.

c. The Council discussed a possible change in U.S. policy relating to the bunkering of Free World ships under Communist Chinese charter, provided such ships were carrying only food and paid cash. The President requested that the Secretary of State study this question further, particularly whether any such change in policy could be at the request of the Canadian Government.5

d. The Secretary of State outlined a new proposed policy on the Congo which was being submitted to the President today after coordination with the Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency. The President subsequently reviewed and approved the State Department's proposal.

2398. Military Budgets and National Security Policy

a. The Director, Bureau of the Budget,6 reported that the past system of preparing military budgets has the following weaknesses: (1) A lack of correspondence between military plans and the military budget which resulted in military plans larger than could be implemented by the budgets.

(2) A lack of common assumptions and doctrines among the three military departments, resulting in differing strategic doctrines and appraisals of the threat, which were not adequately understood or taken into account in the budget process.

(3) Military budgets were organized by departments and by in-puts (such as personnel, procurement, etc.), but not by out-puts (such as strategic deterrence, limited war capabilities, etc.), making if difficult to determine what objectives were being fulfilled.

(4) The perspective of the military budgets have been generally short-range, rather than being decided on the basis of five-year or longer range objectives.

b. The Secretary of Defense reported that, with reference to the FY 1961 and 1962 military budgets, the following actions were being taken: (1) Acceleration of the procurement of five Polaris submarines so that they would be completed nine to ten months earlier than previously planned.7

(2) An increase in the airlift capacity of 50 transport aircraft, including 30 jets.

(3) A complete re-appraisal of the FY 1962 military budget, to be completed about March 1, 1961, based on studies by four groups, each headed by a senior official of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, on strategic weapons, requirements for limited war, selected weapons research and development programs, and base and installation requirements.

c. The Secretary of Defense reported further that, in collaboration with the Director, Bureau of the Budget, he would develop, between March 1 and July 1, 1961, guidelines for the President's consideration as to the FY 1963 military budget.

d. The Secretary of State said that he planned to send to the Secretary of Defense certain revisions in a previous memorandum of June 19608 which stated foreign policy requirements bearing upon U.S. strategy. These revisions would relate to NATO strategic doctrine, airlift, counter-guerrilla forces (including greater U.S. capability in this field), as well as the desirability of improved civil defense.

e. The President requested that the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with other interested agencies, should examine means for placing more emphasis on the development of counter-guerrilla forces.

f. The President agreed with the suggestion by the Secretary of the Treasury that means be found to separate in the military and foreign assistance budgets the funds which would be spent in foreign countries, as a means of improving the control of such expenditures.9

g. The President requested the Secretary of Defense to consult with the Atomic Energy Commission about a review of the purchases of uranium from foreign countries, as suggested by the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology.10

2399. Studies of Executive Branch Organization

a. Noted, in answer to the President's request, that the Director, OCDM, and the Director, Bureau of the Budget, would report by the end of February on their study of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.11

b. Noted, in answer to the President's request, that the Secretary of State was submitting certain recommendations clarifying the relation between the educational exchange program and the foreign information program; and that the Director, U.S. Information Agency, would be submitting recommendations regarding that agency's program.

c. Noted the President's view that the foreign assistance program must be reorganized before presentation to the Congress; and that the Director, Bureau of the Budget, was planning to submit such a reorganization along with the new foreign aid program.12

2400. National Security Policies Requiring Urgent Attention

Deferred discussion of this subject, with the understanding that the Secretary of State would, after appropriate consultation, recommend to the President certain immediate changes in current U.S. policy on Africa, to permit more flexible action in economic support of certain new governments.

2401. Organization and Procedures of the National Security Council

The Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs reported that in response to the President's desires a different organization and procedures would henceforth be used in the work of the National Security Council, involving fewer and smaller staff groups composed of more senior personnel. Policy recommendations would be brought to the NSC without being obscured by inter-agency processing but with adequate previous consultation and the presentation of counter-proposals. The preparation of such recommendations would require the full cooperation of all agencies in providing access to essential information.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on February 2. The source text has minor revisions as of February 6.

2 Edward R. Murrow, Director of the U.S. Information Agency.

3 Allen W. Dulles.

4 C. Douglas Dillon.

5 A typed marginal note indicates an action memorandum based on Action No. 2397-c was sent to the Department of State. This was National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) No. 3, February 3. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAMs) Regarding the NSAM series, see Document 9.

6 David E. Bell.

7 On January 28, McNamara recommended, and the President approved, this action. Financing was effected by earlier allocation of previously appropriated funds. (Memorandum from McNamara to Kennedy, January 28, and memorandum from McNamara to Secretary of the Navy John Connally, also January 28; both attached to JCS 1620/334 from the Joint Secretariat to the JCS, February 8; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 9050/4720 (28 Jan 61))

8 See footnote 3, Document 10.

9 A typed marginal note indicates an action memorandum based on Action No. 2398-f was sent to the Bureau of the Budget. This was NSAM No. 1, February 3. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAMs)

10 Typed marginal notes indicate action memoranda based on Actions No. 2398-e and-g were sent to the Department of Defense. These were NSAM Nos. 2, February 3, and 4, February 4. (Ibid.)

11 A typed marginal note indicates an action memorandum based on Action No. 2399-a was sent to the Bureau of the Budget. This was NSAM No. 5, February 3. (Ibid.)

12 A typed marginal note indicates an action memorandum based on Action No. 2399-c was sent to the Bureau of the Budget. This was NSAM No. 6, February 3. (Ibid.)

9. Letter From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk 9. Letter From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, February 3, 1961.

Dear Dean:

The President has asked me to start to keep track of directives and requests which he makes in the area of national security affairs. Such requests and actions may come from memoranda of his, from phone calls which he makes or asks one of his assistants to make, or they may come from discussions which he has directly with members of the Administration in private meetings, or they may come out of the discussions of the National Security Council. Wherever they come from, he is eager to keep track of the things which he personally initiates.

Accordingly, we are beginning a series of National Security Action Memoranda, and I enclose herewith the ones which relate to your Department from the last discussion of the National Security Council.2

It is not our intention to pester the departments and agencies with untimely follow-up messages on these action memoranda, and I have the strong impression, from my brief experience, that departments and agencies will always be acting just as fast as they can to respond to the President's directives. At the same time, it is obviously important to him to have some orderly procedure for follow-up. So we will try to keep track over here as each problem is acted on, and will bother you only if in the normally brisk dispatch of business we are not in the position to tell the President what is happening.

I hope that this method of action may seem sensible to you, and if you have any questions I hope you will let me know.

Sincerely,

Mac

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, NSAMs. Top Secret Attachment.

2 Enclosed is NSAM No. 3; see footnote 5, Document 8.

10. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 10. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara1

Washington, February 4, 1961.

Dear Bob:

As I indicated in the NSC meeting February 1,2 I am sending you certain revisions in the memorandum concerning foreign policy considerations bearing on DOD budgetary planning which Secretary Herter sent to Secretary Gates in June 1960.3 This should be looked upon as preliminary to the long-range study of the U.S. military posture on which you and we are shortly to be engaged.

We will give this matter continuing study and will advise you of any further thoughts we may have.

I would be glad to discuss these considerations with you, or to have them discussed by our staffs, if you believe that this would be helpful.

I am sending a copy of this paper to Dave Bell.

Sincerely,

Dean4

Enclosure5

SUBJECT

Foreign Policy Considerations Bearing on the US Defense Posture

I. Major Foreign Policy Requirements

1. General War Deterrent. An effective, invulnerable, and reliable US nuclear retaliatory force is required both to deter general war and to frustrate nuclear blackmail. (a) Its effectiveness must be evident so that both the USSR and our allies will feel no uncertainty on this point.

(b) Its invulnerability must be such that (i) the Communists and our allies will realize that it could not be destroyed; (ii) we will not need to use it hastily or preemptively in a grave crisis, in order to prevent its being crippled by a possible Soviet attack; (iii) we will not, in the event of such a crisis, have to take such “crash” measures to enhance its invulnerability as the Soviets would be likely to consider evidence of impending attack.

(c) Its reliability must (i) be such as to minimize the risk of accidental war; (ii) not be so dependent on bases and forces on foreign territory as to cause the Soviets to believe that they could blunt its effectiveness by pressing our allies to limit the use of their territory or forces for this purpose.

Effective civil defense measures will also be required to make credible our deterrent to general war.

2. Limited Operations. A mobile, substantial, and flexible US capability for operations short of general war is essential to meet the threat of limited aggression, which is likely to assume increasing importance in the years ahead. (a) Its mobility must be such that our allies and the Communists will realize that it can respond promptly to threats in any part of the world.

(b) Its size must be sufficiently substantial so that the US will be able to respond effectively to limited aggressions involving sizeable Communist forces, without requiring the redeployment of our force contributions to NATO and without crippling the base for partial or complete mobilization in the US.

(c) Its flexibility must be such as to enable the US (i) to respond in each case with a use of force appropriate to the threat, and (ii) to achieve its military objective in case of non-nuclear attack without use of nuclear weapons, if the President so decides at the time, in the light of relevant considerations—including likely Communist and free world reactions. We attach the greatest importance to “raising the threshold” beyond which the President might have to decide to initiate the use of nuclear weapons.

3. Counter-Guerrilla Capabilities. An improved capability to deal with threats to the internal security of free-world states, such as the threat of guerrilla insurgency, is urgently needed. These threats have recently been stepped up by the Communists and their allies, and it is likely they will be further expanded and extended. Free world capabilities to meet these threats must include US ability to give to the indigenous elements charged with maintaining internal security in individual countries advice, training and assistance which is tailored to the tasks they face.

4. Guerrilla Capabilities. Increased and improved guerrilla capabilities could also make a substantial contribution to defense of the free world. This will require that the US and other selected free world countries maintain special forces, which are trained and equipped for guerrilla tasks.

II. Major Regional Requirements

In addition to these basic considerations, two regional requirements are sufficiently important to merit special notice.

5. NATO. A cohesive NATO alliance, based on a convincing US commitment and a strategy in which our allies continue to have confidence, is essential. (a) A convincing US commitment involves a continuing US willingness to station substantial US military forces in Europe and to commit US-manned MRBM's in Europe or in European waters to NATO during the next few years. Our allies view the presence and commitment of US forces as an essential element of the assurance that we will respond, despite growing Soviet nuclear capabilities, to future threats against the Treaty area in Europe. In the absence of a reduction in the Soviet threat, any reduction in the over-all combat effectiveness of US NATO-committed forces in Europe would seriously damage allied cohesion, as well as weaken our negotiating position vis-à-vis the USSR.

(b) A strategy in which our allies have confidence will be one that gives NATO the option of responding without nuclear weapons to substantial attack on NATO Europe by Soviet ready non-nuclear forces, for a long enough period to enforce a pause which would give the Soviets time to appreciate the wider risks of the course on which they are embarked and provide an opportunity for negotiations. This will require (i) Shield non-nuclear forces adequate to discharge this mission, which means not only pressing European countries to build up and modernize Shield forces but also ensuring that US forces in the Shield have fully modern weapons; (ii) arrangements to ensure that such Shield nuclear capabilities as may be required to deter more massive Soviet aggression will not be automatically used in the event Shield forces become engaged against forces not themselves using nuclear weapons.

6. Asian Periphery of the Bloc. The free world's military posture along the Asian rim of the Bloc should be capable of rapid response to a wide spectrum of threats. Chinese Communist policy is likely to pose such threats, with emphasis on infiltration and guerrilla warfare, with greater urgency in the years ahead.

Threatened free world states in the area will be best able to concentrate on the tasks of maintaining internal security and eliminating guerrilla insurgency, where it is present, if they do not have to keep an undue proportion of their forces inactive to guard against overt invasion.

It is, therefore, important not only to have mobile, flexible and substantial US forces (para. 2) but also to have them deployed in forward areas of the western Pacific, in order to present our allies and the Communists with tangible evidence of our capacity to respond to aggression. As a related task, the State and Defense Departments and CIA should give urgent attention to improving the morale and fighting effectiveness of non-Western forces with whom we are allied or closely associated.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/2-461. Secret. Drafted by Henry Owen of the Policy Planning Council and cleared in EUR and FE. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, State 2/2/61-2/16/61.

2 See Document 8.

3 This memorandum, dated June 30, 1960, emphasized increasing U.S. capability for operations short of general war and for counter-guerrilla activities. (Enclosure to memorandum from McGhee to Rusk, January 27, 1961; Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, BNSP 1961-1962) The memorandum printed below closely follows the format and much of the substance of the June 30 memorandum, but with even greater emphasis on non-nuclear options in Europe and on counter-guerrilla capabilities elsewhere.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

5 Secret.

11. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 11. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy1

Washington, February 6, 1961, 11:05 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Lemnitzer

General Decker

Admiral Burke

General White

General Shoup

General Clifton

The President asked General Decker if the magazine which prepared the extensive “sell” on the Nike/Zeus was his magazine. There was some confusion because both Missiles and Rockets and Army Magazine had come out within the last week.

General Decker explained to the President Army Magazine and its relation to the Association of the U.S. Army. Then the Chiefs told about the various associations, including the Navy League and the Air Force Association, and the magazines published, both officially and unofficially.

General Lemnitzer briefed the President on his weekend visit with Mr. McNamara, Mr. Gilpatric and two others to SAC Headquarters in Omaha and the SIOP. He said the operation plan goes into effect April 1st, although it was approved on December 1st.2 He gave the President quite a few details on how targets are covered. The President asked them, “if we hit first and some of our forces are diminished, how do you provide for the second strike?” General Lemnitzer said individual commanders duplicate strikes. General White explained to him there were second and third runs laid on all targets, and that if the first run did not take off, the second run would get it. Also, if the first run was successful, there were plans to divert the second run to other targets.

The President asked if there were any limitations on the U.S. operating from Japanese bases against the Soviet Union with atomic weapons. The Joint Chiefs answered those questions. The President asked, if we decided to make the first strike, could we eliminate the Soviet strikeback? The Joint Chiefs answered no, the USSR could strike back and especially in the missile age it is becoming more and more difficult to actually know where the targets are—that is, the Soviet Union capabilities—and we couldn't possibly get them all. Their estimate was that under any circumstances the Soviet Union could strike back hard.

The President asked if the Department of Defense, in analyzing the last budget that was submitted, had discussed with them what, in the opinion of the Chiefs, were the priorities—the first priorities—of items they would want above the budget that was submitted. General Lemnitzer intercepted this with an explanation of the four task forces in the Department of Defense3 and that on the 10th of February the Chiefs would be examining the results of the task forces analysis of the budget and by the 20th would report to the President which items would be needed in addition to the last budget, or what changes should be made within the limitations of the last budget. (I believe that there was a failure of communication on this point. The President did not get the answer he was seeking, which was what, in the opinion of the Chiefs, should they have had as first priority items above the last budget when it went in, but maybe there was a deliberate lack of communication on this point.) The President indicated that perhaps the Joint Chiefs might want to give him some ideas about this after they see the February 10th paper and before the final Department of Defense paper comes in.

The President mentioned guerrilla activities in Laos, the Congo and Viet-Nam and asked what we are doing in each of the Services on this type of training. He asked especially if the guerrilla activity which we are going to face in the future on an intensified basis by the enemy couldn't have some effect on our MAAG training efforts. There was a long discussion on this point and the President said, “Maybe you would like to give me a short memorandum on Viet-Nam, especially as far as our guerrilla efforts in that area are concerned.”

The President then requested a memorandum on what the Services are doing on guerrilla activity and training.4 He stated that there are 7,000 to 15,000 Communist guerrillas in South Viet-Nam and yet we have no guerrillas in North Viet-Nam. He asked specifically how many Americans are in guerrilla training. General Decker replied with a discussion of special forces training, and the Joint Chiefs all promised to get him more data on this subject. The President then asked how the special forces in Laos are doing with the tribesmen.

The President also asked if we should do more about bringing more Laotians out of Laos, training them and sending them back in. Are we doing enough in this field?

The President said there is obviously going to be more guerrilla and counter-guerrilla activity in Africa and Asia in the near future. He then asked what plans they had to step up our own training and plans in those two spheres, and asked if they had learned anything from the other nations on this matter. General Lemnitzer responded that we have studied the British experience in Malaya and the French experience in Southeast Asia, and we have been training some CIA people, but, obviously, we are not doing enough.

General Lemnitzer then mentioned the memorandum here on the airlift and sealift readiness posture of Laos and how detailed it is. He said that he would turn it over to me for briefing. The President indicated he wanted to be briefed on this subject and he asked them if the memorandum gave him any information on the relative buildup from North Viet-Nam over the roads that could be accomplished in the same thirty days which he had asked for before. The Chiefs responded that there was nothing like that in this report, and they thought it might not be meaningful because, obviously, they could put a lot more Communists in there than we could get ourselves if they so decided. The President emphasized again that he wanted their best opinion on what the Viet-Namese could do in the same thirty days, and they promised him a reply.

The next item was the B-52G, covered in a separate memorandum, attached.5

The President asked the Chiefs about the reenlistment rate, especially in SAC. All three Chiefs gave the President a rundown on the reenlistment rate and emphasized that his “gold widow” decision was going to be a help.

There then ensued a discussion of the efforts in the Services to hold down the spending of American dollars by the Service people in lieu of having the dependents refused the opportunity to go overseas. The President directed that the Services take every measure possible to indoctrinate our people on the importance of this matter, even though there was no good way of measuring whether the men and their families were saving money or not. General Decker mentioned the U.S. Savings Bond program and the Soldiers Deposits program as good steps to cut down the amount of money. None of the Chiefs had any idea of restricting the amount of funds that a man was paid in American currency. The President reiterated that he hoped that they would take open and strong measures to win the voluntary compliance with the spirit of this order so that he would never again have to consider taking the dependents away from them.

The President asked Admiral Burke about the water supply in Guantanamo. Admiral Burke told him that we had a three-week water supply available by shipping and that we could keep this up with some strain on the logistics supply line.

In conclusion, the President directed that they give some attention to guerrilla activities in relation to their future position in the Congo, especially concerning training of intelligence teams and our advisory groups, if and when they were to go in there.

After the meeting, General Lemnitzer expressed his concern with our having all these papers and the backup material in considerable detail. I assured General Lemnitzer that after I had briefed the President, I would keep the papers around for two weeks and return them to him, and I would not give them wide distribution around the staff because they held so much rather planning type information.

CVC
Brig. Gen., U.S. Army
Military Aide to the President

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

2 By President Eisenhower.

3 Not further identified.

4 This request eventuated in an undated memorandum from Decker to the President, attached to a note from Lemnitzer to Clifton, February 16. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume I) In a February 18 memorandum to Lemnitzer, Clifton listed the detailed questions on guerrilla training posed by the President after his reading of Decker's memorandum. (Ibid.)

5 Not found attached; see Document 12.

12. Memorandum for the Record 12. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, February 6, 1961.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in their meeting with the President today, told him that the B-52G is being tested, but that they, on February 4th, resumed the 12 sorties a day level of airborne alert.

They also told the President that the Defense Department goal is 1/8 of the B-52 forces on continuous alert—that is the goal for this year.

General Lemnitzer said that Secretary McNamara, after his visit to Omaha and SAC this week end, is asking whether or not they can go to 1/4 on continuous alert and he has asked for the estimate of additional costs in men and money.

They assured the President that 1/3 of the total forces are on 15-minute ground alert and emphasized that this is the major emphasis at this time for security.2

CVC
Brig. Gen., U.S. Army
Military Aide to the President

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, JCS General 1961. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

2 In an August 8 memorandum to McNamara, Lemnitzer stated that SAC had put 50 percent of its forces on ground alert as of July 15. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 64 A 2382, 1961 General, 381 8 Aug 61)

13. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting 13. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting1

Washington, February 6, 1961, 9:15 a.m.

1. Remarks by the President

The Secretary welcomed the President to the staff meeting and invited him to comment. The President expressed his appreciation to the Secretary and the Under Secretaries for the work they were doing. He said that the positions of the Assistant Secretaries, as well as those of Mr. Murrow, Mr. Berle and Mr. McCloy are extremely responsible and carry as much importance as those of Cabinet officers. The decisions they make affect all areas of the world. The President desires a close relationship with the Assistant Secretaries and he hoped that this was the first of many meetings with them.

The President noted the report by the Jackson Subcommittee which was referred to in the press this morning2 and which emphasized the role of the Department and the Secretary of State. The President said this report reflects his point of view. The responsibility for political action in crises falls squarely on the Secretary and on no other Department. The President concluded by emphasizing again his belief that the jobs of the Assistant Secretaries are essential in our Government.

The Secretary noted that the confidence of the President in the State Department places even more responsibility on the officers of the Department in the discharge of their functions.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Staff Meetings. Secret. Drafted by Stoessel.

2 Reference is to Organizing for National Security: Inquiry of the Subcommittee on National Policy Machinery of the Committee on Government Operations, United States Senate, Vol. 1, Hearings, Vol. 2, Studies and Background Material, and Vol. 3, Staff Reports and Recommendations (Washington, 1961). This report of a subcommittee, which was established in July 1959 with Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington as its Chairman, includes hearings held and reports prepared during the Second Session of the Eighty-Sixth Congress and the First Session of the Eighty-Seventh. This reference is apparently to the section in vol. 3 entitled “The Secretary of State and the National Security Process” (pp. 41-56), which had been released on January 28.

14. Editorial Note 14. Editorial Note

On February 7, 1961, The New York Times carried a story that asserted that studies made by the Kennedy administration since inauguration day showed tentatively that no “missile gap” existed in favor of the Soviet Union. On that day, the administration termed this report inaccurate but would not comment on assertions that the Times article and other similar accounts were based on a background briefing by Secretary of Defense McNamara. In a February 16 letter to Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois, Senate Minority Leader, McNamara denied that he had told newsmen that the United States was “neither in a superior or an inferior position vis-à-vis the Soviet Union.” He stated also: “I have emphasized that acting on the President's instructions, we have already begun to move so that there will be no such gap in the months ahead.” (The New York Times, February 7, 1961) For additional information, see Document 129.

15. Record of Actions Taken at the 476th Meeting of the National Security Council 15. Record of Actions Taken at the 476th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, February 9, 1961.

[Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and the record of Actions No. 2402 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security and 2403 on crises in Laos, the Congo, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic.]

2404. National Security Policies Requiring Urgent Attention (NSC Action No. 2400)2

a. Noted that the President and the Council approved a recommendation by the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs that he, in consultation with planning representatives of the Departments of State and Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and as appropriate other agencies, initiate a thorough analysis and re-appraisal of basic national security policy, as previously reflected in NSC 5906/1,3 making appropriate reports to the Council for consideration. Noted the President's directive that the above re-appraisal include an early review of the provisions of paragraph 24 (particularly subparagraphs b, c and d) of NSC 5906/1.4

b. Noted and concurred in a proposal by the Secretary of State that he interpret paragraph 38 of NSC 5906/15 as providing flexibility for the United States to supplement Western European economic support to newly-independent areas whenever such action is deemed to be in the U.S. security interest.6

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on February 11.

2 See Document 8.

3 “Basic National Security Policy,” dated August 5, 1959. (Department of State, S/P-NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1,NSC 5906 Series) For text, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. III, Document 70.

4 These subparagraphs concerned U.S. policy on the sharing of nuclear weapons with individual allies and with NATO. A typed marginal note indicates action on Action No. 2404-a would be initiated by the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs.

5 Paragraph 38 enunciated the U.S. policy of relying on former colonial powers to influence and support their former dependencies.

6 A typed marginal note indicates an action memorandum based on Action No. 2404-b was sent to the Department of State.

16. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting 16. Notes of Secretary of State Rusk's Daily Staff Meeting1

Washington, February 14, 1961, 9:15 a.m.

[Here follows discussion of intelligence matters and an exhibit in Moscow.]

3. Policy Planning

Mr. McGhee said that the OCB was to be abolished and that certain of the functions of the OCB, such as interdepartmental clearances and the implementation of decisions, would in the future be supervised on a regional basis by the geographic bureaus. Mr. McGhee thought each bureau should have a planning advisor. Also, an effort will be made to draw the missions abroad more closely into the planning operation.

The Secretary came in at this point.

The Under Secretary noted that the President is anxious for the State Department to take the leadership in foreign affairs and it is up to us to use our imagination and best thinking to contribute to this. It is up to the State Department to be strong and to see to it that foreign policy is not made on a fragmented basis by various agencies. Each Assistant Secretary should arrange his schedule so that he has time to devote to planning considerations and to achieve a perspective on our current activities.2

[Here follows discussion of the economy.]

WJS

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 66 D 147, Secretary's Staff Meetings. Secret. Drafted by Stoessel.

2 In a February 13 memorandum to Bowles, McGhee stated that the NSC had “decided regional and country policies formerly prepared by the Planning Board will, in the future, be the responsibility of the Department, except in cases where critical security considerations prevail. In addition, the OCB is to be abolished and the Department is in the future expected to assume responsibility for coordination and carrying out of programs and plans based on these policies.” McGhee expected that the geographical bureaus would exercise, through their planning advisers, most of the old Planning Board functions and some of the responsibility for policy implementation inherited from the OCB, but that an official at the Deputy Under Secretary level would be needed to bring about interagency coordination of policy implementation. (Ibid., S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, NSC Admin 1961)

17. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 17. Letter From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy1

Washington, February 20, 1961

Dear Mr. President: I have now completed my initial review of the Eisenhower Administration FY 1961 and FY 1962 budgets for the Department of Defense. The attached memorandum explains the basis on which the review has been made and summarizes the changes I am recommending for your consideration. In reaching these recommendations, I have been aided in the definition of national security objectives by the advice of Secretary Rusk and members of your staff. The proposed budget changes have been reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, whose individual opinions on specific recommendations are recorded in Annex C.2

The task of thinking through the implications of national security objectives for military force structure is a tremendously complex and necessarily a continuing one. This review of the current budget has been able to deal with only the most urgent and obvious problems. Existing analyses on some of the central issues of general nuclear war made it possible to penetrate most deeply into this area. However, here, as with limited war, much more study is required, and will be undertaken as a matter of urgency before the FY 1963 budget is presented.

My recommendations relating to the expansion or contraction of our domestic and foreign bases and installations are not included in this paper. A separate report on this subject will be submitted approximately March 1.3 I believe the report will indicate that such action as might be taken in FY 1962 to terminate operations at unneeded facilities will have little effect on FY 1962 expenditures, although the savings which would result in future years may be substantial.

Sincerely,

Robert S. McNamara4

Attachment5

MEMORANDUM ON REVIEW OF FY 1961 AND FY 1962 MILITARY PROGRAMS AND BUDGETS

Summary of Proposed Changes

The proposed changes in the FY 1961 and FY 1962 military budgets are summarized below in the conventional budget categories.

The Eisenhower FY 1961 and FY 1962 Budgets
and the Proposed Changes
(New Obligational Authority in Millions of Dollars)

Present
FY 1961 FY 1962 Proposed Changes
FY 1961 FY 1962

Personnel 11,855 12,266 — +66

O&M 10,714 10,842 — +270

Procurement 13,453 13,378 — +1,186

RDT&E 4,261 4,349 — +433

Construction 995 985 — +53

Revolving Funds 30 20 — —

Total 41,308 41,840 — +2,008

We estimate that these changes alone, without taking into account action already taken to accelerate expenditures within the limits of existing obligational authority, would increase defense expenditures during FY 1961 by $60 million and during FY 1962 by $740 million.

The proposed net additions to the budgets can be restated in the three major categories reflecting the task force studies: (1) Resources going into forces whose mission is primarily associated with general nuclear war;

(2) Resources going into forces whose mission would primarily be limited war; and,

(3) Resources going to research and development not included in (1) and (2) above.

Proposed Net Changes

Proposed Net Changes

FY 1961 FY 1962

Strategic and Continental Air Defense — 1,088

Limited War — 806

Research & Development, not included above — 114

Total — 2,008

Detailed proposals are explained in the attachments under these three headings.

National Security Objectives

Our review of the defense budget has focused on the adequacy of our present and planned military forces to accomplish major national security objectives. Task Forces were appointed in the areas of Strategic and Continental Air Defense, Limited War, and Research and Development to carry out this review and to examine the need for additional forces in each of these areas.

The following are the national security objectives in terms of which we believe the adequacy of our defenses should be examined:

Deter Deliberate Attack

We must deter deliberate nuclear attack on the United States and our major allies by making it clear to potential enemies that, in all circumstances, such an attack would result in unacceptable losses to the attacker. This deterrence depends critically upon our ability to strike back after a direct Soviet attack designed to destroy our retaliatory forces. It does not depend upon a pre-attack comparison of numbers of missiles, or of forces in general, except in a most indirect way. We must have survivable retaliatory power.

The reality of our power to strike back must be clear to the Communists, to our allies, and to ourselves. The success of our deterrent should not depend merely upon enemy caution in the face of uncertainties about our retaliatory power. Such a dependence upon uncertainties could undermine our resolve in time of crisis, and is dangerous because enemy leaders may not be cautious.

Stability and Safety

Also of great concern, and perhaps more likely, is the chance that war could come in an irrational or unpremeditated fashion—possibly by the mistaken triggering of alert forces, by miscalculation by one side of the opponent's intentions, by irrational or pathological actions by individuals, by spread and escalation of local wars, or by nuclear attack by a minor power.

Our posture should be designed to avoid these dangers. This can be done (1) by reducing the probability that individual triggering incidents can occur, and (2) even more important, by reducing the probability that such incidents would lead to war. Decisions, not incidents, cause war. For this reason also we must avoid exposed strategic systems that depend for their survival on quick decisions that might have to be made in ambiguous circumstances.

We are therefore taking steps to reduce the dependence of our retaliatory power on quick decisions. We want to reassure our allies and our enemies that we do not need to act hastily or preemptively in order to be able to retaliate. We must not be forced in a crisis to take “crash” actions for the protection of our forces that might be interpreted as evidence of impending attack.

Improved War Outcome

The conduct and outcome of a big nuclear war is worth caring about, more than any war in history. The success of deterrence cannot be guaranteed. If nuclear war comes and is unlimited and uncontrolled, it would be suicidal. We must do what we can to prevent this disaster, to improve the war's outcome, to terminate it under favorable military conditions, and to limit damage to our allies and ourselves.

One of the most effective ways of limiting damage to this country if nuclear war comes, although admittedly we cannot place great confidence in it, is for us to use our nuclear force in a careful and discriminating way. This may be a necessary condition for inducing the enemy not to attack our civil society in wholesale fashion.

But for this strategy to be feasible, our forces must be well protected not only against a sudden attack, but also against re-attack. A long wartime endurance capability is necessary if we are to use our forces with deliberation and discrimination. In short, our nuclear forces must be controllable not only in peacetime, but in war. This means making the command and control of our forces so well protected that we can maintain responsiveness to Presidential authority.

Beyond this, we require a combination of active air defense, civil defense, and the ability to attack vulnerable parts of the enemy's military forces. The best balance among these at any particular time will of course depend on the costs and effectiveness of each in the light of choices made by the Sino-Soviet Bloc. We should maintain broad flexibility to shift the emphasis of our strategy as conditions change.

Reassure and Protect Major Allies

If we provide strategic capabilities that meet all the above objectives, we shall satisfy an essential prerequisite for successful local defense and diplomacy elsewhere in the world. In the case of our NATO allies, we must have a strategy for their protection in which they can have confidence. Our common strategy must be one which is clearly in their interest as well as ours. The U.S. must maintain substantial forces in Europe; we must also persuade our allies of their responsibility to increase their own forces. Moreover, an increased emphasis should be placed on non-nuclear capabilities.

Reassure and Protect the Rest of the Free World

In most other areas of the world, the main burden of local defense against overt attack must be borne by indigenous forces, reinforced by strong highly mobile U.S. forces, some of which must be deployed in forward areas. This means having a substantial airlift and sealift capacity and prestocked overseas bases. The main responsibility against subversion and guerrilla warfare must rest on indigenous populations and forces, but given the great likelihood and seriousness of this threat, we must be prepared to make a substantial contribution in the form of forces trained in this type of warfare.

A Broadly Flexible Posture

While it is implicit in the above objectives, a broadly flexible posture that can serve us well in a wide range of contingencies deserves so much emphasis as to be listed as a separate objective. We are not required to make many decisions in the face of major uncertainties about future enemy objectives and capabilities and about our own. These factors interact to compound the uncertainty. In these circumstances, it is essential that we adopt an insurance philosophy and hedge against uncertainty by buying alternative future options for our military capabilities. We must procure “lead time” reduction, making decisions now to buy particular kinds of productive capability that we may never use. We must start development programs in the full realization that, because of changed and unforeseen circumstances, some may not be needed by the time they are completed. We must try to design our posture so that its effectiveness will not be seriously degraded by changes in objectives or circumstances. Our recommended changes in the budget reflect this philosophy.

Major Weaknesses in Existing Posture

(1) Strategic and Continental Air Defense

In our review of the currently planned posture for general war, we have found major vulnerabilities or deficiencies in the following areas:

Command and Control of Forces

The chain of command from the President down to our strategic offensive and defensive weapon systems is highly vulnerable in almost every link. The destruction of about a dozen sites, most of which are soft, none of which is adequately hardened, would deprive U.S. forces of all high-level command and control. Moreover, the communications connecting the various headquarters with each other and with the forces are soft, concentrated, and highly vulnerable to missile attack.

Without the survival of at least some of these sites (including the one containing the President, his successor, or designated replacement) with their communications, there can be no authorized response in the event of a nuclear attack on the U.S. Moreover, destruction of these sites would deprive our forces of essential orders for self-protection and for subsequent conduct of the war, as well as the order to execute retaliatory action. We should not count on the enemy being deterred by the belief that some of our forces may attack without authorization in the event our control is knocked out. Moreover, the vulnerability of the U.S. high-level command undermines the positive control system, making our forces both more accident prone and less likely to respond when they should.

The programs we propose now are intended to provide simultaneously for engineering development and an interim capability for survivable command and control of forces. We intend in the future to emphasize the development of command and control systems with greater endurance and flexibility under conditions of thermonuclear attack.

However, these programs do not provide a high-confidence solution to the problem of the survival of the President (or his successor or designated replacement) in the face of a surprise missile attack. This problem requires the urgent attention of the President and the National Security Council.

The Bomber Force

Today our strategic deterrence is almost totally dependent on our bomber force. This force is soft and concentrated on about 60 bases. Its current mode of protection is warning and alert response. About one-third of the bomber force is kept on a 15-minute ground alert. The two-thirds of the bombers which are not on alert are completely unprotected, except in periods of tension, or after strategic warning has been received. However, both the programmed warning systems and the decision-making part of the alert response are unreliable. Moreover, this posture contributes to the kind of instability which it is one of our objectives to avoid.

Active Bomber and Missile Defenses

The U.S. anti-bomber defense system is highly vulnerable to ballistic missile attack. Its control is centralized in a few soft vulnerable SAGE centers, without which the operation of the system would be seriously degraded. The BOMARC missile is completely, and the interceptors are almost completely, dependent on SAGE. The destruction of the SAGE centers would give enemy bombers essentially a free ride over the U.S. to the hardened ICBM sites. This would make it possible for the enemy to destroy U.S. hardened ICBM's with bombers when it cannot do so with missiles (if the bombers arrive prior to the launching of the U.S. missiles).

Over the next few years we intend to reorient the anti-bomber component of the air defense system. Changing circumstances will make the massive bomber attack a less likely and less important threat than before. Nevertheless, we do believe that we must continue to possess a defense against attack by small numbers of bombers.

We do not now have, nor can we have until the late 1960's, if then, an effective active defense against ballistic missiles. This is a serious and undesirable deficiency. Moreover, the cost of the Nike-Zeus system, the only system we can now expect to be able to deploy before 1970, appears to be very high. A 70 battery program, which would protect about 40% of our population, would cost, all told, about $14 billion, possibly more. Further, it is far from clear that the system would be effective during the period when it could be operational, the late 1960's. Therefore, we are recommending only a small expenditure on long lead time production items in order to buy about a year during which to reconsider this difficult problem.

However, our civil society does not need to be completely defenseless against missile attack. In some circumstances we could drastically reduce the casualties we would suffer in a thermonuclear war by a civil defense program. Although protecting people in cities from the direct blast, thermal and radiation effects would be extremely expensive and uncertain in outcome, it may be neither in our interest nor the enemy's to engage in wholesale city attack. And protection against fallout, which could cause most of the casualties, does appear feasible. While civil defense is not a Defense Department responsibility, the success of many of our programs depends on some expansion in civil defense.

Missile Reliability

The reliability of the U.S. strategic missile systems under operational conditions is uncertain and may be less than anticipated. There has been no systematic approach to a determination of missile reliability. Additional test firings are required for both the determination and improvement of missile system operational reliability.

Protected Missiles

The retaliatory power of the United States is now very dependent on soft or poorly protected bombers and missiles and will remain so for the next year or two. It is very important that we bring this period to an end as soon as possible. Therefore, we are recommending acceleration of the Polaris program and authorization of construction of the industrial base required to double Minuteman production should this later appear necessary.

Inflexibility

Perhaps our most fundamental weakness in the strategic area is the lack of flexibility in our ability to respond. With a vulnerable strategic force, with the expectation that the tempo of actions in nuclear war would be incredibly fast, we have been forced into a single strategy for retaliation. At the present time we have little ability to make decisions in the event of an attack. Our forces might have to be committed at a point when little is known of the extent of damage to our military forces or civil society or the size of force the enemy has left. The possibilities of a catastrophic mistake loom large. Our response would be a reflex action varying in scale only as determined by the size of our surviving force. We must move as rapidly as possible not only to create the survivable forces and control systems necessary to give us a range of choice, but also to develop strategies at the highest level for a wide range of general war contingencies.

(2) Forces for Limited War

The analysis of our capabilities for limited war reveals weaknesses in the following areas:

Over-emphasis on General War in Tactical Forces

Our forces designed to fight overseas, those we would call on to fight in limited conflict, are, in fact, strongly oriented in their war plans, current capabilities, materiel procurement, and research and development, towards general nuclear war. This is at the expense of their ability to wage limited and especially non-nuclear war. Yet because of their vulnerability these forces make only a modest contribution to the deterrence of general nuclear war. And survival abroad depends even more on fast and therefore risky decisions than survival of forces in the U.S. The problems of stability with our strategic forces discussed above are even more acute with nuclear forces overseas. This is not to say that these forces have no contribution to make to a big nuclear war. They can help. And because some ability to deliver nuclear weapons from within a local theater could have important tactical advantages (e.g., timeliness of delivery, choice of targets, warhead yield) the ability to deliver nuclear weapons with limited war forces should be retained. However, their major job lies elsewhere and we should make sharper division of labor between long-range nuclear and shorter range non-nuclear capabilities.

In concentrating on nuclear war, we have in recent years neglected our ability to wage non-nuclear war and have severely limited our range of policy choices. We cannot hope successfully to meet local Communist aggression at all conceivable points. But we can raise the threshold of our local non-nuclear defense capability, and reduce our dependence on nuclear war, a type of warfare which it will increasingly be in our interest to avoid. In sum, the primary mission of our overseas forces should be made non-nuclear warfare.

Sub-limited War Capabilities

The free world is faced in some parts of the world with a political-military threat that our military forces and those we support are not well designed to combat. We have too little ability to deal with guerrilla forces, insurrections, subversion. Much of our past effort to create guerrilla and anti-guerrilla capabilities, and it is a useful effort, has been aimed at general war. A greater effort in sub-limited war capabilities oriented towards Southeast Asia, the Mid-East, Africa and Latin America is needed.

Research and Development

We are doing too little research and development on non-nuclear weapons. The favored subjects: strategic systems, air defense, space, have received an overwhelming proportion of our research effort. However, technology promises great improvements in non-nuclear armaments as well, and it is important to be in the forefront of these developments. Accordingly, a substantial increase in this kind of research and development is recommended.

Transporting and Supporting Forces Abroad

Our capacity to move forces in sizeable numbers on short notice and to be able to support them is too small. The timely arrival of a modest U.S. and Allied force to crisis areas could avoid the need for a much larger commitment later. More sea and air transport is needed, but transport is not enough. The prestocking of heavy matériel and fuel and the availability of bases abroad is equally important and a greater effort is recommended. Although some of the bases used by our strategic force have lost most of their former value for general war, we and our Allies will remain critically dependent on overseas bases for limited war, and in some regions (Southeast Asia, South Asia, and Africa), more may be needed.

Training and Readiness

Many of our limited war forces are inadequately trained for non-nuclear war. We need more large scale deployment exercises for all Services, but especially joint Army-Air Force training in limited war operations.

Matériel

Our principal deficiencies in materiel for limited war also stem from focusing on nuclear capabilities. Most of the equipment is nominally designed for dual nuclear and non-nuclear war but in many instances the non-nuclear capabilities are small. This is notably true with our tactical aircraft. In addition, some important new advances in ammunition and bombs need much more vigorous development and procurement. Here we can make a sizeable qualitative jump in our limited war capabilities.

In general our recommendations are directed toward removal of current dangerous inflexibilities and vulnerabilities in our posture. It is imperative that adequate strategic retaliatory power be made secure. Beyond this indispensable requirement, we seek a responsible, controlled power of selective response that can appropriately meet a wide range of possible threats. The recommended improvements will permit us to lessen greatly our dangerous dependence upon blunt and indiscriminate nuclear responses to attacks directed either against the United States or our Allies.

Annex “A”6

U.S. STRATEGIC FORCE STRUCTURE

Changes in Strategic Offensive Force Structure Implied by FY 1961
and FY 1962 Budget Proposals

Table 1

Total U.S. Forces Currently Programmed
(Operational Bombers, Missiles on Launcher, End FY)

1961 1962 1963 1964

B-47 900 720 675 450

B-58 36 72 72 72

B-52 (w/o GAM-77) 360 255 195 195

B-52(+ GAM-77) 195 375 435 435

Atlas (36) (72) (129) (129)

Titan (—) (45) (81) (126)

Minuteman (—) (—) (130) (540)

Total ICBM's 36 117 340 795

Polaris 80 144 176 256

Snark 30 26 20 —

Table 2

Total U.S. Forces as Proposed
(Operational Bombers, Missiles on Launcher, End FY)

1961 1962 1963 1964

B-47 900 585 360 180

B-58 36 72 72 72

B-52 (w/o GAM-77) 195 360 255 195 195

B-52(+ GAM-77) 195 375 435 435

Atlas (36) (72) (129) (129)

Titan (—) (45) (81) (126)

Minuteman (—) (—) (130) (540)

Total ICBM's 36 117 340 795

Polaris 80 144 192 384

Snark 30 — — —

Moreover, the action proposed to double the Minuteman production capacity and to procure the long-lead items for additional production and deployment gives us the flexibility, should it become desirable to do so, to increase the force deployed by the end of Calendar Year 1964 by about 50%.

Of these forces, the alert bombers, hardened or mobile ICBM's, and Polaris at sea have much greater survival potential in the face of attack than the rest of the force. The comparison in terms of these elements is shown in the two following tables:

Table 3

U.S. Alert Forces Currently Programmed
(Alert Bombers, Hardened or Mobile ICBM's, Polaris on Station, End FY)

1961 * 1962 1963 1964

B-47 300 240 225 150

B-58 12 24 24 24

B-52 (w/o GAM-77) 120 85 65 65

B-52 (+ GAM-77) 65 125 145 145

Atlas (—) (39) (99) (99)

Titan (—) (45) (81) (126)

Minuteman (—) (—) (130) (540)

Total ICBM's — 84 310 765

Polaris 32 64 96 128

* These forces are loaded with nuclear weapons with a total yield of approximately [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].Since most of these weapons are in bombers on ground alert, their retaliatory capability is highly vulnerable to missile attack until our warning and control systems are much improved. But if no bombers are destroyed on the ground, weapons with a total yield of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are expected to reach bomb release line.

Table 4

U.S. Alert Forces as Proposed
(Alert Bombers, Hardened or Mobile ICBM's, Polaris on Station, End FY)

1961 1962 1963 1964

B-47 300 292 180 90

B-58 12 24 24 24

B-52 (w/o GAM-77) 180 128 98 98

B-52 (+GAM-77) 98 187 217 217

Atlas (—) (39) (99) (99)

Titan (—) (45) (81) (126)

Minuteman (—) (—) (130) (540)

Total ICBM's — 84 310 765

Polaris 32 64 96 192

Annex “B”7

U.S. vs. SOVIET MISSILE STRENGTH

U.S.a (Atlas, Titan, Minuteman)

Mid-1960 Mid-1961 Mid-1962 Mid-1963

Production 195 287 534 858

Operational Inventory 14 45 155 390

In-Commission 12 41 142 369

Operational ICBM Launchers 3 36 117 340

U.S. (Polaris)

Production of Missiles 44 197 310 502

Number of submarines in Operation 1 5 * 9 * 11

Number of missiles in submarines in Operation — 80 * 144 * 176

Number of submarines on Station — 2 4 6

Number of Missiles on Station — 32 64 96

U.S. (Total Operational ICBM Launchers or Polaris on Station) 3 68 181 436

Soviet

Prog. “A”-Production 100 280 460 640

Operational Inventoryb 50 190 320 460

In-Commission 30-40 130-160 250-280 390-410

Operational ICBM Launchersc 30 150 270 400

“B”-Production 120 410 770 1,130

Operational Inventory 60 260 530 800

In-Commission 35-50 180-220 410-470 680-720

Operational ICBM Launchers 35 200 450 700

“C”-Production 70 170 270 370

Operational Inventory 15 90 165 240

In-Commission 9-12 60-75 125-145 200-215

Operational ICBM Launchers A few 50 125 200

The Soviet Union is estimated to have a force of submarine-launched missiles during the years 1960-1963 approximately equal to our own.d

The number of ICBM missiles launched (successful and unsuccessful) as of 14 February 1961 is estimated to be:

U.S. Soviet

ICBMs (ex-Polaris) 96 33

Space Shots 10 17

Total 106 50

Polarise 15 0

Note: The difference in the approach to missile development in the two countries may explain, in part, the difference in test firings.

1 Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Volume I, Review FY 1961 & 1962 Mil Prog and Budgets, 2/21/61. Top Secret.

2 Not printed.

3 Not further identified.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

5 Top Secret. Attachments entitled “Strategic and Continental Air Defense Proposals” (24 pages), “Limited War Proposals” (9 pages), and “Research and Development Proposals” (18 pages) are not printed. No later version of this memorandum, which is marked “Draft,” has been found. It was Secretary McNamara's practice to label many memoranda to the President on budgetary proposals as “drafts.” Regarding draft Presidential memoranda, or “DPMs,” see footnote 2, Document 50.

6 Top Secret. The Annex is marked “Draft.”

7 Top Secret. The Annex is marked “Draft.”

a U.S. data are before adjustment for changes in the Eisenhower program and are from the following sources (adjusted downward to reflect a realistic level of “Operational ICBM Launchers”): (1) Air Force Ballistic Missile Program Status Report, 31 Dec 1960.

(2) Appendix E, USAF Program Guidance, June 60.

(3) Appendix E, USAF Program Guidance, December 60.

(4) OP 311 Submarine Section OPNAV.

(5) R&D Missile Section OPNAV.

(6) Special Projects Office for Polaris Program, Bureau of Weapons.

* Includes three SSBN's working up and therefore not fully operational

* Includes three SSBN's working up and therefore not fully operational

* Includes three SSBN's working up and therefore not fully operational

* Includes three SSBN's working up and therefore not fully operational

b Soviet data for “Production,” “Operational Inventory,” and “In-Commission” are from NIE 11-8-60, pages 29 and 30. [For partial text of NIE 11-8-60, “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack Through Mid-1956,” dated August 1, 1960, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. III, Document 111.

c The number of Soviet “Operational ICBM Launchers” are from NIE 11-4-60, pages 52, 53 and 54, where it is stated that:

(1) “Since there is insufficient direct evidence to establish the scale and pace of the present Soviet ICBM production and deployment program, we have based our estimate in part on various indirect forms of evidence and on argument and analysis deduced from more general considerations. These latter include such things as the strategic ideas which appear to govern Soviet military policy, our appreciation of the strategic capabilities which Soviet military planners might expect to derive from given numbers of ICBMs, our general knowledge of Soviet military production practices, and our sense of the tempo at which the present program is being conducted.”

(2) “We have examined the tasks and problems involved in the production and deployment of ICBMs thru the elaboration of three illustrative Soviet programs (”A“, ”B“, ”C“). They represent the range of judgments based on the direct and indirect evidence available to us, regarding the scale and tempo of Soviet effort.”

(3) “With reference to the illustrative programs presented above, the members of the United States Intelligence Board have concluded as follows: “The Director of Central Intelligence considers that Program “A” should be regarded as the nearest approximation of the actual Soviet program.

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that Program “B” approximates the most likely Soviet program.

“The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Special Operations, and the Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, believe that the Soviet planners would regard the advantages to be gained from having a large ICBM force in the near term as justifying the effort required for a program which would be toward the high side of the range defined by illustrative programs ”A“ and ”B“. Further, these members consider that in the light of factors discussed in paragraph (4) it will continue to grow within the ”A“-“B” range during the 1962-1963 period.

“The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, believe that illustrative program ”C“ most nearly approximates the actual Soviet program.”

(4) “The present Soviet ICBM program is, of course, subject to change as the period progresses. Soviet planning for the period beyond 1961 will be substantially affected by the actual development of US retaliatory forces, the prospects for a greatly improved Soviet ICBM, and the prospects, on each side, for an effective defense against ICBM's, as well as the general development of the world situation and of relations between the US and the USSR. Our estimates for future years must be reviewed in the light of such developments and of such additional evidence as we may obtain regarding the actual progress of the Soviet program. They must therefore be regarded as highly tentative. For these reasons, we have not projected even a tentative estimate beyond 1963.” [NIE 11-4-60, dated December 1, 1960, entitled “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1960-1965,” is in Department of State, INR-NIE Files.]

d NIE 11-8-60, pages 22 and 23.

e From the submarine. There have been 61 other firings in the R&D program.

18. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 18. Memorandum of Conference With President KennedySource

Washington, February 23, 1961, 5:30 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Lemnitzer

General Decker

Admiral Burke

General White

General Shoup

Mr. Rostow

General Goodpaster

General Clifton

Some of the representatives of Time-Life Films, Inc. were taking pictures of the President and they followed him into the room with their cameras and microphones. While they were in the room, General Lemnitzer gave a brief report on the meeting in Puerto Rico with the Latin American representatives of their Armed Forces.1 In connection with this (but later in the meeting), the President asked the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to get a report from all Services on the number of Latin American military personnel whom we educate in our military schools in this country—by country, by service, and by school.

The President also instructed General Lemnitzer to make an effort in the next few days to find out how these military Latin Americans feel about Castro; from a military viewpoint, what would they do from their countries to offset his regime; and does Castro represent a threat to their countries? The President instructed the Chiefs to do this quietly and unofficially. They assured him they could get information of this kind within the next few days while our escort officers are still with the Latin Americans.

The President indicated he wanted to take up two subjects: the guerrilla and counter-guerrilla warfare, and the nuclear weapons. He mentioned the Holifield Report,2 indicating that he expected them to read it and be prepared to discuss it as well as other facets of atomic weapons “command control.” [2-½ lines of source text not declassified]

In the discussion on guerrilla and counter-guerrilla warfare, the President asked several questions which General Decker and others answered:

How many are in training in the Special Forces of the Army? Decker: 1100 at Fort Bragg, 346 in Germany, 364 in Okinawa.

How do we intend to use these forces—in what kind of war? Decker: In all kinds of war—cold war, limited war, and even in general war, if it occurred.

How many people in our MAAG in Viet-Nam are skilled in guerrilla warfare operations? Decker: There are three officers in the MAAG in Viet-Nam who include this kind of training with their more general training. We had a team of 30, but the MAAG Chief had requests for the team to pull out. Our program was based on training Vietnamese who, in turn, trained others. General Decker made the point that in some areas we don't have authority to train the military personnel and we have to have the host government invite us to participate in this training.

In response to questions, it was stated that we are putting 75 more people into the Laotian training program. We have already trained 7000 Laotians. Altogether, we have trained 14,000 people in the Southeast Asian area. We now have a team with each of the 21 Laotian battalions. In addition, there are 1200 Meo tribesmen in the hills who have been trained by our people.

The President asked General Decker's judgment, in line with Khrushchev's speech, on what our course of action (as far as training is concerned) should be in Iran and in Viet-Nam.

A general discussion then brought out the following points: That we now respond, in the military assistance program, to country requests as to what kind of training and what kind of equipment they want. The country requests are screened thoroughly by the “country team” and then, back here, before we furnish them the equipment or the training. It was stated that certainly more emphasis can be given to guerrilla and counter-guerrilla training. We can also examine our programs carefully to see that more light equipment is put into the program—the kind that a man can carry with him. In regard to equipment, General Decker pointed out that one of our most valuable contributions is radio direction-finding equipment in order that guerrillas can be located. Usually, guerrilla teams have some sort of radio communication, and we can locate them promptly if we have teams trained with this direction-finding equipment. This is vital to counter-guerrilla operations because guerrillas are in small groups and move so rapidly.

In response to the President's questions, General Decker showed him some pictures of our Special Forces and described their organization. An “A” team has 12 men. “B” and “C” teams are organized to control the “A” teams. General Decker finally estimated that we have approximately 100 “A” teams in the three Special Force centers. The “A” teams include linguists, communications, intelligence, and medical personnel. Their jobs are to train anywhere up to 500 men each, and that the “B” and “C” teams then help control the “A” teams and the trained guerrillas.

In response to the President's questions, the JCS emphasized that the teams in Germany are essential; they are aimed at the satellites in case of a war where guerrillas would be trained to operate against Soviet lines of communication.

The President asked them to study carefully and give him some idea of whether or not we could use more teams in South Viet-Nam—for training of men who can be inserted in North Viet-Nam and operate as Vietnamese guerrillas, and in South Viet-Nam as counter-guerrillas. He directed that they find out what the South Vietnamese are doing about anti-guerrilla preparations in their own country, and what they are doing in South Viet-Nam to infiltrate North Viet-Nam. In this connection, he brought to their attention the Lansdale Report.3

General Decker pointed out that in the MAP program an additional 20,000 strength was being considered for South Viet-Nam. General Lemnitzer added that approximately 6,000 of the 20,000 are to be used in this unconventional warfare approach. The President asked General Decker to get in touch with the Military Assistance Group in Viet-Nam and find out, from their viewpoint, what the situation is in regard to additional training.

The President brought up the subject of a rather large-scale Communist effort in Ecuador and indications that Castro was probably the source of some of this activity. He asked: “What are we doing to help Ecuador train and prepare to offset this?”

Responses from the group brought out that the State Department has to negotiate for additional people to be introduced into these countries. General Decker said that a first “must” was to teach the people counter-intelligence operations; and secondly, then help them train their own forces in these matters. General Decker added that guerrilla and counter-guerrilla operations have not been emphasized in our Latin American MAAG efforts.

The President then directed that the JCS make “a sort of analysis” of what we can do around the world in building anti-guerrilla forces. He especially wanted comments on each Latin American country. He pointed out that each year as we go to Congress on military aid, he would get more support if we emphasized this type of activity—“giving friendly nations the kind of military assistance they are most likely to need.”

General White suggested that the JCS take a look at our guidance to our Military Assistance Advisory Groups in Latin America. In his discussion, he cited Colombia.

Returning to the discussion of Castro in Cuba, and the opinions of the Latin American military people whom they had just talked with, Admiral Burke said that the consensus of the military was that their governments are really moving too slowly in countering the Communist activities in Latin America. The present governments, he said, are not too eager to go into this training large-scale, because they are afraid of dissident groups in their own countries rising up and taking over the government when they are well-equipped and trained. General Lemnitzer commented that our engineer equipment had made a considerable contribution to these countries in repairing roads, bridges, and airfields—in effect, although it is not contemplated in our military assistance, it is most helpful in improving the economies and communications of the countries, and ultimately leads to stability. He commented that we might review our military aid program to see that more of this kind of material is usefully provided.

Admiral Burke commented that a great deal of local pride is involved and we should emphasize items that help their local prestige. For example, we are helping them build a naval academy in Ecuador. Its cost is only $30,000. The Ecuadorans are doing most of the work and are very pleased with this kind of contribution.

General White discussed what the Communists are doing in these areas. He mentioned a small thermo-generator being given wide distribution—a little generator that can light one single lamp bulb or run a radio—and that the Communists are getting great credit for this small physical improvement. He felt we could examine our own efforts in this line.

General Decker mentioned the school that is opening in the Canal Zone in June for Latin American countries and stated that we would see that the guerrilla and counter-guerrilla training would be emphasized.

General Lemnitzer mentioned that many of our escort officers and briefers spoke in Spanish. General White pointed out that the A-2, an Air Force general, gave his whole briefing in Spanish. The President asked if he mentioned Castro at all. General Lemnitzer said that he would check on this.

It was at this point that the President asked them to take a reading on how the Latin American military people felt about the Castro threat.

Turning to the Commandant of the Marine Corps, the President asked him for a brief resume of their activities in this field. General Shoup stated that the Marines had a different approach to this problem: The Marines felt that we should be allowed to go in and be guerrillas by direct action; that the Marines are always ready to go in and blow up bridges and tear up the countryside and then, if necessary, they can go into action to teach other guerrillas. Fundamentally, he stated, the Marines don't want to train someone else. They would rather go in and do the job themselves, and then take on indigenous help and, finally, train them to do likewise. General Shoup made it clear that the Marines have no such mission of training other people, but that they would gladly do it if so directed.

The President pointed out that it is not always possible for us to take direct action and that, for most of the problems that face us now, we will have to satisfy ourselves with training the people of these various countries to do their own guerrilla and anti-guerrilla operations, “realizing, of course, that this would disappoint the Marine Corps, but that into each life, some disappointment must fall.”

General Shoup then discussed the force-reconnaissance company, the reconnaissance battalion in each division, their missions and training. He pointed out that in the Philippines the Marines have a radio that only exposes itself for 30 seconds to communicate with other forces. He added that the Marines work very successfully with submarines and can invade other areas without discovery. He explained the language training of the Marines and that the linguists are added to the force as the mission is assigned.

The President then mentioned that Ambassador Thompson told him that it is his opinion that, in the future, no Soviets will actually cross their own borders to enter into these operations and, therefore, for the time being, we will have to prepare other forces to protect themselves. The President added that we will have to do more to help those countries (with whom we are associated) to do more for themselves. He mentioned the threat that 15,000 men from North Viet-Nam will be enough to overwhelm South Viet-Nam, and that Viet-Nam “will fall this year.” The President felt that, if this threat had any basis of realization, certainly we must face up to it promptly.

The President turned to a discussion of the SEATO meeting4 and what we should do about discussing guerrilla and counter-guerrilla training and operations with our SEATO friends. General Lemnitzer mentioned that Admiral Felt is our representative and they would get an opinion from him on whether or not we should encourage this discussion at the SEATO meeting. He promised that he would give the President a report on this subject very promptly.

Admiral Burke stated frankly that some of our troubles came from the Ambassadors in these areas who head the “country teams.” He felt that there is frequently resentment about the U.S. team's military activities; that the Ambassadors generally want nothing undercover going on in their areas—things that they cannot face publicly; and that the MAAG people then feel suppressed and, finally lose heart and enthusiasm. Admiral Burke felt that we must change this. The President then asked what can we do about SEATO in this connection. He stated that he would talk to Secretary Rusk and see if that would be a channel which could interest the State Department in furthering this effort. He pointed out that the Malayan example was a very successful one and might be applied to some of our trouble spots. Again, he mentioned Cuba, Viet-Nam, and possibly Iran.

General Lemnitzer volunteered that they might work out a joint State-Defense message to all Ambassadors to get their reaction and thoughts—country by country—on this new approach. He also volunteered that they would get a report from Iran in this field; and they would hold discussion on what kind of proposals could be made at the SEATO conference.

The President asked where this sort of training and activity was centered in the Pentagon. General Decker responded that it is handled in the Organization and Training Division of Army Operations under the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations, and he has recently appointed General Heintges, who has been in Laos for the last year and a half, as the director of this activity in the Army staff.

The President then requested that they give him a report concerning Viet-Nam. He wanted them to specifically indicate how many people we could and should train and by what date these people could be effective. They were to consider whether we should make a direct approach to Viet-Nam, or propose this at a SEATO conference.

On the subject of atomic weapons, there was a discussion of two major command and control areas, including the Holifield Report, and the JCS assured him that they were preparing briefings on both subjects and would be asking him for time to present such briefings.

The President then asked them to discuss Berlin—including the steps that the East Germans and the Soviet Union might take, and what we should do to counter them. Again, the JCS told him that they would present to him a briefing of all our contingency plans, and urged that this be done rather soon so that he would be prepared in his analysis of the Berlin problem.

The President then asked about the military situation in Laos and what our next steps should be. The JCS reported that the situation is now stable. They pointed out that the loyal government would like to take Plaines des Jarres, but that it was pretty slow going.

Turning to the presentation by Secretary McNamara on an increased budget for defense, he asked if it was essential that we have an additional 13,000 personnel—“Can't we get them elsewhere?”

The JCS outlined the personnel problems in some detail, mentioning the needs in SAC, and the Polaris crews; and Admiral Burke outlined some of the steps the Navy is taking to meet these new requirements. The new attack transport (ship) was discussed, and the President was told why the World War II type transport was no longer adequate. In addition, the strain on personnel caused by RB-47 wings, missile commands, nuclear submarines, and support forces, were discussed. The President inquired about the level of manning of the Marine divisions and the use of reserves.

The final discussion led by the President was on intelligence and the differences between the Army, the Air Force, and the Dulles conclusions based on the same intelligence. He wanted to know on what basis these differences arose. General Lemnitzer responded with a discussion of the intelligence problem, pointing out that, in the last analysis, the course of action, based on the intelligence estimates, had to be a Presidential decision.

The President concluded the meeting by indicating that at the next session he would like to discuss the atomic weapons problems that were scheduled for this agenda. Mention was made of the AEC-Defense paper that was already being worked on with Mr. Bundy, but the Chiefs agreed that they would prepare such briefings for the next meeting with the President.

C. V. Clifton5
Brigadier General, USA
Defense Liaison Office

Note: Attached are Mr. Rostow's notes on the actions he thinks resulted from the meeting.7

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton. Documentation on the JCS response to a number of President Kennedy's requests for information made at this meeting is ibid., Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume I.

1 Not further identified.

2 Not further identified.

3 General Lansdale reported on his January 2-14 trip to Vietnam in a January 17 memorandum to Secretary of Defense Gates; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. I, Document 2.

4 Held in Bangkok March 27-29.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

7 Not found attached. The notes list the President's requests for action and information made at this meeting in summary form. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President Volume I)

19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Press Secretary (Salinger) 19. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Press Secretary (Salinger)Source

Washington, February 28, 1961.

Because the President called off the NSC meeting last week and does not expect to have one this week, there may well be a question to you—or to him on Wednesday—about his procedures in this area.1

I think the best answer is the straight one: he is spending more time on national security affairs than on any other class of problems and he is meeting frequently with those most directly concerned with each specific question. He finds this method on the whole more effective than frequent scheduled meetings of the whole group, but he does expect to have formal NSC meetings from time to time when it seems appropriate.

A survey of the President's calendar for the first month indicates that he met twice formally with the NSC and fifteen times with interdepartmental groups concerned with particular problems. In addition, of course, he had frequent individual conferences with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and other senior officials in the national security area.

McGeorge Bundy2

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, McGeorge Bundy 2/61-4/61. No classification marking. Copies were sent to the President and Larry O'Donnell.

1 No questions on the subject of this guidance were asked at the President's news conference on March 1. See Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 135-143.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

20. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Bell) to President Kennedy 20. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Bell) to President KennedySource

Washington, March 10, 1961.

SUBJECT

Revisions to Defense FY 1962 Budget

This joint memorandum of the Secretary of Defense and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget summarizes the results and present status of further reviews of the proposals for revising the FY 1961 and FY 1962 Defense programs and budget which were submitted to you by the Secretary of Defense with his memorandum dated February 20, 1961.1

Attachment I lists the items and amounts on which there is currently agreement between the Department of Defense and the Bureau of the Budget, assuming that you approve the related policy recommendations of the Department of Defense. The changes in the amounts from those appearing in the attachments to the February 20, 1961, memorandum of the Secretary of Defense result partly from refinements by Defense in the earlier estimates and partly from adjustments recommended by the Bureau of the Budget and concurred in by the Department of Defense.

We have agreed to defer any request for appropriations for an increase in airborne alert over the amounts now included in the FY 1962 Budget. In lieu thereof we propose to rely on continuation in FY 1962 of the present legislative authority to incur a deficiency, if necessary, to support an airborne alert. The FY 1962 Budget now includes funds for a 1/8 “on-the-shelf” air alert capability and 12 sorties per day. Upon your determination at any time during the fiscal year that further airborne alert action is necessary, the Defense Department could provide for the alert on a deficiency basis. We estimate that the additional cost involved in increasing the number of daily sorties from 12 to 30 should be at the rate of $176 million per annum.

Attachment II lists the items and comments on which there is currently disagreement between the Department of Defense and the Bureau of the Budget, together with their respective recommendations.

The items covered in the attachments are limited to those contained in the Department of Defense proposals of February 20, 1961, plus the Bureau of the Budget proposal to cancel the last four Titan II squadrons which was also discussed with you at the meeting on February 21, 1961. Several additional matters involving possible further adjustments to the Defense FY 1962 budget will be treated separately. These include, among others, the impact on the FY 1962 budget of possible actions to close installations, the possible additional fund requirements for retired pay, repair of fire damage to the USS Constellation, cost increases for Minuteman, and a classified project.

The specific amounts of the budget amendments required for each appropriation account will be determined on the basis of your decisions with respect to the program amounts shown in Attachments I and II and the items to be treated separately. Except for a possible FY 1961 supplemental for retired pay, all FY 1961 requirements, including those indicated on Attachments I and II, are to be financed from funds presently available pending the provision of additional funds in the 1962 appropriations where necessary.

Secretary of Defense Director of the Bureau of the Budget

Attachment I2

AGREED UPON PROPOSED REVISIONS TO THE FY 1961 AND FY 1962 DEFENSE PROGRAMS AND BUDGETS

(Millions of Dollars)

FY 1961 FY 1962

Strategic and Continental Air Defense

1. Command and Control

a. SAC Airborne Command Post — + 3.7

b. Airborne Communications Relays + 6.2 + 2.0

c. Sea-Mobile Command Post + 0.6 + 0.9

d. Improvements in Alternate Joint Communications Center — + 3.0

Sub-Total + 6.8 + 9.6

2. Bomber Program

a. Airborne Alert — —*

b. Expanded B-52 Alert Force by 50% + 6.6 + 9.0**

c. Bomb Alarm at BMEWS Sites — —

d. Bomb Alarm Output at SAC Bases — + 2.0

e. Expanded Ground Alert and Accelerated Phase-out of B-47 — -10.1

f. Acceleration of Midas Development — +60.0

g. Snark Early Phase-out — - 6.9

Sub-Total + 6.6 +54.0

3. Air Defense System—Restoration of GCI to Radar Sites — +23.0

4. Missile Reliability

a. Polaris Confidence Firings — +42.0

b. Minuteman Confidence Firings — +35.0

c. Minuteman 2nd Wing Block Changes +49.0 —

Sub-Total +49.0 +77.0

5. Reconnaissance—Bulls Eye and Special National Security Agency Requirements — +61.0

6. Acceleration of Polaris A-3 — +60.0

7. Numbers of Missiles

a. Polaris Initial Acceleration +597.4 -597.4

b. Polaris Initial Acceleration—Associated Items + 45.0 + 70.0

c. Polaris—Cancel Long Beach Installation — - 57.7

d. Minuteman 2X Production Capability + 17.0 + 19.0

e. Accelerated Minuteman Deployment Rate — + 50.0

Sub-Total +659.4 -516.1

8. Options for a More Flexible Thermonuclear Strategy

a. Increased Flexibility in Minuteman + 6.0 + 20.0

Total—Strategic and Continental Air Defense Proposals Agreed Upon +727.8 -211.5

Limited War

3. Readiness, Training and Exercises — +149.0

4. Air Transport + 89.0 + 83.3

5. Ships (LPD Amphib. Transport, Dock) — + 40.0

6. F-105 Aircraft Modification — + 25.0

7. Ammunition, Equipment and Stock + 13.0 +217.0

8. Research and Development (not separately reported) — + 70.0

Total—Limited War Proposals Agreed Upon +102.0 +584.3

Research and Development

2. Certain Fire Power, Mobility and Communications Programs — + 20.0

3. Tactical Fighter or Fighters — + 45.0

4. Eagle/Missileer

a. Missileer — —

b. Eagle - 10.0 - 47.7

5. Conventional Weapons for Limited War (Navy) — + 12.0

6. Other Navy Programs — + 20.0

8. Skybolt (GAM-87) — + 50.0

9. Dynasoar — +30.0

10. ANP — -25.0

11. Missile Penetration Aids — + 20.0

12. Hyper Environmental Test System — + 10.0

13. Saint — + 14.0

14. Discoverer — + 30.0

15. Defender — + 21.0

Total—Research and Development Proposals Agreed Upon - 10.0 +199.3

Recap of Agreed Upon Proposals

Strategic and Continental Air Defense +727.8 -211.5

Limited War +102.0 +584.3

Research and Development - 10.0 +199.3

TOTAL +819.8 +572.1

Attachment II3

PROPOSED REVISIONS TO THE FY 1961 AND FY 1962 DEFENSE PROGRAMS AND BUDGETS CURRENTLY IN DISAGREEMENT

Proposed Revisions

DOD BOB Variance

1. Polaris, Second Acceleration (Strategic: Item 7c) +330.0 +1,108.0 +778.0

2. Titan II, Cancellation of Last Four Squadrons — - 200.0 -200.0

3. Nike-Zeus, Long Lead Production (Strategic: Item 8b) + 82.8 — - 82.8

4. Military Personnel, Increased Strength

Army Special Forces (Limited: Item 1) + 19.0 — - 19.0

Army, Navy and Marines (Limited: Item 2) + 35.0 — - 35.0

Air Force Net Increase, Expanded + 9.0 — - 9.0

B-52 Alert Force (Strategic: Item 2b)

Sub-Total + 63.0 — - 63.0

5. Advent (R&D: Item 1) + 22.7 — - 22.7

6. B-70 (R&D: Item 7)

FY 1962 -108.0 - 358.0 -250.0

FY 1961 — - 100.0 -100.0

Sub-Total -108.0 - 458.0 -350.0

Recap of Proposals Currently in Disagreement

FY 1962 +390.5 + 550.0 +159.5

FY 1961 — - 100.0 -100.0

TOTAL +390.5 + 450.0 + 59.5

1. Polaris Second Acceleration

Defense Proposal

Provide $330 million for incremental funding on a minimum basis to initiate with FY 1962 funds work on 10 additional Polaris submarines (Nos. 20 through 29).

Budget Recommendation

Assuming the 10 submarines are to be built, include $778 million additional to provide funds on a “full funding” basis in accordance with regular budgetary practices in the shipbuilding area. Defense recommendation would definitely commit the Government to construction of the 10 submarines. Proposed partial financing will probably be criticized in Congress as a dodge to reduce the total amount of the 1962 budget amendment and would be an unfortunate precedent from a management standpoint. The $778 million will have to be included in the 1963 budget as an increased fund requirement without a corresponding increase in the program.

Defense Recommendation

The inclusion of $778 million additional appropriation in FY 1962 is not considered necessary. The long lead components for the additional submarines can be fully financed without these funds. The $778 million would be required in FY 1963 for financing the ship construction per se. However, this is primarily a fiscal policy matter for decision by the President. Defense would not object if the decision was made to include the additional funds in FY 1962.

2. Titan II—Cancellation of Last Four Squadrons

Budget Proposal

Consider, as a partial offset to the substantial increases in the proposed budget revisions, the cancellation of the last 4 of the presently planned 8 squadron Titan II program. Total savings would be about $500 to $525 million, of which between $200 and $225 million, consisting of amounts in the present 1962 budget and recoupments of 1961 funds, could be applied to reduce the proposed 1962 budget amendments. As shown below, the reduction would eliminate from the forces only 36 operational Titan II missiles which would not come into the force until the third quarter of 1964, by which time the inventory of Polaris and Minuteman missiles will be increasing rapidly, and an even greater increase in Minuteman missiles could be accomplished under the flexibility provisions recommended in the budget amendment.

End FY 1963 End FY 1964

Atlas 132 132

Titan I 54 54

Titan II (first 4 squadrons) 27 36

Minuteman 150 540

Polaris 192 384

Total operational missiles 555 1,146

Titan II (last 4 squadrons) -0- 36

Minuteman (additional possible) — 260

It is suggested that the equivalent additional deterrent posture could be achieved in this period, if necessary, with additional Minuteman missiles in lieu of the last 4 Titan II squadrons and that the special advantages of the Titan II missile (longer range and heavier warhead) may be provided to a sufficient degree by the first 4 squadrons which, under the proposal, would not be cancelled. It would be desirable not to defer the decision since initial construction contracts have been let and obligations through FY 1962 will be about $250 million.

Defense Recommendation

The cost comparison made by the Bureau of the Budget is not an accepted basis for measuring effectiveness. The current uncertainty as to complete reliability of the Minuteman precludes the substitution thereof for the 4 Titan squadrons. Further, the military requirements, as they are determined from active studies now being made, may indicate a need for missiles of large capabilities which cannot be filled by the Minuteman.

3. Nike Zeus—Long Lead Production

Defense Proposal

Provide $82.8 million, the minimum first year funding, to provide capability for and to initiate actual production of long lead time items which must be contracted for in FY 1962 to permit accomplishment of the first Nike Zeus installations by about October 1965 if all developmental, production, and installation schedules are met. The intention is to provide flexibility, at a low cost, for a future decision whether or not to go ahead with production and installation of the Nike Zeus system. A comprehensive review by the Office of the Secretary of Defense clearly indicates that the minimum initial requirement is $82.8 million rather than the previous provisional estimate of $50.0 million for this purpose.

Budget Recommendation

Defer provision of first year production funding at least to the 1963 budget. There appears to be general agreement (except for certain Army and contractor representatives) that development has not yet progressed to the point where the technical feasibility of the Zeus system has been proven. A decision now to proceed with $82.8 million in 1962 entails follow-on funding of about $550 million in 1963 for large-scale production activities to preserve the possibility of meeting the October 1965 date.

A decision on the $550 million would have to be made in the 1963 budget decision period this fall with very little additional developmental data than is available right now—the key tests of the complete system do not begin until the summer of 1962. Thus, instead of providing flexibility, it appears that a decision to provide $82.8 million in 1962 virtually commits us to large-scale production, and it would certainly be regarded as doing so by the vocal advocates of Nike-Zeus.

Deferring first year production funding at least to the 1963 budget, as recommended, would defer the large-scale $550 million funding decision to the 1964 budget decision period in the fall of 1962, at which time the results of the first full system tests should be available.

In view of the widespread doubts whether the Nike-Zeus system should ever be deployed, because of practical operating problems, its own vulnerability, and its very large cost in relation to the protection received, deferral of the initial production decision appears warranted, even if it means a delay of at least a year in the target date of October 1965. Demonstration for psychological or prestige reasons of our technical capability of intercepting an ICBM would be accomplished by the present research and development program without going into actual production.

Defense Recommendation

The Department of Defense agrees with the position taken by the Bureau of the Budget that the Nike Zeus development program involves many uncertainties and, in common with other advanced weapon system developments, such as the big missiles, constitutes a high risk program with a chance of failure, but believes that it has the promise of substantial pay-off in terms of deterrence and prestige, if successful.

Provision in FY 1962 of $82.8 million does not entail a follow-on funding decision of about $550 million in the FY 1963 budget unless, for good reason, the capability to proceed with preparations for production is exercised early enough in FY 1962 to warrant such an amount of follow-on funding in FY 1963 to preserve the possibility of meeting the October 1965 date. Preservation of the capability to proceed with preparations for production can, of course, be misinterpreted, but it is the intention of the Department of Defense to so manage this capability as to make such misinterpretation unlikely. It does not necessarily follow that deferring the first year production decision to the FY 1963 budget would defer the $550 million follow-on decision to the FY 1964 budget since the time frame of the sequence of events in this program is not that rigid. Furthermore, it is expected that the Nike Zeus program will continue to involve uncertainties even after the test schedule is well underway, but this fact in itself is not a compelling argument against the early provision of the capability to proceed with preparations for production at the earliest time an assessment of the relative risks involved would favor a decision to advance.

4. Military Personnel, Increased Strength (all items)

Defense Proposal

Provide a net increase of $63 million for military personnel costs in 1962 to provide for 13,000 additional personnel for limited war and Polaris capabilities and a 2,000 net increase for the B-52 ground alert program after allowing for slight offsetting reductions resulting from the B-47 accelerated phase-down and the elimination of Snark missile units.

Budget Recommendation

Approve no change in total military personnel strength or funding in 1962, on the grounds that the proposed increases (to which there is no objection) can be accommodated by redistribution within the existing total. Specific areas in which offsetting reductions well in excess of the proposed increases appear possible have been brought to the attention of the Department of Defense.

Defense Recommendation

Defense must have the certain capability of providing the military strength needed for these identified purposes without the conditional necessity of making offsetting reductions elsewhere at this time. The military services advise they cannot absorb these requirements without a time consuming review of all requirements. Such a review has been ordered but cannot be relied upon to produce the required spaces in time to meet these requirements. These requested spaces and funds will be released by the Secretary of Defense only upon showings by the Services that they cannot otherwise provide for them within presently authorized strengths.

5. Advent—Communications Satellite Project

Defense Proposal

The Department of Defense proposes to augment the FY 1961 funding for Advent by a transfer of $13.2 million from the Emergency Fund and to add $22.7 million to the $57.0 million presently in the FY 1962 budget, in order to maintain the research and development effort at a level to insure that highly reliable satellite equipments are available to meet present schedules.

Budget Recommendation

Make no specific recommendations to Congress at this time for additional funding in the controversial communications satellite field in the absence of a thorough review of both Defense and NASA projects in this field on which an administration position can be based. Use 1962 Emergency Fund for any increased funding requirements for Advent that may be required.

Defense Recommendation

The amount of $57.0 million presently in the FY 1962 budget is insufficient to maintain an adequate research and development schedule at a level of effort required to achieve a highly reliable satellite. The requirement is now known and thus would not be an appropriate need to be met from the FY 1962 Emergency Fund. The need for reliable full time military communications is considered to be compelling to the extent that any reassessment of national policy would recognize the need to continue Advent.

6. B-70

Defense Proposal

The Department of Defense proposes to proceed at a reduced rate of $250 million in FY 1962 with a development program which will include 6 prototype aircraft and prototypes of certain sub-systems to provide for the orderly demonstration of Mach 3 flight with an airframe potentially useful as a bomber. The intention is to reserve an option later to develop a weapon system which could provide a first operational wing about 1970.

Budget Recommendation

Consider cancellation of entire program at this time in view of doubtful need for an aircraft with the B-70 characteristics in addition to expected missile capabilities during the period the B-70 would become available and in view of the extremely high cost of the B-70 in relation to the limited second strike capabilities that would be provided by such a vulnerable ground based system. If a new strategic bomber beyond the B-52 and B-58 is needed, consideration should be given to a less costly concept better adapted to an airborne alert.

Defense Recommendation

Since evidence is not conclusive it is not timely to decide either (a) to proceed at this time with an all-out weapon system development program, or (b) that there is to be no further step taken in manned strategic bombers beyond the B-52 by terminating the B-70 program. Even though there will be primary dependence on ballistic missiles for the strategic mission in the future, there remains certain uncertainties with respect to missiles including the question of reliability. There are certain advantages inherent in a controlled force of manned bombers. Until full confidence can be achieved in the missile force and until there is conclusive evidence of the feasibility or lack of feasibility, based on technical, military, economic and timing factors, of a Mach 3 bomber, it is believed to be essential to explore this phase of flight to preserve the option to advance towards a weapon system at the earliest time an assessment of the relative risks involved should favor such decision.

[Here follows a series of financial recapitulations.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 3/61. Secret.

1 Document 17.

2 Secret.

* Deleted based on continuation of deficiency authority.

** Excludes proposed net increase in FY 1962 Military Personnel Funds.

3 Secret.

21. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen) 21. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Special Counsel (Sorensen)Source

Washington, March 13, 1961.

SUBJECT

Defense Message1

1. I think the President is right in thinking that the question of the size of the military budget is important, but wrong in thinking that it is all-important. The net increases in new obligational authority will be less than what many news reports have been hinting: and the state of the country, the state of the world, and the state of the Congressional mind persuade me that there will not be great trouble on this point. The need for accelerating our second generation deterrent force and the need for increased capabilities in the area of limited war take up nearly all of this new money, and I just don't think there is going to be any real opposition to either course of action. Accordingly, I believe that the main thrust of the budget message should be directed not at justification of these relatively modest quantitative changes, but at the discussion of more important underlying questions of military posture which are implied by these first changes.

2. Most of the specific changes that are being made in the Eisenhower budget justify themselves, on common sense grounds, one at a time. It is an interesting tactical question in each case whether the argument should be spelled out in detail. My own hunch is that it may be better to reserve fire on the more controversial items simply because there are so very many skilled propagandists lurking in the wings of the Pentagon, industry and the Hill. To give them exposed targets at this stage may be dangerous.

3. Yet most of the changes can also be defended by more general arguments, of which the most important are the need for flexibility of all sorts, and the need for hard choices among hundreds of possible ways of spending billions of dollars. It seems to me that both of these propositions can be profitably developed at length. The need for flexibility is quite varied: we need to be able to make sensible choices in rapidly changing circumstances—this is the basic case for strengthened command and control; we need to be free to move rapidly to sharply different weapons systems—this is the case for investments in development and in long lead-time items; we need to have a much more varied set of capabilities—this is the case for guerrilla and anti-guerrilla efforts and for research and development in the field of conventional warfare. Each of these points can be spread around to a number of additional items in the budget changes.

4. The argument about hard choices is the President's own, and I see no need to gild the lily here. The initial submissions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the total figures of any one of half a dozen of the weapons systems which are cheerfully proposed, the present tendency of each service to think as if it were responsible for the whole of the national defense, and many other elements are evident here. One quite subtle point which may deserve some attention is that it is always important to calculate the effect of our own plans upon the plans of the enemy. This is where Nike-Zeus still seems to me to fall down badly, and it is also where many advocates of the resumption of testing get into trouble—all they can see is that tests will give us improved warheads; the consequences of the decision in other fields, including the military, are not weighed in.

5. So far I have been discussing relatively easy points. The really tough question about this message, I think, is how far we want to go in restating the basic military posture of the United States. This ties in, of course, with the missile gap question.

For argument, let me suggest that we do not want to discuss “the missile gap” and that we do want to restate a military policy which will be somewhat different from that currently enshrined in national security policy papers. The phrase “missile gap” is now a genuinely misleading one, and I think the President can safely say so. In earlier years it had the useful shorthand effect of calling attention to the need for more rapid and attentive concern with our basic military posture, but no one has ever supposed that a naked count of missiles was in and of itself a sufficient basis for national action. What we have to do, rather, is to be clear about our purposes and then energetic and alert in finding the means to carry them out. The President's language will have enormous effect within the government. There is a whole theological framework here of words like “prevail” and “general war” and so on which has led to a lot of war planning and even budgetary planning of a seriously distorted kind. What I am suggesting is that the President may find it easier to change all this by public language than by a complex renewal of the theological argument within the government. The problem is to find the fresh words, and the following notions are put forward for discussion and not for definite acceptance.

The nut of what the President wants, as I understand it, can be described in the following four requirements: a. That our military capability be such as to prevent any general atomic aggression. Our own strength should protect us against such an attack upon ourselves, and the strength which we share with our allies should prevent any such attack upon them.

b. That our ability to act effectively with conventional weapons in situations which do not involve general atomic attack should be substantially increased.

c. That we should maintain the necessary strength, in all arms, to take appropriate action, short of general strategic warfare, in the event of a major aggression that cannot be thrown back by conventional forces. (This is the hard one, but I think it cannot be swept under the rug; the suggested language is cool and unthreatening, as far as possible.)

d. That in the terrible event of a general atomic war, we retain the capability to act rationally to advance the national interest by exerting pressure and offering choices to the enemy. (This one need not be public at this stage.)

In addition to these general propositions, there are two limiting propositions, one affirmative and one negative, which I think are greatly needed in our national policy, and which can well be stated in public by the President. a. Negatively, we are not aiming to create forces whose objective is a preventive or preemptive war, or any other kind of massive first strike against another nation. This is not the policy of the U. S. Government.

b. Affirmatively, we intend to see to it that our military policy is fully consistent with our earnest commitment to seek effective international understandings in the field of limitation and control of armaments. (In a number of ways the current budget does in fact observe this limitation, and they can be spelled out if the connections are not too subtle and sophisticated.)

If the President says these things, or anything like them, you will in fact be rewriting basic military policy which came on to him from the Eisenhower Administration. This is in my view a desirable result, but clearly it implies a decision which he should make only after considering the alternatives. What I like about this notion is that if the President says something of this sort, he will, I think, get strong public support and we can then proceed quite painlessly to the revision of the appropriate policy documents. If we do it the other way around, by revising the policy documents first, we will get one of those terrible guerrilla wars in which calculated leaks about our desire for appeasement mess up the picture before we have a chance to paint it our own way.

Finally, let me apologize for being so slow in producing this set of comments, and let me also ask if I may have a look at the draft message. Whatever the President says will become a part of our national security policy, and while the above suggestions may not be useful or relevant, I would like to get maximum mileage from whatever you do write; sometimes a very small change in wording, because of the history of internal debate, can be very helpful. For the same reasons—and especially if the message goes into major questions of posture and policy, Bob McNamara will be as eager to comment as I am.2

McG.B.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 3/61. Secret.

1 Not found. Reference is presumably to a draft of the President's special message to Congress on the defense budget, dated March 28. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 229-240.

2 In a March 14 memorandum to Bundy, Sorensen stated that he believed the points in Bundy's memorandum might be grouped around two large themes: 1) that the military policy of the administration was to provide the United States with capacity to deter all forms of armed aggression, at any level of force required by the national interest; and 2) the relation of this policy to the maintenance of peace and the negotiation of arms control. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 3/61)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

22. Editorial Note 22. Editorial Note

On April 6, 1961, the Director of Central Intelligence circulated NIE 11-61, “Probable Intelligence Warning of Soviet Attack on the US.” The estimate concluded: “Considering all the factors affecting the problem of warning, we believe that in most circumstances of an actual Soviet decision to attack at present or in the near future, intelligence could give warning of increased Soviet readiness, and could infer a possible intent to attack, perhaps a few days or more before the attack. Warnings of a probable Soviet intent are likely to be given, if at all, only a few hours before attack.”

In the next few years, there was little prospect for major improvement in the “firmness or explicitness” of warning, because improvements in intelligence technique would be offset by a decline in the number and accessibility of military indicators as missiles gained in importance and general Soviet readiness rose. Nonetheless, the “possibility of warning from physical preparations” would not disappear. “Indeed, the limited time between initial attack and potential retaliation would virtually force the Soviets to undertake various preparations, including those for defense and recuperation, prior to launching an attack.” In future, intelligence would also have “to place additional reliance for warning on the more ambiguous indicators not directly related to physical preparations.” In some cases, “the first preliminary warning of possible Soviet attack might arise from a judgment that the USSR was about to take a political initiative involving great risk of war with the US, or that a crisis was developing in such a way as to prompt the USSR to prepare for war.” (Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry) The full text of NIE 11-61 is in the Supplement.

23. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 23. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, April 7, 1961.

Problem:

To determine the bearing of certain foreign policy considerations on the U.S. defense posture.

Discussion:

On 4 February 1961 the Secretary of State sent you a memorandum (Tab A)1 concerning foreign policy considerations bearing on DOD budgetary planning with the statement that it “should be looked upon as preliminary to the long range study of the U.S. military posture on which you and we are shortly to be engaged”.

By a memorandum dated 20 February 1961 (Tab B)2 you requested the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Secretary of State's memorandum. The JCS response, dated 11 March 1961 (Tab C),3 expresses views which appear to conflict with those of the Department of State on the following points: (1) General War Deterrent. The JCS agree on the deterrent role of nuclear weapons but fear that State fails to recognize the deterrent value of conventional forces as well as their importance should deterrence fail.

The JCS also point out that nuclear retaliatory forces form a part of total force requirements. The degree of improvement which can be attained in nuclear retaliatory forces is thus limited by the total force requirements balanced against available resources. The JCS emphasize the need for responsiveness and diversification in nuclear retaliatory forces in addition to the qualities of effectiveness, invulnerability, and reliability specified by State.

(2) Limited Operations. The JCS are in general agreement with the desirability of “raising the threshold” before a decision has to be made on the use of nuclear weapons. They point out, however, that the level of this threshold is actually determined not by doctrine, which has long required that no more force than necessary be employed, but by existing conventional capabilities. The ceiling on these capabilities, and thus the height of the “threshold”, continues to be set by budgetary and manpower limitations. The JCS clearly envisage the selective use of nuclear weapons in limited operations. State, however, appears to be moving toward the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons in any limited war situation.

(3) NATO. The most recently expressed views of the Joint Chiefs on U.S. policy towards NATO appear to supersede and to eliminate a major difference expressed in the attached memorandum.

No further discussion of this earlier conflict, therefore, seems necessary.

The resolution of the remaining differences through discussion with the Department of State should be preceded by careful development of a Department of Defense position on these points. As a first step in this direction, the JCS should be asked to supplement their 11 March memorandum through direct discussion of their views with you. A memorandum to the JCS requesting such discussion has been prepared for your signature (Tab D).4

Recommendation:

That you sign the attached memorandum (Tab D).

Paul H. Nitze

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files:FRC 65 A 3464, 381 4 Feb 61. Top Secret. Attached to an April 11 memorandum from Gilpatric to the JCS.

1 Document 10.

2 Not found.

3 Memorandum from the JCS to McNamara, JCSM-153-61, not printed.

4 Reference is to the April 11 memorandum cited in the source note above, as signed by Gilpatric. No record of the proposed discussion has been found.

24. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State Rusk 24. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State Rusk1

Washington, April 15, 1961.

Dear Dean:

The enclosed memorandum reflects the current views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the use of nuclear weapons in limited war. I think you will find them of interest.

While the references by the Joint Chiefs of Staff to basic national security policy (NSC 5906/1)2 are historically accurate important revisions in the military portion of this document are now being prepared within the Department of Defense. While it is too early for us to indicate in specific terms what policy we will recommend on the use of nuclear weapons in limited war, the trend of our thinking has been made evident in the recommendations we have made on revisions to the 1962 budget and in the accompanying explanatory statement.3 It is very much in accordance with the views you expressed in your February 4th memorandum on defense posture.4

It is our conviction that greater emphasis be placed on the use of non-nuclear weapons in the defense of third areas. However, as you know, we believe that the United States must retain the ability to use nuclear weapons tactically in local wars under carefully controlled conditions.

When our review of basic policy is further along I would like to discuss our findings with you. I expect that this will be possible within the next few weeks.

Sincerely,

Roswell Gilpatric

Enclosure4
Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, March 17, 1961

JCSM-170-61

SUBJECT

Assumptions Regarding the Use of Nuclear Weapons in Limited War (U)

1. In recent discussions relating to the review of defense posture currently underway, two questions have been frequently asked concerning: a. The assumptions regarding the use or non-use of nuclear weapons in limited wars that are currently used in the formulation of force levels and equipment levels.

b. The validity of those assumptions in the future.

2. With respect to subparagraph 1 a above: a. Force and equipment levels are based on Basic National Security Policy (NCS 5906/1), which provides in substance that: (1) Main, but not sole, reliance will be placed on nuclear weapons and that these weapons will be used in conjunction with other weapons when required to meet the nation's war objectives.

(2) The nuclear stockpile should include a variety of weapons to provide flexible and selective capabilities for general or limited war.

(3) In the accomplishment of national objectives in certain limited war situations, nuclear weapons may not be necessary or appropriate. However, conflicts involving sizeable forces of the United States and the USSR should not be construed as limited war.

(4) In carrying out the central aim of deterring general war, the United States must develop and maintain as a part of its military forces, its effective nuclear retaliatory power.

(5) In dealing with limited aggression, the United States must be prepared to defeat such aggression in a manner and on a scale best calculated to prevent hostilities from broadening into general war.

b. These provisions have combined to give the highest priority to the development of forces primarily designed for general war. Requirements for limited war forces and equipment types are contained within the larger requirements for general war. Additional equipment levels for limited war are also provided for in military planning. However, budgetary and manpower limitations have necessitated lesser priorities for equipping and manning of forces to provide non-nuclear capabilities.

3. In substance, our national strategy requires that limited war operations be conducted with whatever weapons and forces are required by the military and political exigencies involved in each particular situation and by the national objectives to be attained. In terms of nuclear or non-nuclear weapons, the requirements of each of these contingencies are impossible to determine with precision in advance. They can be determined only in the light of the particular military and political context in which each has developed. Situations may occur in which authorization for use of nuclear weapons will be delayed, and there may be other contingencies which do not warrant the use of nuclear weapons. An appropriate mix of nuclear and non-nuclear capabilities for those of our forces which might be involved will provide the United States with greater political and diplomatic flexibility as well as greater battlefield flexibility and capability for survival than if only one of these capabilities is developed to the exclusion or neglect of the other. Forces and delivery vehicles which might be used in limited war should continue to have the capability of delivering either nuclear or conventional weapons.

4. With respect to subparagraph 1 b above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that while expected changes in the world situation during the next 10 years certainly justify continuing review of national strategy, there is nothing foreseen that will justify abrogation of the principle that US forces must maintain a dual nuclear and non-nuclear capability. It can be reasonably anticipated that the trend in the future will be toward expansion rather than contraction of the weaponry available for these actions, as innovations in agents, weapon systems and techniques develop. For example, a US capability to utilize advanced nonlethal incapacitating agents in a limited conflict in the future might well offer substantial military advantages within the limitations imposed by delicate political considerations.

5. It is the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that in planning for limited war, a flexible capability for diverse levels of operations, employing the appropriate weapons, will continue to be of paramount importance.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L. L. Lemnitzer5
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5611/4-1561. Top Secret.

2 See footnote 3, Document 15.

3 See Document 20.

4 Enclosure to Document 10.

4 Top Secret.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Lemnitzer signed the original.

25. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 25. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, April 18, 1961

CM-190-61

SUBJECT

“Doctrine” on Thermonuclear Attack

1. By JCSM-252-61, attached hereto, the Joint Chiefs of Staff forward to you their divergent views on Project #2 of Assignment of Projects within the Department of Defense, dated March 8, 1961,1 in which you asked that the Joint Chiefs of Staff present a “doctrine” which if accepted would permit controlled response and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear attack.

2. You will note, from the attached memorandum, that the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I among them, are in agreement that we do not now have the requisite capabilities for carrying out a doctrine of controlled responses and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear attack. We also agree that attempts at the present time to implement such a doctrine, or to declare such an intent, would be premature and could gravely weaken our deterrent posture.

3. The basic split in this report relates to the extent to which the Joint Chiefs of Staff should make a judgment now that implementing a doctrine of controlled response and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear war is a desirable and feasible course of action in the future.

4. My personal judgment is that we do not now have adequate defenses, nor are our nuclear retaliatory forces sufficiently invulnerable, to permit us to risk withholding a substantial part of our effort, once a major thermonuclear attack has been initiated. Furthermore, the advantages to be achieved by limiting our responses, under such conditions, could only be realized by the enforcement upon the Soviets of a degree of tacit “cooperation” which does not now appear realistic. Nevertheless, I believe that further specification of such a doctrine, insofar as it applies to conditions of less than large-scale deliberate attack, would be a desirable undertaking. It would submit the complex problems of controlled responses, negotiating pauses, and their interrelationship with enemy reactions to rigorous analysis. However, except for these lower levels of attack, I believe that an attempt to spell out specific controlled response options would be undesirable until we have more knowledge of the technological possibility of creating the essential building blocks on which safe implementation of the doctrine could be based.

5. It is my judgment, therefore, that it is not now possible to set forth a more definitive doctrine, which if accepted in the proximate future would permit, with safety, controlled response and negotiating pauses covering the full range of the conceivable thermonuclear threat. Nevertheless, I believe the matter to be of such importance that it can, with profit, be examined further, with regard to its application under conditions of less than large-scale deliberate attack and particularly with respect to the conditions and the time-frame under which such a doctrine might realistically be made increasingly applicable over a wider range. Accordingly, I have directed the Joint Strategic Survey Council, as a matter of priority, to examine the problem further from this point of view and to submit their findings to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

6. I recommend, therefore, that the answer to Project 2 provided herewith be considered as a first reply, to be followed by further study by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

L. L. Lemnitzer2

Attachment3
Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, April 18, 1961.

JCSM-252-61

SUBJECT

“Doctrine” on Thermonuclear Attack (U)

1. Reference is made to Item 2 of your memorandum, dated 8 March 1961, requesting preparation of a “doctrine” which, if accepted, would permit controlled response and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear attack.

2. Appendix A hereto is a study which considers the problem of a “doctrine” as it would relate to the current situation; i.e., 1 April 1961, and to a future situation; i.e., mid-1960's. A possible doctrine is contained in paragraphs 17 through 25 of Appendix A.4

3. United States and Allied response to a thermonuclear war emergency in the current time period is implemented through the Single Integrated Operational Plan and other US and Allied operational war plans. These implementing plans are in consonance with current policies and doctrines and are based upon guidance contained in the National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy,5 the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan,6 and other directives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. These provide certain controls relating to objectives and constraints and allow some flexibility in timing and the selection of the major geographical areas against which the response is to be directed. They do not, however, address directly the type and degree of controlled response which are postulated in recent studies and analyses conducted within and outside of the Department of Defense.

4. In the context of your request referred to in paragraph 1, the attached doctrine, if accepted, would not permit controlled response and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear attack in the current time period. The reasons for this judgment are discussed in paragraphs 9-12 of Appendix A. As further discussed in paragraphs 16 and 23 a of Appendix A, attempts to implement a strategy including such options, or declarations of such intent, would at the present time be premature and could gravely weaken the current deterrent posture.

5. In light of the relative capabilities, limitations and objectives of the United States and its Allies and of the USSR and its satellites, there is no significant likelihood of thermonuclear attack against the former which would be so executed that it would be to the advantage of the United States and/or its Allies in the current period to respond under a degree of control beyond that provided in current policy, doctrines and strategic plans.

7 6. It is possible, although not certain, that the future relative power positions of the United States and the USSR may result in feasible options for controlled attack and response, which could lead to opportunities for negotiating pauses and war termination under conditions advantageous to the United States and its Allies. Accordingly, US and Allied planning for the mid-1960's and beyond should take such possibilities into consideration.

7 7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff will consider the doctrine in paragraphs 17-25 of Appendix A hereto and the range of foreseeable possibilities attendant thereto in preparation of joint policies and plans for the mid-1960's and subsequent time period, and will reflect, as appropriate, in such plans and policies, provision for controlled response and negotiating pauses in the event of thermonuclear attack upon the United States and/or its Allies.

8. Attached as Appendix B8 is an amplifying statement by the Chief of Staff, US Army, the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps, and, as Appendix C, the views of the Chief of Staff, US Air Force.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:L. L. Lemnitzer9
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3020 (3 Apr 61) Sec 2. Top Secret.

1 This memorandum was addressed to the JCS and other recipients within the Department of Defense, and contained 96 questions (informally known as “the 96 trombones”) on all aspects of the national defense. (Ibid.,JCS 2101/413, JMF 5000 (8 Mar 61) Sec. 1)

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Lemnitzer signed the original.

3 Top Secret.

4 Not printed. This tentative doctrine emphasized that the various elements of a controlled reponse strategy should be phased in only as the United States attained capability to implement them.

5 Concerning the National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy, see footnote 2 to the memorandum of conference with President Eisenhower held August 11, 1960, in Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. III, Document 113.

6 The Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP), revised annually, was the shortest-range of the JCS group of comprehensive plans. Its major purpose was to translate national defense policy into military tasks consonant with actual capabilities.

7 For views of the Chief of Staff, US Air Force, see statement following paragraph 7 of Appendix C. [Footnote in the source text. Appendix C is not printed. The view there expressed was that U.S. war plans should reflect, as controlled response capabilities became feasible, “provision for increased latitude in options for controlled response to thermonuclear war emergency, preserving military advantage to the United States and its Allies as the basis for negotiating pauses and war termination under conditions advantageous to the United States and its Allies.”]

7 For views of the Chief of Staff, US Air Force, see statement following paragraph 7 of Appendix C. [Footnote in the source text. Appendix C is not printed. The view there expressed was that U.S. war plans should reflect, as controlled response capabilities became feasible, “provision for increased latitude in options for controlled response to thermonuclear war emergency, preserving military advantage to the United States and its Allies as the basis for negotiating pauses and war termination under conditions advantageous to the United States and its Allies.”]

8 Not printed. Appendix B recommended “the desirability of moving as rapidly as possible towards a posture which will permit increased flexibility of response” and stated that a doctrine that would rely on counterforce alone would negate controlled response because “any doctrine which specifies in advance the nature of the response would invalidate the entire concept of controlled, deliberate application of force, the achievement of which is the basic objective of the doctrine itself.”

9 Printed from a copy that indicates Lemnitzer signed the original.

26. Record of Actions Taken at the 478th Meeting of the National Security Council 26. Record of Actions Taken at the 478th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, April 22, 1961.

[Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and Action No. 2406, “U.S. Policy Toward Cuba.”]

2407. Strengthening the Basic U.S. Posture Toward the Communist World

a. Discussed possible changes in the level of effort of the United States in the fields of military activity, foreign policy, civil defense, and para-military effort. The President announced his prospective appointment of General Maxwell Taylor to advise him with respect to ways and means of improving U.S. efforts in para-military, guerrilla and counter-guerrilla activities, in the light of recent experiences. It was agreed that the Department of Defense would review its military budget, and that the study of the civil defense posture of the United States should be expedited by the Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, in consultation with the Department of Defense and the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization.

b. Noted the President's request to the Department of Defense for a prompt report to him on military planning for a possible crisis over Berlin.

c. Discussed the possibility of a large Contingency Freedom Fund to be administered under the direct supervision of the President. The President requested a preliminary report on the possible uses of such a fund for consideration at the next meeting of the NSC, and asked that this report be prepared by the Department of State in consultation with the Departments of the Treasury and Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency.1

[Here follow Actions No. 2408, “The Geneva Test Ban Negotiations,” and No. 2409, “Review of U.S. Space Program.”]

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council. Top Secret. The actions were approved by the President on April 24.

1 Typed marginal notes indicate that action memoranda were sent to the Department of Defense and OCDM (based on Action No. 2407-a), Defense (Action No. 2407-b), and State, Treasury, Defense, and CIA (Action No. 2407-c). These memoranda have not been further identified.

27. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 27. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, May 10, 1961.

SUBJ

Reappraisal of Capabilities of Conventional Forces

You have asked that we reexamine the capabilities of our conventional forces. We have done so and our conclusions are summarized in this report. The study,1 which was directed by Mr. John Connally and the Joint Staff, included: a. An evaluation of the present capabilities of U.S. conventional forces, including our Reserve forces. (See Section 1)2

b. An evaluation of suggestions from the Army, Navy and Air Force for possible increases in personnel and matériel. (See Section 2)

c. An analysis of suggestions from Congressional leaders for personnel and materiel increases. (See Section 3)

d. A consideration of new uses of our existing forces. (See Section 4)

The Services proposed the following increases in conventional forces:

Men FY'62 Cost (millions)

Army 62,960 $ 986.5

Navy 18,500 1,496.0

Marine Corps 12,000 42.6

Air Force 11,500 116.5

Total 104,960 $2,641.6

After a thorough review of the Services’ proposals, Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Connally and I have concluded that the 2.5 million men in our Armed Services, equipped with 817 ships and over 30,000 aircraft, backed by a highly trained Reserve force of 1.8 million men, an FY'62 Budget for New Obligational Authority of $43.794 billion (including the Budget increase of $2,274 billion which you proposed to the Congress), and the forces of our NATO, SEATO, CENTO, and other allies, represent a military force which is adequate for our purpose.

We believe that, with the exceptions noted below, a further increase in the FY'62 Defense Department Budget is not the answer to the problems which confront us.

The United States and her allies have developed strong military forces. These have been successful in deterring the Sino-Soviet Bloc from overt attack, but they have not effectively stopped the indirect aggression carried on by the Communists in many parts of the world. Militarily, we are neither organized nor oriented for the task of meeting and counteracting this type of Soviet strategy. A substantial augmentation of our forces at this time would provide us with no appreciable assurance that we could better combat the indirect attacks which we face today.

It is apparent that new approaches to organizing and utilizing our military power must be developed. We propose to place increased emphasis on this subject during the coming year. Re-programming of funds within the existing Budget should provide adequate financial support for whatever additional para-military activities appear necessary.

There are only three major additions to the FY'62 Budget which we wish to recommend at this time.

1. An increase of $77 million to permit the start of development work on certain high-thrust boosters for military space projects. This recommendation was discussed in detail in a paper submitted to the Space Council on May 8 by NASA and the Defense Department.3

2. An increase of at least $200 million for the Military Assistance Program. The specific amount to be requested will be determined following completion of the study now being directed by Mr. Burton Marshall. Following completion of Mr. Marshall's study, it is possible that we may wish to request that part or all of the funds be provided in the form of a general contingency reserve for the Defense Department.

3. An increase of $100 million for the procurement of long-lead equipment necessary to support a proposed reorganization of the combat forces of the Army (See Section 5).4 The structure of the present Army divisions was tailored to the use of atomic weapons. We believe that without reducing the nuclear power of the Army division, reorganization of the divisional structure will make possible: a. Increased non-nuclear firepower—providing to decision-makers a wider range of alternatives and an improved capability to apply measured force without threatening nuclear devastation.

b. Internal flexibility within and between divisions and greater compatibility with forces of major Allies—facilitating tailoring of forces for particular tasks and the coordinated employment of U.S. and Allied forces.

c. Improved tactical mobility (ground and air)—tailored to the operational environment.

d. Mechanized divisions in Europe—providing protected mobility and the means to counter massive Communist mechanized forces.

e. Separate airborne brigades in Europe and the Pacific—providing flexible, mobile forces tailored for immediate response to varying situations without degrading other theater capabilities.

f. Improved capabilities for command and control and for training commanders and units.

Re-equipping of the present active and reserve divisions in accordance with the proposed new organizational structure may cost several hundred million dollars. The divisional reorganization program should start as rapidly as feasible. The Army estimates the program can begin in the latter part of FY'62 and the proposed Budget supplement will support this time schedule.5

Robert S. McNamara6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD Study on Conventional Forces 1961. Secret.

1 This 73-page study is attached but not printed.

2 According to Section 1, this evaluation was done under the assumptions that only one large conventional commitment of forces at any one time was unlikely and that participation of more than 250,000-300,000 troops would reach the nuclear threshold and thereby “stem” the requirement for additional combat forces. Given these assumptions, the evaluation found that the United States had “substantial” capacity for waging non-nuclear war and that capacity for strategic mobility was satisfactory “except during the first 10-30 days of a large-scale, rapidly-developing limited war.”

3 Not found.

4 This change became known as ROAD (Reorganization Objective, Army Division), a form of organization more flexible than the existing “pentomic” divisions, each composed of five battle groups.

5 In a May 17 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Clifton argued that the assumptions outlined in footnote 3 above were outdated and recommended that the President approve one additional army division. In a May 20 memorandum, he stated that he had secured General Decker's endorsement of his proposed creation of an additional division with “no additional logistic support.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Staff Memoranda, Clifton, 3/61-6/62, and Departments and Agencies Series, Army 5/61-7/61, respectively) On May 25, however, the President instead asked Congress to fund the Marine proposal for an increase of 12,000 men to a total of 190,000. (Public Papers of the President of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 396-406)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

28. Memorandum of Conversation 28. Memorandum of ConversationSource

Washington, May 25, 1961.

MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION WITH MR. HENRY ROWEN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS

We talked about the draft paper on “Military and Related Aspects of Basic National Security Policy.”1 Rowen pointed out that the function of the paper was in his mind two-fold: The first and most important function was internal in the Defense Department, and this was to change the whole operational doctrine, and the thinking behind it, of the Military Establishment from the JCS through the operational commands. The present concept is based on “spasm war.” This was reflected in all the planning documents such as SIOP and JSCAP. In Rowen's view (and the view of Dean Ellsberg,2 whose intellectual child this part of the report is), this is a ridiculous and unworkable notion. It is therefore extremely important to move from the “spasm” notion to the notion of controlled response over a period of time. Our general plan should be flexible and include a large variety of controlled responses.

The second purpose of the document was to make the same point clear at the level of the Secretary of Defense and the President. In addition, it was also directed at providing some general rationale for this view. The rationale is more important for the second purpose than for the first. It was my impression that Rowen was in effect saying that the Department of Defense could not itself change the views of the Services, a point which he illustrated with a number of anecdotes, and that therefore the NSC and the White House were needed to effect this change.

He appeared to accept my comment that the document in its present form seemed rather without a clear political basis. It was his view that our comment could most usefully be directed toward the political basis on which the report should rest and its usefulness for White House purposes rather than for internal educational purposes.

Carl Kaysen3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Carl Kaysen Series, BNSP 1/61-5/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Kaysen on May 27.

1 Apparent reference to the draft cited in footnote 2, Document 30.

2 Apparent reference to Daniel Ellsberg of the Rand Corporation, who served as a consultant in the Office of the Secretary of Defense.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

29. National Intelligence Estimate 29. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, June 7, 1961.

NIE 11-8-61, Annex C

THE SOVIET ICBM PROGRAM—EVIDENCE AND ANALYSIS

1. During the course of the past year or more, US intelligence has acquired a considerable body of additional information pertaining to Soviet programs for ICBMs and other ballistic missiles. This information, derived from a wide variety of intelligence sources, has provided new insights into the general characteristics and performance of the Soviet ICBM, the facilities required for its deployment as a weapon system, and the timing of some of the Soviet activities critical to the progress of this weapon system through research and development into the deployment phase of the program.

2. A major purpose of this Annex is to set forth the direct evidence bearing on Soviet ICBM development and deployment, together with the alternative interpretations which we believe can reasonably be assigned to various aspects of this evidence. From this we seek to arrive at a general estimate of the ICBM force likely to exist in the USSR at present and to set forth clearly the uncertainties attached to any such estimate. The problem is more difficult than that of estimating current Soviet strength in many other forms of military power. Estimates of current bomber strengths, for example, are based primarily on production and order-of-battle information of good quantity and quality, which narrows the area of uncertainty. Indirect evidence and insights drawn from Soviet military thinking and weapon systems programming practices play a much larger role in estimates of current Soviet missile strength.

3. Future estimates of many Soviet weapon programs are projected from a reasonably firm current base; it is far more difficult to establish such a base for Soviet ballistic missile programs. Moreover, the trends are at best only dimly seen. The second major purpose of this Annex, therefore, is to set forth the methodology for making an estimate of the likely future range of Soviet ICBM capabilities, using the evidence as well as insights derived from general considerations.

4. There are several reasons why considerable uncertainty should exist in present US estimates of the Soviet ICBM program, and why there should be a number of elements in the evidence which permit differing judgments. Large ballistic missile systems are new to both the US and the USSR, and it is natural that there should be uncertainty as to the precise problems and lead-times involved in quantity deployment. Ballistic missile systems require the development of new operational concepts, which are not necessarily the same in the two countries; this limits the direct applicability of analogies from US experience. Moreover, these weapon systems are being developed and deployed in a period of vastly accelerated technological change.

5. Another factor in the estimative program, worthy of special attention, is the effect of Soviet security measures. The USSR has always regarded secrecy as a major military asset in itself, and there is evidence that ballistic missile programs have been cloaked with a very high degree of security. The secrecy goes considerably beyond the dispersal and concealment of launching sites, a practice which the Soviet leaders have stated is a part of their missile deployment concept. Even routine aspects of the missile and space programs have been assiduously concealed—place names like Kapustin Yar and Tyuratam continue to be withheld, despite the common use of these place names in the Western press. Khrushchev once publicly apologized for withholding the names of Soviet missile and space experts who received awards, allegedly because such recognition would make them the targets of Western provocateurs. There is much evidence that the Soviets attempt to prevent the observation of missile equipment in transit, by moving it at night, harassing or rerouting Western observers, and other means. Finally, we have recently discovered a special masking address system, apparently designed to prevent the disclosure in personal telegraphic communications of the places where missile personnel are stationed.

Background on the ICBM System

6. In NIE 11-5-611 we summarized the general characteristics of the Soviet ICBM system and reviewed the pattern of test range activities at Tyuratam, concentrating on the period up until about 1 January 1960, the approximate time when the majority of the intelligence community estimates that the Soviets achieved an initial operational capability (IOC) with an ICBM system of about 5,000 n.m. maximum range.2 In that estimate, we reached full agreement, based on a very extensive data, as to the following basic characteristics of the Soviet ICBM system which would significantly affect its production and deployment: a. The missile itself is of relatively heavy construction and is extremely large. Depending upon its exact configuration, it can best be described either as twice as bulky as a US Atlas or half as large as a US Saturn.

b. It employs radio-inertial guidance, requiring ground guidance equipment at the launch area.

c. It uses nonstorable liquid propellants, requiring extensive transfer facilities at launch sites and storage capacity for the equivalent of at least five large rail tank cars of propellants for each missile.

d. It is probably transportable over long distances only by rail, although very short-haul transport over well surfaced, wide radius roads may be feasible.

e. A certain amount of missile assembly and checkout must be accomplished at permanent on-site facilities, which must also include heavy equipment for handling and erecting the missile.

f. The most suitable deployment areas for the very heavy nosecone ICBMs which had been test fired prior to about 1 January 1960 would be in northwestern USSR or the Soviet Far East, the only areas from which 5,000 n.m. missiles could achieve extensive coverage of the US.

7. From the foregoing, it is clear that the present Soviet ICBM system is heavily dependent on the Soviet rail network, and that launch sites would necessarily be served by rail spurs. The system is extremely bulky and must be fairly cumbersome to handle. It does not readily lend itself to deployment in hardened sites. The most suitable ICBM deployment site would be a large, fixed facility with considerable ground support equipment.

[Here follows discussion of Soviet missile tests, test sites, and missile deployment.]

Interpretation of Deployment Evidence

40. A review of other major Soviet military construction and deployment programs (e.g., airfield construction and surface-to-air missile deployment), shows that there is often a time lag of a year and sometimes as much as two years between the start of a program and our acquisition of sufficient information to determine its scale and pace. Some compensation for this time lag is provided by the probability that work must begin at Soviet ICBM sites some 18 months to two years before they become an operational threat.

41. Considering the available evidence, our total collection capabilities, and the time lags to be expected, a minimum of two to four ICBM sites were probably under construction in 1957-1959 in areas suitable to deployment of 5,000 n.m. missiles (see paragraphs 31-32). We believe that such sites are operational at the present time.3 In addition, 7,000 n.m. missiles can reach targets in the US from the Tyuratam rangehead, and it must be recognized that in the event of war the USSR could employ the launchers there operationally. With respect to the other suspected locations in areas suitable to deployment of 7,000 n.m. missiles, some or all of these locations may not be ICBM sites; on the other hand, there may be such sites at locations which are unsuspected at present. There has been insufficient time to establish a pattern, the areas are poorly covered, and the security likely to be imposed by the Soviets is stringent.

42. From the foregoing examination of the direct evidence, it is possible to derive a minimum number of operational ICBM complexes which can be supported on reasonably good evidence. In addition, the results of our search for operational deployment sites, taken together with the other elements of direct evidence, contribute to sense of the current tempo of the Soviet program. The relatively small number of suspected areas and the identification of only a few masking addresses which might be associated with ICBM deployment are consistent with the deliberate pace of activities at the test range. Further, the USSR has a greater capacity to produce and deploy ICBMs than we believe it has exercised. In sum, while the direct evidence remains insufficient to establish with certainty the present Soviet ICBM strength, it leads us to believe that the deployment program thus far has proceeded at a deliberate rather than an extremely urgent pace.

Soviet Programming Decisions

43. The year 1959 was probably a time of major Soviet decisions on military policy. In several private conversations with Western officials in the summer and fall of 1959, Khrushchev referred to studies to determine what it would cost the USSR to build ballistic missile forces sufficient to destroy the “vital centers” of the US and Europe.4 His references were ambiguous and are not subject to precise numerical definition—they indicate, however, that Khrushchev had recently been engaged in the planning of production and deployment programs. This was almost certainly related to the planning for major reorganization of the Soviet military establishment, announced in January 1960. Planning considerations in 1959 would have included the expectation of deployment with a 7,000 n.m. missile and a simplified deployment concept, for which Tyuratam launch area “C” may have been the prototype.

44. The operational deployment program which we believe is now under way will probably continue over the next two or three years. The scale and pace of this program will probably be determined largely by: (a) the view of the Soviet leaders regarding the ICBM force they require in this time period; (b) factors of efficiency in the scheduling and expenditure of resources on the present weapon system in relation to other military and economic programs; and (c) the Soviet judgment of likely trends in their own and Western offensive and defensive weapon systems. Given the rapidity of technological change and the heavy emphasis on research and development in both the missile and antimissile fields in the USSR, it is likely that Soviet ICBM deployment programming beyond the 1963-1964 period is highly tentative.

Pertinent Soviet Statements

45. In persuading their own followers to accept the military reorganization announced in January 1960, and in debating the Chinese Communists on strategy and policy, the Soviet leaders have in the past year or so revealed much of their thinking about modern weapon systems. The most pertinent of these statements have been of three types. First, there have been Soviet statements that the leadership seeks to achieve and maintain a superiority over the West in weapon systems, but the Soviets appear to be stressing their claim to a qualitative superiority in advanced weapon systems as much as to a numerical advantage. Second, there have been a number of public and private references to the potential employment of ballistic missiles against what are termed “strategic” targets or “vital centers,” in contexts which seem to include both military bases and other elements of national strength such as industry, government, and population. Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders have spoken of the desirability of achieving sufficient missile strength to attack these objectives. Finally, in late 1960, Khrushchev privately told important Bloc officials that 300 missiles were sufficient to “destroy” the US, while 200 were sufficient for Europe.

46. The foregoing statements about targeting are quite general, but they parallel much previous Soviet commentary on the need to destroy an enemy's power base as well as its striking forces in war. Military, industrial, and population targets in Japan and the US were included in mock exercises by Soviet missile and bomber units in the Far East in 1959 and 1960. Khrushchev's reference to 300 missiles is open to various interpretations—the figure may refer to operational missile inventory or ready missiles in the USSR, or to missiles detonating in the vicinity of selected US targets. Nevertheless, it confirms our previous assumption that the Soviet leaders had explored the question of numerical requirements for ICBMs, and it indicates that Khrushchev himself speaks of 300 ICBMs as a formidable capability.5

Strategic Planning Factors

47. The Soviets appear to have decided, for the present and short-term future at least, to maintain a mixed long range attack force and not to rely exclusively on the ICBM for inter-continental striking power. Bomber forces capable of delivering large megatonnages are being maintained, and the USSR is acquiring submarine-launched missile capabilities. The present combined striking force has certain advantages in providing greater flexibility in Soviet tactics and in complicating Western defensive problems. In the light of these advantages, we consider it probable that the USSR will for the foreseeable future retain other intercontinental weapon systems to supplement their ICBM forces.

48. In planning the present and future size of their ICBM force, the Soviet leaders have to weigh the advantages of an ICBM weapon system as compared with bombers, missile launching submarines, and other advanced weapon systems. They have to consider the superior capabilities of the ICBM for launching a large-scale attack, in particular its suitability for surprise attack on US strategic bomber bases, fixed missile sites, communication centers, and other fixed installations related to the US retaliatory capability. They have to weigh these advantages against such considerations as the ability of the heavy bomber to deliver very heavy megatonnages against difficult targets and targets of uncertain location, and the ability of the missile submarine to survive an initial Western strike and deliver a subsequent retaliatory attack. Finally, they have to consider the entire target system which their planners have developed for attacking the US under the whole range of possible circumstances, and determine what role ought to be allocated to the ICBM.

49. As our own approach to an appreciation of the military capabilities that the Soviets might expect to achieve by building up their operational ICBM capabilities, we have computed the number of ICBM launchers the Soviets would theoretically require for a single salvo designed to inflict severe damage on various US targets. We have considered the following target systems: fixed bomber and missile bases of the US nuclear striking forces; command centers associated with control and communications for these and other elements of US military strength; air defense bases whose reduction by missile attack would improve the chances of successful Soviet bomber missions; urban areas containing a large proportion of US industry, population, and other resources of national strength. We believe these are the sorts of target systems the Soviets would have considered in evaluating their own ICBM requirements for potential use in a broad variety of circumstances and kinds of attack.

50. Theoretical computations of this sort are extremely sensitive to varying assumptions regarding the Soviet view of the precise targets worth attacking, the necessary or desirable amounts of damage to be inflicted, and the degree of assurance of inflicting such damage to be sought. We have had to use US criteria for these factors. Such computations are also sensitive to variations in the accuracy and reliability of the Soviet ICBM system, about which there is a margin of uncertainty in our estimates. In addition, computations involving an assumed attack against fast-reaction retaliatory systems (i.e., the bomber and missile bases) apply only to hypothetical circumstances in which the Soviet force has achieved near-perfect surprise and simultaneity of attack. The Soviets are capable of making more valid computations about their own weapon system than we, but they too must be cautious about assessing in advance the results of the first ICBM salvo in human history.

51. While computations of theoretical numerical requirements do not provide any firm basis for estimating Soviet ICBM force goals, they do provide a sense of proportion with respect to the suitability of current and improved Soviet ICBMs for attacking various target systems. In very general terms, we find that Soviet ICBMs are well suited to attacking cities and relatively unprotected military targets, including air and naval bases, soft and semihardened ICBM sites, and soft and semihardened command centers. Even with the improved performance projected for 1963-1965, however, Soviet ICBMs do not appear to be well suited to attacking an ICBM force deployed in very hard sites.

52. Applying these same computations to various hypothetical Soviet force levels, we find—though with considerably less certainty—that under favorable circumstances from their point of view, Soviet planners might expect to achieve the following theoretical capabilities in a single ICBM salvo: a. With roughly 50 launchers in 1961 or any time thereafter, high assurance of being able to detonate an ICBM warhead over each of the 25 principal US metropolitan areas.

b. With roughly 100 launchers, moderate assurance in 1961 and increasing assurance thereafter of being able to inflict severe damage on the operational air bases of the US Strategic Air Command (SAC).

c. With roughly 200 launchers in 1961-1962, moderate assurance of being able to inflict severe damage on SAC air bases and on soft and semihardened ICBM sites as well.

d. With roughly 300 to 500 launchers in 1962-1963, moderate to high assurance of being able to inflict severe damage, not only on SAC air bases and soft and semihardened ICBM sites, but also on other fixed soft and semihardened targets associated with US striking and defensive capabilities.

53. As the period advances, the Soviets could expect to achieve higher levels of assurance against the foregoing types of targets with fewer missiles, because Soviet ICBM performance will probably improve while the number of such targets will remain relatively unchanged. For example, in 1964-1965 and possibly as early as 1963, the capabilities described in d above might be achieved with as few as 200-400 launchers. However, studies show that several thousand ICBM launchers would be required to provide the Soviets with reasonable assurance of an ability to engage in counterbattery fire against the combined total of hard ICBM sites planned by the US for the period beginning in 1963.

54. In evaluating the significance of various hypothetical numbers of ICBMs, Soviet planners would take into account the likelihood that, for at least the next few years, the great preponderance of US megatonnage would be bomber-borne. They would almost certainly seek an ICBM force large enough to blunt or at least disrupt the US bomber capability before launch so that their air defenses would have a reasonable chance of preventing large-scale penetrations to Soviet target areas. However, they would also know that the US is rapidly acquiring significant capabilities with mobile and hardened missile forces, and that even at present the SAC airborne alert and dispersal capability tends to offset a Soviet ability to destroy air bases. Thus, the advance in US techniques for the protection and security of its own striking forces obliges the Soviets to recognize that—even should they build a very large ICBM force—they are confronted with a growing segment of US retaliatory power which could not be eliminated in a first strike by ICBMs, even under the most favorable circumstances.

55. The foregoing considerations do not, in themselves, define any particular ICBM force levels which the Soviets think appropriate to their needs. They do, however, support a judgment that the USSR has strong incentives to build up a substantial ICBM force, and that, at least for present planning purposes, the Soviets would probably look upon several hundred operational ICBM launchers as a substantial force.

Effects of Technological Change

56. The Soviets probably desire an ICBM force with a high salvo capability and high survivability, in order to have a capability either to launch an initial attack or to retaliate against a Western attack. The former can be approached by maintaining a high ratio of launchers to missiles, although this will not fully overcome the problems of fueling and missile hold-times inherent in the present Soviet ICBM system. The latter can best be achieved for the present system by dispersing and concealing operational launchers. Even with their very tight security practices, however, the Soviets probably view the protection afforded by concealment and dispersal as susceptible to deterioration with time, especially in view of the reconnaissance satellite capabilities they would expect the US to achieve in the next few years.

57. Many of the developments referred to in our other estimates, especially the missile advances projected in NIE 11-5-61, point to the period beginning around 1963 or 1964 as a time of major technological change in Soviet weapon systems. Principal among the advances which we can now foresee are initial operational capabilities with a new ICBM system, in about 1963 or after, and at least limited deployment of an antimissile system designed for use against IRBMs and ICBMs, in the period 1963-1966. There is a possibility that test firings of a new ICBM have already begun at Tyuratam. Intensive R&D in antimissile defenses has been under way in the USSR for several years.

58. The new ICBM system will probably be designed to overcome disadvantages in the present system. It will probably use either storable liquid or solid fuels and include compatible elements to increase flexibility and decrease vulnerability in deployment. It will probably be easier to deploy than the present system. Moreover, at that time the oldest of the current Soviet heavy bombers will be approaching 10 years in operational service. Although the USSR has developed air-to-surface missiles for heavy bombers and could be developing new bombers for intercontinental use to supplement its missile capabilities, there is little evidence that the Soviets have made the amount of progress necessary to avert obsolescence in this field. We estimate that by 1963 the Soviets could also achieve a submerged-launching capability with ballistic missiles in nuclear powered submarines. In the same time period, the USSR could also have a long range, ground-launched unmanned aerodynamic vehicle for reconnaissance or weapon delivery. These and other developments could effectively supplement the ICBM force.

59. In 1963-1964, however, US forces will begin to include numerous hard ICBM sites. We cannot exclude the possibility that a new Soviet ICBM could achieve accuracies and reliabilities excellent enough to permit the USSR to contemplate counterbattery fire, but it is extremely unlikely that such improved performance could be attained before late in the decade. Even so, the fast reaction times of US systems and increasing US strength in mobile missiles would probably preclude effective counterbattery fire. The Soviets would probably decide that, in these circumstances, it would be desirable to adopt additional measures such as hardening for the protection of their own ICBM forces, and also to develop more advanced offensive techniques. Moreover, they would probably regard the achievement of effective antimissile defenses as an important element in solving their problem.

60. The potential effectiveness of Soviet antimissile defenses will therefore be an extremely significant factor in their ICBM programming. Their antimissile R&D is receiving very heavy emphasis, but we do not know with any certainty when in the 1963-1966 period they will first deploy antimissile defenses, nor do we know how effective the initial capability will be. If the initial system has only a limited, interim capability, its significance would be primarily political and psychological. However, if the Soviets conclude that their antimissile system could provide reasonable assurance of coping with some substantial portion of the Western ballistic missile capability, they would be strongly motivated to commit extensive resources to its deployment, even, we believe, to the extent of diverting resources which would otherwise be allocated to offensive systems. This conclusion rests partly on the high priority accorded to military defense in the USSR over the years, but also on our belief that in Soviet eyes the early deployment of antimissile defenses would constitute a major technological victory over the US.

Probable Range of Soviet Force Levels6

61. In this concluding section of the Annex we present an estimate of probable current and future Soviet ICBM strength, based on the several interpretations we believe can validly be drawn from the evidence and from appreciation of our own ability to acquire such evidence. We again emphasize that the direct evidence is insufficient to establish with certainty the scale and pace of the present Soviet ICBM deployment program. Our estimate therefore also rests on the indirect evidence and other considerations discussed in preceding sections, including the strategic ideas which we believe govern Soviet military policy, the approximate levels of ICBM strength which the Soviet leadership appears to be seeking, our general knowledge of Soviet military programming practices, and our sense of the tempo at which the present program is being conducted. For these reasons, our estimates of current and future Soviet ICBM capabilities are expressed as ranges.

62. From the direct and indirect evidence at hand, we judge that the USSR is building toward several hundred operational ICBM launchers, to be acquired as soon as practicable within the next few years. The commitment of resources is probably quite large, but thus far the programming has apparently been deliberate in pace. It is probably affected by a desire for efficiency in scheduling the construction and activation of a number of launching complexes dispersed over a wide geographic area. The production of missiles and training of troops could be scheduled to fit into whatever site activation schedule was deemed practicable.

63. In order to achieve such a goal, a continuing and well-coordinated program of launcher activation would be required over a period of several years. In determining the activation rates which the USSR could achieve after a buildup of a year or two, we have taken into account the grouping of several pairs of launchers into complexes, the tasks and problems involved in the preparation of these complexes, and the time required to construct and activate them. We believe that launcher activation rates of 50 to 100 per year would be consistent with the sense of the current tempo of the ICBM program which we have derived from the direct and indirect evidence available.7 Because it is impossible to pinpoint the threshold of activity which our intelligence collection resources would detect, we cannot exclude a present rate somewhat higher than 100 per year.

64. Since it would require 18 to 24 months for launching complexes to be brought to operational readiness, our judgment regarding present activation rates bears most directly on ICBM deployment at present and through the next year or two. Such activation rates are not likely to remain constant; they are likely to vary considerably within this approximate range from year to year, depending on the configuration of the ICBM sites and areas of their deployment. Although we believe that the Soviets have substantially passed through the learning period of the activation program, as they gain additional experience it will be easier for them to increase the rate. At the same time, other considerations such as a new ICBM, developments in their antimissile program, and alternative uses of the resources involved will influence their decisions as to the rate of ICBM activation. Taking these factors into account, we believe it reasonable to project an average launcher activation rate of approximately 50 to 100 per year during the period to 1963-1964.

Force Levels in Mid-1961

65. We believe that the probable Soviet force level in mid-1961 is in the range of 50-100 operational ICBM launchers, together with the necessary operational missile inventories and trained crews. This would probably involve the present existence of 10 to 15 operational ICBM site-complexes. This estimate should be regarded as a general approximation. The major bases for it are our sense of the tempo of the program and our judgment as to the relationship between what our evidence supports and what our coverage is likely to have missed. Such a force level could have been acquired through either the smooth or phased deployment programs which can be derived from interpretation of the test range data.

Force Levels to 1963-1964

66. While deployment to date has probably been deliberate in scale and pace, we believe that the USSR is now building a substantial ICBM capability. Soviet planning for the next few years probably anticipates the advent in about 1963 or after of a new ICBM system, and deployment of the present system will probably taper off and then cease as a buildup with the new system begins. This transition might affect the overall rate at which deployment occurs; for example, the Soviets might decrease this rate for the present system before the new one comes in, and then accelerate it thereafter when the new system becomes ready for deployment. Over the next few years, however, we believe that the launcher activation rate will probably average some 50-100 per year, which would result in force levels about as follows: 100-200 operational launchers in mid-1962, 150-300 in mid-1963, and 200-400 in mid-1964.8

67. Soviet planning for this period probably anticipates the attainment in about 1963 or after of a new ICBM system which will permit greater flexibility and less vulnerability in deployment. Deployment of the present system will probably taper off and then cease as a buildup with the new system begins. Some launchers for the new ICBM system may be operational in mid-1963, and 100 or more may be operational a year later. If so, deployment rates for the present system would almost certainly have begun to phase down before 1963. We therefore consider that 200-400 operational launchers remains the best present estimate of the Soviet force in mid-1964.

Trends in 1965-1966

68. The deployment program for this period may be significantly affected by such developments as US acquisition of numerous hardened and mobile missiles and other improved capabilities, and by Soviet development of antimissile defenses. Soviet ICBM force goals for 1965-1966 could be enlarged considerably over the 1964 level in view of these anticipated developments. On the other hand, these anticipated changes on the attack-defense relationship may appear to the Soviet leaders to warrant no increase in force goals or, more likely, only a moderate increase. We are unable to predict what the Soviet judgment will be regarding the interplay of these military factors, and there is a good chance that the Soviet leaders themselves have not yet come to a definite decision.

Position on the ICBM Program of the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

69. The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, does not concur in this estimate. He believes (a) that NIE 11-8-61 should include an estimate of the largest ICBM force which the USSR could have in mid-1961 and that such a force could be as large as 200 operational launchers, and (b) that the probable Soviet force level in mid-1961 is in the range of 75-125 operational launchers and will increase to 150-300 in mid-1962 and 200-450 in mid-1963.

70. Possible force levels. In his opinion, an NIE on Soviet long range attack capabilities should provide policymakers with an estimate of the largest ICBM force which the USSR could have deployed to date, based on an IOC of 1 January 1960 and assuming a vigorous deployment program. He regards such an estimate of the possible mid-1961 force level as just as important as the estimate of the probable current force level. Indeed, by making no explicit judgment about the possible current force level, the Estimate renders a disservice to the policymaker by encouraging him to consider only force levels within the probable range and, at the same time, advising him (paragraph 42) that “the USSR has a greater capacity to produce and deploy ICBMs than we believe it has exercised.” The policymaker would not know, on the basis of the NIE, whether he can exclude all force levels for mid-1961 beyond those slightly above the probable range or whether he cannot exclude a force level substantially higher than the probable range. Yet it is precisely this possible Soviet ICBM strength which he needs to take into account in making decisions bearing directly on US national security.

71. The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, realizes that an estimate of possible Soviet strength in any weapon system is less essential when there is sufficient evidence to narrow the range of our quantitative judgments. However, in the case of the ICBM, the available evidence is not sufficient to establish current Soviet strength within reasonably narrow limits. The NIE discussion and annexes acknowledge that the evidence relating to ICBM deployment can be interpreted in a variety of ways, that there are many uncertainties in the analyses of such factors as Soviet force goals and programming decisions, and that vast areas of the USSR are not covered or only poorly covered by US collection efforts. Under such circumstances, it is essential to estimate the highest force level that can be reconciled with the evidence and thereby indicate the range of possibilities which cannot be excluded.

72. The view of the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, is that the USSR could have as many as 200 operational launchers in mid-1961. He emphasizes that an ICBM force of this size is definitely less likely than one half as large, but he believes that the chances are sufficiently good to include this estimate of possible current strength in an NIE on Soviet long range attack capabilities. By the same token, he would exclude mid-1961 force levels exceeding 200 operational launchers. He bases his estimate on the following considerations: a. The available evidence on the Soviet ICBM development program can be interpreted to allow for a steady buildup of operational sites concurrent with ICBM testing activities. While the inferred tempo of the Soviet program suggests that the probable size of the mid-1961 ICBM force is substantially less than 200 operational launchers, it does not preclude a possible force level of about 200 launchers.

b. Missile production is not a limiting factor. Site activation rates in excess of 100 launchers per year are within Soviet technical and economic capabilities. In order to have 200 operational launchers by mid-1961, it is not necessary to begin construction of operational sites for the 5,000 n.m. missile before late 1957 or construction of sites with more simplified launch pads before early 1960. Moreover, construction times need not be shorter than 18-24 months and site activation rates in excess of 100 launchers per year do not have to be achieved in less than the time allowed for the initial buildup period. In short, a deployment program resulting in 200 operational launchers in mid-1961 can be carried out within the limits set by the factors judged to be most critical.

c. Because of the limitations of our intelligence coverage, together with the high degree of Soviet security, substantial ICBM deployment could have occurred without being detected by US collection efforts. In any case, the chances of detecting Soviet deployment activity depend on the number of sites under construction or completed. There is sufficient uncertainty in the number of launchers per site to allow for a considerable increase in aggregate ICBM strength without a corresponding increase in the number of sites.

d. On the other hand, it is very unlikely that construction of the first operational sites began before initiation of test firing or that high rates of site activation were achieved early in the deployment program. A rate of site construction in excess of that required to reach a force level of about 200 launchers in mid-1961 probably would have created severe organizational problems and possibly would have strained Soviet resources. Consequently, an ICBM force of about 200 operational launchers is believed to be the maximum practicable level which the USSR could have achieved by mid-1961.

73. During the next year or so the USSR could increase its ICBM force much more rapidly than in the past, since more simplified launch pads would be constructed at new sites. With several years experience behind them, the Soviets could achieve an activation rate of about 200 launchers per year by early 1962 and an operational force of roughly 400 ICBMs might be deployed by mid-1962. Thereafter deployment could be accelerated if Soviet planners decide on a high ICBM force goal.

74. Probable force levels. The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, believes that the probable size of the current Soviet ICBM force is in the 75-125 range and that this force is likely to be 150-300 operational launchers in mid-1962 and 200-450 in mid-1963. The higher figures for current strength reflect his judgment that the pace of the Soviet ICBM program is in fact more rapid than the NIE implies; the higher figures for future strength are based on his judgment that a site activation rate of 150-175 launchers per year should be used in projecting the upper limit of the probable program. Underlying both judgments is his estimate that Soviet leaders seek to acquire a force of several hundred operational ICBM launchers before the US has a large number of hardened sites and mobile long range missiles. The Soviet deployment program, consequently, is likely to be pursued at a fairly rapid pace in the next year or two.

75. It is recognized that the additional ICBMs estimated for mid-1961 would not materially increase current Soviet long range attack capabilities. However, a force of about 300 ICBMs around mid-1962 would enable the USSR to bring all SAC operational air bases and soft ICBM sites under attack by missiles alone or, alternatively, to have moderate assurance of inflicting severe damage to command-control centers, air defense bases, and missile-launching submarine bases, as well as SAC operational installations. This capability would be achieved approximately one year sooner than is possible with the maximum ICBM force as estimated in the NIE text. In particular, it would be achieved before the number of hard ICBM sites planned by the US begins to increase sharply.

76. Whether deployment thereafter will continue at a rapid rate or level off depends on such factors as Soviet success in developing a new ICBM system and antimissile defenses, their assessment of US retaliatory capabilities in the post-1963 period, and the extent to which Soviet leaders become convinced that very high ICBM force goals are necessary or desirable. If Soviet leaders decide to build toward an effective ICBM capability against large numbers of US missiles in hardened sites or to achieve a substantial ICBM retaliatory capability by the middle of the decade, then the Soviet deployment program would be accelerated. However, there is at least an equal chance that ICBM deployment will taper off sometime in 1963 since Soviet planners might consider it more advantageous to accelerate their antimissile defense program. In that case, an ICBM force of 300-500 operational launchers would be maintained in the 1964-1966 period.

Position on the ICBM Program of the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy

77. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, have entered several specific footnotes in the body of this estimate expressing their differing opinion. The basis for these footnotes, and the only fundamental difference with judgments in the estimate, is their estimate of current force levels of Soviet operational ICBM launchers. A basic difference affecting current force levels is their judgment concerning the date when the Soviets first achieved an operational capability with deployed ICBMs. They do not believe that this occurred in January of 1960. The following factors, well supported by evidence, weigh heavily in their judgment against the Soviets having attained or even sought a deployed operational capability by that time with their existing ICBM: a. The size of the existing Soviet ICBM (450,000-500,000 pounds and about twice the size of Atlas), the difficulties involved in the use of nonstorable liquid fuel, and heavy dependence on a rail network are factors which combine to make launcher construction a major undertaking which they believe would have been detected by US Intelligence if any substantial program had been undertaken.

b. Despite large and representative collections of evidence, our intensive search has failed to identify even probable operational ICBM site-complexes.

c. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

d. It has been characteristic of other Soviet missile programs that prototype or trial launch sites were constructed at the test range before or, at the latest, concurrently with the construction of an operational facility. Indications of construction of such a prototype site for the ICBM did not appear at the test range until 1960 and it was probably not completed until late 1960 or early 1961. e. Recent test firings of ICBMs, in which reliability has dropped sharply [1 line of source text not declassified], suggest the introduction of redesigned system components, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] inexperienced personnel, or both.

f. [2-½ lines of source text not declassified], analysis of which indicates that the Soviets did not have a large scale deployment effort under way before mid-1960. Considering 18 months construction time, this would indicate no large operational capability prior to late 1961. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

g. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

78. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, believe that the appearance of the probable prototype launching site, the increased pace of firings, and the recent changes in telemetry support the view that the Soviets may now be about to deploy some ICBMs of the existing cumbersome type and clearly strengthen their judgment that the Soviets did not have a deployed ICBM capability by 1 January 1960. This judgment, in turn, influences their view of the possibility of ICBM deployment in the inhospitable northwest portion of the USSR. While information is not yet firm enough to rule out the possibility of ICBM deployment at Plesetsk and Polyarnyy Ural, as well as at two other locations, they believe it unlikely that sites of ICBMs of the type described above were constructed in those areas in the time period 1957-1959, which would have required site design and decision to deploy prior to the first Soviet firing of an ICBM.

79. The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, believe that the evidence available on the Soviet ICBM development program is sufficiently complete and valid to support the conclusion that little, if any, ICBM deployment has occurred, and that the near absence of evidence of deployment strengthens that conclusion.

80. On the basis of all the evidence and the reasoning outlined above, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, estimate “a few” operational Soviet ICBM launchers for mid-1961. Although they do not consider the evidence sufficient to project a precise estimate of the Soviet planning for future ICBM strength, they accept the reasoning in the text as a generally valid measure of the scale and pace of a build-up. Therefore, on the basis of making a prudent and reasonable projection of Soviet deployed ICBM launcher strength they estimate as follows:

Mid-1962…………………………..50-100

Mid-1963………………………….100-200

Mid-1964………………………….150-300

Position on the ICBM Program of the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF

81. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur with the judgments reached herein on the nature of the current and future Soviet force goals or the strategic considerations which determine their magnitude. In his view the estimate of current force levels does not accurately represent the scope of deployment indicated by the nature and quality of the evidence thus far accumulated, but reflects instead the impact of the extreme security measures which have obscured the broad scope of the Soviet ICBM program from its inception. In addition, he believes that proper allowance has not been made in the estimate for the lack of intelligence coverage of the many areas in the USSR in which ICBM deployment may have been carried out.

82. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the Soviet determination to achieve world domination has fostered recognition of the fact that the ultimate elimination of the US, as the chief obstacle to the achievement of their objective, cannot be accomplished without a clear preponderance of military capability. Moreover, Soviet doctrine and deeds suggest to him that the Soviet hierarchy are mindful of the fact that few, if any, lasting major political victories in history have been achieved without the supporting bulwark of superior military power.

83. The history of their ballistic missile program testifies to an early recognition by the Soviets of the unprecedented potential offered by such weapons and reflects their determination to exploit the potential by making ballistic missiles the dominant system in their strategic strike force. Their highly successful ICBM testing record reflects the qualitative achievement of their well-planned, well-organized program which would facilitate the realization of predetermined force goals of any reasonable magnitude. Soviet efforts to mask their program in secrecy indicate the importance which they attach to their growing missile capability. Moreover, evidence developed in spite of their security measures reveals programming for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] deployment concurrent with the testing phase of their program. This concurrency is a further indication of Soviet determination to maximize their operational capability at the earliest practicable time. In this connection, the evidence on deployment is consistent with the estimate that the Soviets achieved their initial operational capability by 1 January 1960, and in the intervening period of a year and a half, to mid-1961, brought to operational readiness at least 120 and possibly an ever greater number of operational ICBM launchers.

84. Considering the emphasis which the Soviets place on secrecy, and the absence of other than partial intelligence coverage on most of the areas most suitable for ICBM deployment, we could not expect to identify more than a small portion of the Soviet ICBM deployment program. Nevertheless the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, has identified at least six areas on which there is reasonably good evidence of ICBM deployment. Within these areas he believes there are between 10 and 15 operational ICBM site-complexes. Further, he has about 20 additional areas under active consideration on which evidence indicates the possibility of ICBM launch site construction. Considering the economics of logistic support and specialized maintenance and control problems, the siting of several site complexes in a deployment area is highly probable and should be expected. Therefore, deployment—whether actual or planned—represented by the 20 additional areas—reflects the existence of a program of considerable magnitude. Even though identification of some of the suspect areas should later prove erroneous, undoubtedly others will be identified to replace them as the delay in intelligence reporting catches up with the actual situation.

85. In view of the above, the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates the operational ICBM launcher availability as follows:

Mid-1961………………………….at least 120

Mid-1962……………………………………300

Mid-1963……………………………………550

Mid-1964……………………………………850

Mid-1965…………………………………1,150

Mid-1966…………………………………1,450

[Here follows 5 pages of charts and maps.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. NIE 11-8-61 (46 pages), entitled “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack,” was published and distributed separately from Annex C, which is printed here. A cover sheet and a table of contents to Annex C are not printed. A note on the cover sheet indicates that Annex C was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction. NIE 11-8-61 is ibid.

1 Soviet Technical Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles, dated 25 April 1961. (Top Secret) [Footnote in the source text.]

2 See NIE 11-5-61, paragraph 17. The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, believe that the IOC date did not occur this early. For their position, see paragraphs 77-80. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, do not believe that a minimum number of two to four ICBM sites were probably under construction in 1957-1959 in areas suitable to deployment of 5,000 n.m. missiles, nor do they believe that such sites are operational at the present time. For a full statement of their position, see paragraphs 77-80. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The figure quoted by Khrushchev was 30 billion rubles. This amount is not inconsistent with programs for several hundred long range ballistic missile launchers and associated missiles. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 According to information recently received through clandestine channels which have provided reliable military information in the past, several senior Soviet officers associated with missile activity have commented on the ICBM program along the following lines: The Soviets are spending “millions” of rubles on the program. If one success is achieved, it is magnified to support a pretense that the USSR has “hundreds” of ICBMs, in order to impress the West. The implication that there are hundreds is only “idle talk” at present, but such a force will be achieved since the USSR's economy and policy are “geared” for developing such a force. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, do not concur in the range of current and future ICBM force levels estimated herein. For their positions, see their statements beginning respectively at paragraphs 69, 77, and 81. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, do not concur that a launcher activation rate of 50 to 100 a year can be supported “by the sense of the current tempo of the ICBM program.” They would, in the light of the direct and indirect evidence available, be able to say only that such a launcher activation rate is within Soviet gross capabilities. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 The inventory of operational missiles associated with these numbers of launchers would of course be higher, and the cumulative production total higher still. We have little evidence on the relationships actually obtaining in the Soviet program. In general, however, we believe that the following assumptions are reasonable: (a) to achieve a high salvo capability, to simplify maintenance and logistics, and to have a modest reserve of missiles for possible subsequent use, the Soviet operational ICBM inventory would include some three missiles for each pair of operational launchers; (b) the operational ICBM inventory would also include missiles allocated to operational units but not yet integrated into the complete weapon system at deployment sites, in a pipeline equivalent to about two months’ production; (c) the cumulative total of production missiles would be about 50 percent larger than that required for the foregoing operational purposes, with the remaining production missiles allocated to such purposes as R&D, training, static testing, space program, etc. [Footnote in the source text.]

30. Letter From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen) 30. Letter From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen)Source

Washington, June 16, 1961.

Dear Henry: Attached is a comment on your draft of the military and related sections of the Basic National Security Policy which you sent to us on 22 May.1 These comments, which I have put together, reflect the views of the relevant people here and have been discussed with Mr. Bundy. The nature of our comments is such as to make it unnecessary at this time to attempt a detailed examination of the language of the document.

I will be glad to answer any questions, or discuss the comments with you at your convenience.

Cordially yours,

Carl Kaysen2

Attachment3

SUBJECT

Draft of Proposed “Military and Related Aspects of Basic National Security Policy”

1. The fourteen sections of the document (labeled A-N in the longer explanatory part) appear to fall into two quite different parts. Sections E, F, H, and N (corresponding to pages 4-6, 6-12, 14-22, and 30, respectively, of the shorter document) contain a basic revision of military policy and doctrine for both general and local war. Their substantive content deals with problems that are primarily military in content and that fall within the operating responsibility of the Defense Department. The other sections deal with a wide variety of problems ranging from a statement of basic national objectives to alliances and civil defense to arms reduction. These problems are less narrowly military, and they involve the operating responsibilities of the State Department and in some cases other Departments, as well as those of the Defense Department. Further, the statement of a new national policy with respect to many of them involves the resolution of political problems which are not explicitly faced in the present draft.

For these reasons, and also because of the importance we attach to restating our military doctrine as soon as feasible, we suggest that the scope of the document be substantially narrowed to encompass just those issues dealt with in the central paragraphs listed above. When so narrowed, it could take the form of an amendment of the present BNSP, which would be followed by other amendments as soon as possible.

2. The new views on central war contain two important components. The first is the proposition that our initial recognition of the outbreak of central war should not result in a spasm in which we fire off everything we can in the way of strategic weapons. Rather, we should substitute a doctrine of controlled response, which emphasizes the maintenance of some reserve strategic nuclear striking capacity, and which has as its goal the limitation of damage and the avoidance of a situation in which we are inferior in military strength after the first exchange. For the single goal of “prevailing” in central war, the new doctrine substitutes a spectrum of possible goals running from superiority to stalemate, the appropriate one of which is to be sought in the light of the situation at the time.

We agree on the importance of this change, and the associated changes in the mechanism of command and control which are necessary to put it into practice.

3. The second component of the discussion of general war is the explicit introduction of second-strike counterforce (countermilitary) capability as an objective to be achieved by our striking force.4 The paper does not seem entirely clear on just what scope is to be given to this objective. On the one hand, it seems clear that a flexible capability for second strike response would include some capacity for hitting military targets, unless the forces were deliberately designed to preclude this, in terms of accuracy, etc. In this sense, stating counterforce capability as an objective adds nothing that is not already implied by the doctrine of flexible response. On the other hand, the inclusion of this capability does represent a significant change from the present doctrine of deterrence. Once we move from that doctrine, we raise the host of problems attendant on the interaction of our decisions with those of the Soviet Union. If we try to increase our second-strike counterforce capability, and by so doing, stimulate them to do the same, are we in fact adding to our security? The draft perhaps deals with this problem by implication, in terms of budget constraints at the present level. It has been argued that counterforce capability that covers more than a part of the enemy's striking power is at best a transient achievement. Enemy response to our own buildup, plus the real intelligence problems of targetting the force of the other side, make it unclear as to just how much counterforce capability we have at any time and thus, since we cannot really rely on it in choosing our actions, an attempt to build it into our strategy may be dangerous, as well as wasteful. In our judgment, the consequences of the explicit introduction of counterforce capability should be dealt with more directly, and the desired scope of this capability stated more clearly.

4. The draft proposes that, in local war, we place main, but not sole reliance on non-nuclear weapons. With this we are in hearty agreement. But there are two aspects of this proposition that are unclear. First, the present transition point from conventional to nuclear response—namely, any war involving more than 300-350 thousand troops—is accepted without discussion. We think this point deserves explicit explanation, including the consideration of how desirable it would be to have a larger conventional capability in order to make possible a higher transition point. Similarly, a more explicit treatment of the feasibility of local nuclear war is desirable. At least the alternative of mobilizing more non-nuclear forces might be brought in.

At present, the draft makes no explicit geographic references in its discussion of local war. It would be better to make explicit that it does not deal with the NATO area, and refer to the recent NSC paper on this subject.

5. The present draft follows the traditional style of BNSP papers. This style, with its heavy reliance on abstract and somewhat dogmatic statement, may be dictated by the nature of the task. The added explanatory section is a commendable innovation. It could perhaps be carried further by modifying it in two ways. First, another annex is needed which indicates in concrete and, where possible, quantitative, terms how far our present force position is from achieving the desired capabilities, and what would have to be done to go the whole way. Second, the basic explanatory material might be treated as a sort of “legislative history,” which provides various examples of how the doctrines would apply in specific circumstances, and thus reduce the scope for partisan exegesis of the abstract language of the NSC directive paper.5

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3001 (14 Apr 61) Pt. 1, Sec 3. Top Secret.

1 This May 19 draft is the enclosure to Rowen's memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, dated May 22. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Carl Kaysen Series, BNSP 1/61-5/61)

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

3 Top Secret.

4 The most explicit reference to counterforce in the draft paper reads: “Offensive countermilitary attack capabilities, active defenses and passive defenses, supported by warning and reconnaissance systems, should be able to reduce enemy residual military capability at least to levels that will avoid the strategic inferiority of U.S. residual forces, and if consistent with other U.S. wartime objectives, give the U.S. a strategic superiority.”

5 Other commentaries on the May 19 ISA draft BNSP include those of the JCS and Secretary Rusk. In memorandum JCSM-397-61 to the Secretary of Defense, June 12, the JCS reserved comment on general and local war strategy, but maintained that the draft gave the impression that “our security policy contemplates two entirely separate and distinct sets of forces” for limited and general war, that a precise distinction could not be made between local and general war, and that national security policy should be able to deal with China and the Soviet Union as separate entities as well as a common threat. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3001 (14 April 1961), Sec. 2)

For Rusk's comments, see Document 35.

31. Memorandum for President Kennedy 31. Memorandum for President KennedySource

Washington, June 22, 1961.

CURRENT ORGANIZATION OF THE WHITE HOUSE AND NSC FOR DEALING WITH INTERNATIONAL MATTERS

The President's staff is at present about two-thirds of the way toward a sound and durable organization for his work in international affairs. Since January a number of steps have been taken, and in the same period the President's concept of what he wants has developed somewhat. There is still unfinished business.

The rules of this operation, as we see them, are four: First: The President's staff must not attempt to replace the President's chief constitutional and statutory advisers.

Second: The President's staff is to serve as an extension of himself—as his eyes and ears and his source of nondepartmental comment. The President's staff is his own instrument. It is not—though this is a hard rule—a place for men trying to peddle their own remedies without Presidential backing.

Third: The President's staff must see to it that all great issues are adequately controlled and coordinated. This does not mean that control and coordination should necessarily be managed through this staff, but rather that when there is weakness the White House group must spot it early and stimulate remedial action—either through efforts with those directly responsible or by reference up the line, to the President if necessary.

Fourth: The President's staff must be a center of initiative and energy in the planning process. It is an abiding weakness of this—and of every democratic government—that it tends to react to crises. We have sought to correct this weakness by organizing the planning process in Washington: isolating foreseeable problems and areas of opportunity; arranging for the assignment of responsibility for initiating planning papers; reviewing the papers as they come forward; gearing the intelligence process to the town's planning schedule. Centered about the Tuesday Planning lunch, all of this has moved forward in good order and is reflected in the attached planning schedule.1

The staff near the President, as it stood in January, 1961, was a complex affair. General Eisenhower had within the White House staff six men with distinct and significant responsibilities in foreign affairs: Gray, Goodpaster, Harr, Kistiakowsky, Randall and Persons. But across the street in the NSC he had a multitude: the NSC staff and the staff of OCB.

President Kennedy has changed all that. He abolished the OCB; his men have cut back the NSC staff. On the other hand, he has used for specific foreign problems several of his immediate White House staff. He has not wished to give clear authority to any one of these men over another, preferring to retain the right of direct communication and command with such men as Schlesinger, Dungan, Goodwin, Sorensen, Feldman, and Clifton—in addition to Bundy and Rostow, who hold formal appointments in this area, and McCloy, McGovern, Berle, and Acheson, each of whom has some special relation to the White House. There is also the Vice President, a highly valuable agent, but obviously one with direct access; and members of the Administration who are particularly close to the President, by blood or friendship, have channels of their own.

First, though the President works through many people and talks to still more, he retains an acute sense of “operational” communication; thus he seldom gives an assignment to an inappropriate receiver; he expects his staff to get his ideas into sensible channels; he counts on his people to keep in close touch with each other, and in general they do. His own plain sense of the matter is that the White House must be the center of both final authority and initiatives, but that the great roles of the State and Defense Secretaries must never be undermined. It is within these standards that his agents work.

Second, after some months of effort and much resistance in all agencies, the White House now has sure and rapid access to all important messages, and they all come in to one place (or nearly all—end-running is endemic). This puts Mr. Kennedy and his people where none of his predecessors have been. It is the cable and despatch traffic, above and beyond anything else, that gives the immediate flavor of the daily world and shows the President and his people where to look further and where to intervene.

Third, although many men have direct access to the President, they have learned, in very large measure, to keep in close touch with one another, and to see to it that their work is coordinated. The White House very rarely speaks with two voices, and there is good communication from the President's men to one another. In part this is the result of informal communication, and in part is the result of a regular staff meeting now held each morning under Bundy. Those who attend with regularity are: Bundy, Rostow, Dungan, Schlesinger, Clifton, Smith, Kaysen, Komer, C. Johnson, R. Johnson, Belk, Hanson and Shepard.

This staff meeting is an informal affair, because no one has formal authority, but it keeps us all informed of what the President wants and what the day's situation is. In particular, this meeting allows for prompt report on any trouble or opportunity in any task force, for the staff is represented on all operating forces.

Fourth, gradually, and still imperfectly, members of the White House-NSC staff have assumed defined assignments for specific areas of the world. These assignments (listed in the attached paper, Annex A)2 do not distinguish between “planning” and “operation,” and resistance to this distinction is fundamental to our whole concept of work. The old pattern completely separated the general plan from the concrete work. This Administration does not think that way, and the staff does not work that way.

Fifth, the White House-NSC group has gradually encouraged the growth of responsible self-reliance in the Departments, and especially in the Department of State. The first stimulus has come from the President: his personal decision formed the post-invasion Cuban task force under Paul Nitze, and his approval has been responsible for all other action. But the incentive for special task forces on South Viet-nam, Korea and Iran came from the staff, and the process of follow-up has drawn deeply on the energies of the staff. Quietly, but persistently, White House men have pressed for activity and energy. This is true also for NATO. But the State Department has been encouraged, not trodden on, and its internal energy, with critical exceptions, is growing.

The White House-NSC group has thus effectively accepted the concept of Departmental responsibility with which the Administration began. Criticism of the sort lately leveled at White House men for work in Latin America is wildly beside the point; the President's men have sometimes filled vacuums as best they could, but they have never tried to take over the work of men who showed energy and ability of their own. The exact opposite is the case.

Finally, the White House-NSC group represents a high level of ability. No comparable dozen men, I believe, meets regularly anywhere in Washington, and no executive in Washington has a more wholly loyal group of agents than the President in these men.

Much has been accomplished, but much remains to be done. The staff is much closer to the State Department than it is to Defense, and what it knows of CIA is limited to a handful of top officials. There is a clear need in the White House for a senior military adviser, and in one way or another the world of intelligence needs closer connection to the President. In part, this is a matter of increased direct contact; in part, it is a matter of reinforced staff, and somewhat thickened procedures.

Timing and rules of procedure for the NSC itself need some improvement. The NSC should probably meet more regularly—though not more often—and at fixed times. Against its schedules there should be a more clearly defined pattern of preparation for new policy papers, and reporting on existing crisis areas. Against a fixed pattern of NSC meetings, much could be ordered that is now somewhat haphazard. This would require a Presidential acceptance of routine that might be dull. But meetings that are called suddenly, or suddenly called off, make staff work hard.

The staff labors under some handicaps in being half-in and half-out of the White House. This is not easy to change without changing the statutes, but it would probably help if all staff members could have courtesy access to such immediate conveniences as White House transport and membership in the White House mess.

The mechanism of interdepartmental coordination should be carefully, but sparingly, increased. The experience of the OCB shows how dangerous this sort of thing can be, but in the first few months we have probably gone too far the other way. In this instance, I believe that the administrative responsibility should rest with the White House, and I am proposing a revision of certain weekly meetings to ensure that somewhat more formal processes are followed. But it should be clearly understood that in my own judgment such a modest revision should in no sense replace the department as the agency of daily action, and the task force, with a specified Chairman, as the instrument of interdepartmental performance in a time of crisis.

Above all, the White House-NSC group needs what the whole executive branch needs, a renewal of strength and energy in the operating departments. We believe that progress is being made on this front too, but that more progress is urgently needed, and our specific recommendations on ways and means are being put to appropriate officers as we go along.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC Organization and Administration 5/6/61-7/25/61. No classification marking. There is no drafting information on the source text.

1 Not found attached.

2 Not found attached.

3 On September 4, McGeorge Bundy described the new administration's changes in and operation of the National Security Council in a letter to Senator Henry M. Jackson, Chairman of the Subcommittee on Policy Machinery of the Senate Committee on Government Operations. For text, see Jackson, ed., National Security Council, pp. 275-279. In another letter to Jackson dated January 28, 1965, Bundy stated: “In almost every particular, the principles and procedures set forth in the [September 4,] 1961 letter have governed the work of the Council under both President Kennedy and President Johnson.” (Ibid., pp. 279-280)

32. National Security Action Memorandum No. 55 32. National Security Action Memorandum No. 55Source

Washington, June 28, 1961.

TO

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

SUBJECT

Relations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the President in Cold War Operations

I wish to inform the Joint Chiefs of Staff as follows with regard to my views of their relations to me in Cold War Operations: a. I regard the Joint Chiefs of Staff as my principal military advisor responsible both for initiating advice to me and for responding to requests for advice. I expect their advice to come to me direct and unfiltered.

b. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have a responsibility for the defense of the nation in the Cold War similar to that which they have in conventional hostilities. They should know the military and paramilitary forces and resources available to the Department of Defense, verify their readiness, report on their adequacy, and make appropriate recommendations for their expansion and improvement. I look to the Chiefs to contribute dynamic and imaginative leadership in contributing to the success of the military and paramilitary aspects of Cold War programs.

c. I expect the Joint Chiefs of Staff to present the military viewpoint in governmental councils in such a way as to assure that the military factors are clearly understood before decisions are reached. When only the Chairman or a single Chief is present, that officer must represent the Chiefs as a body, taking such preliminary and subsequent actions as may be necessary to assure that he does in fact represent the corporate judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

d. While I look to the Chiefs to present the military factor without reserve or hesitation, I regard them to be more than military men and expect their help in fitting military requirements into the over-all context of any situation, recognizing that the most difficult problem in Government is to combine all assets in a unified, effective pattern.1

John F. Kennedy2

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Folder T-636-7. Secret. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 55. For an account of the origin of NSAM No. 55, see Maxwell D. Taylor, Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir (New York: W.W. Norton, 1972), p. 189. On June 26, President Kennedy appointed Taylor as his Military Representative. Concerning his assigned duties, see ibid., pp. 196-197.

1 The text of this NSAM is a close paraphrase of a portion of Recommendation No. 4 of “Recommendations of the Cuban Study Group,” the fourth of four numbered memoranda (together known as the Taylor Report) submitted to Kennedy under cover of a June 13 letter from Taylor, in his capacity as Chairman of the Cuban Study Group appointed by Kennedy in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs incident. The Study Group suggested this directive so that the JCS would “be brought to feel as great a sense of responsibility for contributing to the success of the Cold War as to the conventional military defense of the country in time of war.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Cuba, Taylor Report)

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Kennedy signed the original.

33. National Security Action Memorandum No. 56 33. National Security Action Memorandum No. 56Source

Washington, June 28, 1961.

TO

The Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT

Evaluation of Paramilitary Requirements

The President has approved the following paragraph:1 “It is important that we anticipate now our possible future requirements in the field of unconventional warfare and paramilitary operations. A first step would be to inventory the paramilitary assets we have in the United States Armed Forces, consider various areas in the world where the implementation of our policy may require indigenous para-military forces, and thus arrive at a determination of the goals which we should set in this field. Having determined the assets and the possible requirements, it would then become a matter of developing a plan to meet the deficit.”

The President requests that the Secretary of Defense, in coordination with the Department of State and the CIA, make such an estimate of requirements and recommend ways and means to meet those requirements.2

McGeorge Bundy4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 56. Secret. Copies were sent to Secretary Rusk, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor.

1 The paragraph is based on suggestions made in Recommendation No. 3 of the Taylor Report, “Improvement of Effectiveness in the Paramilitary Field.” Concerning the Taylor Report, see footnote 2, Document 32.

2 In NSAM No. 110 to McNamara, dated October 25, Bundy stated that in order not to lose “another year,” NSAM No. 56 should be interpreted to permit initial budgetary estimates for FY 1963 “even in the absence of formal completion of the requested evaluation of paramilitary requirements.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 110)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

34. National Security Action Memorandum No. 57 34. National Security Action Memorandum No. 57Source

Washington, June 28, 1961.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director, CIA

The President has approved the attached recommendation.1

The Special Group (5412 Committee) will perform the functions assigned in the recommendation to the Strategic Resources Group.2

McGeorge Bundy3

Attachment

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARAMILITARY OPERATIONS

1. For the purpose of this study, a paramilitary operation is considered to be one which by its tactics and its requirements in military-type personnel, equipment and training approximates a conventional military operation. It may be undertaken in support of an existing government friendly to the U.S. or in support of a rebel group seeking to overthrow a government hostile to us. The U.S. may render assistance to such operations overtly, covertly or by a combination of both methods. In size these operations may vary from the infiltration of a squad of guerrillas to a military operation such as the Cuban invasion. The small operations will often fall completely within the normal capability of one agency; the large ones may affect State, Defense, CIA, USIA and possibly other departments and agencies.

2. In order to conduct paramilitary operations with maximum effectiveness and flexibility within the context of the Cold War, it is recommended that current directives and procedures be modified to effect the following:

a. Any proposed paramilitary operation in the concept stage will be presented to the Strategic Resources Group for initial consideration and for approval as necessary by the President. Thereafter, the SRG will assign primary responsibility for planning, for interdepartment coordination and for execution to the Task Force, department or individual best qualified to carry forward the operation to success, and will indicate supporting responsibilities. Under this principle, the Department of Defense will normally receive responsibility for overt paramilitary operations. Where such an operation is to be wholly covert or disavowable, it may be assigned to CIA, provided that it is within the normal capabilities of the agency. Any large paramilitary operation wholly or partly covert which requires significant numbers of militarily trained personnel, amounts of military equipment which exceed normal CIA-controlled stocks and/or military experiences of a kind and level peculiar to the Armed Services is properly the primary responsibility of the Department of Defense with the CIA in a supporting role.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 57. Secret. A copy was sent to General Taylor.

1 The text printed below is identical to Recommendation No. 2 of the Taylor Report (see footnote 2, Document 32).

2 Recommendation No. 1 of the Taylor Report called for creation of a Strategic Resources Group (SRG), with its own permanent staff, as a mechanism for planning, development, and coordination of Cold War strategy and individual operations. According to a memorandum for the record by Burke, a member of the Cuban Study Group, of a meeting the President held with the Group on June 13, the President “was quite taken with” the SRG proposal as outlined to him by Taylor, while Burke warned the President of “great danger” because if the SRG Chairman “became an assistant President, it would be very difficult to operate with State and Defense.” He noted that the President listened to this, but he concluded: “I think he discounted the difficulties a great deal.” (Naval Historical Center, Area Files, Bumpy Road Materials)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

35. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 35. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, July 9, 1961.

Dear Bob:

We have reviewed in the State Department the draft which was prepared in the Defense Department of the military sections of Basic National Security Policy.1

We have given specific comments on many points to the drafters. There is one point, however, which seemed important enough to warrant my writing you directly about it. I refer to the provision that the main basis for US local war planning should be the plan for resumption of hostilities in Korea. I am informed that this provision means that no major increase in the present scale of US conventional forces is required.

I am not competent to speak to the military need, but I would like to suggest some foreign policy considerations which seem to me to be relevant.

1. There seems no assurance that future local conflicts will be confined to the scale of the Korean war. There may well be two simultaneous aggressions, whose aggregate scope will exceed that of the Korean war. It would be useful, from a foreign policy stand point, to have a military posture which did not require us to use nuclear weapons in the event of a local conflict which exceeds the scale of the Korean war, but left us free to make the decision on whether or not to use nuclear weapons at the time.

2. The Communists appear to have entered on a period of dangerous over-confidence. We must disabuse them, if there is not to be a serious risk of miscalculation on their part.

One of the steps that would be most helpful to this end would be a significant increase in the size of our armed forces. A government as traditionally preoccupied with ground strength as that of the USSR could not fail to take note. The Kremlin would surely be impressed by U.S. willingness to incur the increased expenditures and draft calls that would be involved. It might consider that this portended a U.S. willingness to assume risks—as well as costs—that the U.S. had hitherto considered unacceptable.

3. Such a U.S. move might also suggest to the Soviets that a continuation of their pressures could trigger an even further expansion of the permanent U.S. defense establishment. This would be a more effective deterrent than mobilization of reserves, whom the USSR would expect to return to civilian life at the end of the crisis. The Soviets must, even now, bitterly regret the lasting quantum jump in the U.S. armed forces which was produced by the Korean war.

4. An expansion in the size of our armed forces could also have a useful effect on our allies. It would be welcome evidence of U.S. firmness at a time of crisis. It might increase their confidence in our willingness to stand up in their defense. The U.S. willingness to incur increased defense burdens might, furthermore, encourage our allies to follow suit; this would be most helpful in carrying out our new NATO policy.

I realize that these factors may not be decisive, since important fiscal and military factors are also involved, but I thought that I should bring them to your attention before you had completed preparation of the military sections of national security policy.

Sincerely,

Dean

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 BNSP 18 Apr 61. Secret. Another copy indicates the letter was drafted in S/P. (Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/7-961) Forwarded to Rusk under a June 27 memorandum from George McGhee. (Ibid. 711.5/6-2761)

1 See footnote 2, Document 30.

36. National Intelligence Estimate 36. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 11, 1961.

NIE 11-3-61

SINO-SOVIET AIR DEFENSE CAPABILITIES THROUGH MID-1966

The Problem

To examine the scale and nature of the Sino-Soviet Bloc air defense system,1 and probable trends in its capabilities through mid-1966.

Summary and Conclusions

1. The scale of effort presently being applied to the continuing improvement and modernization of the Soviet air defense system is indicative of the high priority assigned to this mission. During the past two to three years, the Soviet air defense establishment has been undergoing a major transition which has significantly improved its capabilities. The principal aspects of this transition are: (a) the extensive deployment of surface-to-air missile sites; (b) the installation of air defense communications and control systems with semiautomatic features; (c) the deployment of new fighters and radars to Eastern Europe and areas near the borders of the USSR; and (d) a consolidation of air defense districts. Other developments include the advent of radars with better detection and height-finding capabilities, and the equipment of interceptors with more advanced electronic gear and armament, including air-to-air missiles. (Paras. 16-24)

Surface-to-Air Missiles

2. The Soviets now have operational two types of surface-to-air missiles designed for defense against medium and high altitude air attacks. The first of these (SA-1), which has been operational for about five years, is deployed only around Moscow in a massive complex of 56 sites, each having 60 launching positions. This system was apparently designed to counter the massed air raid threat of the late 1940's and early 1950's. (Paras. 25-26)

3. Since late 1957, the USSR has been engaged in the extensive deployment of a second-generation surface-to-air missile system (SA-2), which appears designed to cope with the threat posed by small numbers of aircraft carrying nuclear weapons rather than a massed raid threat. Considering the pattern of deployment, the length of time the program has been under way, and the extent of our intelligence coverage, we estimate that 350-400 sites (each with six launchers) are now operational at about 70 defended areas in the USSR. By mid-1962, the Soviets probably will have deployed roughly 500 SA-2 sites at about 100 urban-industrial areas in the USSR. There is little evidence on possible requirements for defense of field forces, but we estimate that some 80-120 mobile missile units may be deployed by the end of 1963 for the protection of such semifixed targets as major headquarters and logistics centers. We believe that the USSR intends to provide SA-2 defenses for the fixed launching complexes of its long range ballistic missile forces, but we are unable to estimate the level and extent of defenses planned. (Paras. 27-33)

4. Deployment of SA-2 sites in the European Satellites has been under way for more than a year. The heaviest deployment has occurred in East Germany where as many as 20 sites may be operational or under construction. Some of these, located on a ring around Berlin, are manned by East German forces; others, which defend important Soviet military targets, are assigned to Soviet field forces. We believe that additional SA-2 sites will be deployed in the Satellites during the next year or two, and that some mobile units may be provided for Satellite ground forces. We have no reliable evidence indicating the deployment of surface-to-air missiles in Communist China, although some deployment may have taken place or be planned for the future. (Paras. 34-36)

5. The Soviets have had under development a surface-to-air system (SA-3) which we believe is specifically designed to engage targets at very low altitudes. Although no operational sites have been observed, we believe that this system will probably be available for operational use in 1961. Considering the scale and pace of the SA-2 program, we believe that SA-3 will be extensively deployed within the next three or four years, supplementing existing missile defenses of fixed targets and field forces. (Paras. 37-38)

Antimissile Program

6. To develop defenses against ballistic missiles, the Soviets have had under way for several years an extensive and high priority program which we believe to be directed primarily toward defense against IRBMs and ICBMs. We have no basis for a firm estimate on the date of initial operational deployment of a Soviet anti-ballistic missile system or its effectiveness against the various types of Western ballistic missiles. For political as well as military reasons, the Soviets probably would wish to deploy antimissile defenses in a few critical areas even if the available system provided only a limited, interim capability. Considering these factors and the present status of the Soviet research and development program, we estimate that in the period 1963-1966 the Soviets will begin at least limited deployment of an antimissile system. We believe that for some years to come, the Soviets are likely to have only a marginal capability under most favorable conditions for interference with US satellites. (Paras. 40-46)

[Here follows discussion of fighters, supporting equipment, and deployment.]

Civil Defense

11. About 80 million Soviet citizens over the age of 16 have received some instruction in civil defense and about one-fourth of these have probably received good basic grounding in elementary civil defense techniques. The bulk of the population still lacks adequate shelters, although the USSR has a substantial lead over any of the Western Powers in the construction of urban shelters which could provide some protection against fall-out, debris, and fire. In the past two years, the Soviets have given increasing attention to preattack evacuation of nonessential civilians in the event of a threatening situation, but this program appears to be still in the planning stage. Even with limited warning, the existence of a disciplined organization, the use of shelter, and the widespread knowledge of simple techniques such as first aid would probably reduce casualties considerably, especially among key personnel. However, Soviet civil defense is not prepared to cope with the effects of large-scale nuclear attack. Moreover, it would function extremely poorly under conditions of short warning time. (Paras. 73-76)

Warning Time

12. The amount of warning time available significantly affects the capabilities of air defense in various areas of the Bloc. Early warning radar could now give Moscow and many other targets in the interior more than one hour's warning of medium and high altitude attacks made with Western bombers of the B-52 type. Soviet assurance of such detection would be greatly reduced by extremely low level penetrations. The supersonic bombers and air-to-surface missiles now being added to Western inventories could reduce this warning time by as much as 50 percent. Moreover, the more limited early warning time available in Bloc border areas would reduce the effectiveness of the defenses of even heavily defended targets in such areas. As the speeds of Western aerodynamic vehicles increase, and as Western ballistic missiles become a greater threat, the problem of warning time will become more critical. (Para. 78)

Current Capabilities and Future Trends

13. The present capabilities of the Soviet air defense system would be greatest against penetrations by subsonic bombers in daylight and clear weather at altitudes between about 3,000 and about 45,000 feet. Under such conditions, virtually all types of Bloc air defense weapons could be brought to bear against attacking aircraft. Most Soviet fighters can operate at altitudes up to about 50,000 feet, and some up to about 55,000 feet, but the capabilities of the fighter force would be reduced considerably during periods of darkness or poor visibility. In the increasingly widespread areas defended by surface-to-air missiles, air defense capabilities would be virtually unimpaired by weather conditions and would extend to about 60,000 feet, with some capabilities up to about 80,000 feet. (Para. 79)

14. Despite its recent and considerable improvements, however, the Soviet air defense system would still have great difficulty in coping with a large-scale air attack employing a variety of weapons and sophisticated tactics, even within the foregoing altitudes. At altitudes below about 3,000 feet, the capabilities of the system would be progressively reduced; below about 1,000 feet, the system would lose most of its effectiveness. At present, the USSR has little capability for active defense against very low altitude attacks. (Paras. 80-81)

15. The Soviets are making vigorous efforts to counter Western weapon systems. Within the next five years, they will probably introduce improved radars and all-weather interceptors, a surface-to-air missile system designed to counter low altitude air attack, and antimissile defenses. However, they probably will still not achieve a high degree of assurance in coping with a large-scale sophisticated attack by manned bombers. They would probably expect to destroy a significant number of attackers, but given the increasing complexity of the air defense problem, we doubt they will be confident of the extent to which they can reduce the weight of such an attack. The air defense problem has been radically altered by the advent of long-range ballistic missiles. Barring an unforeseen technological breakthrough, the USSR's air defense deficiencies and uncertainties will sharply increase as ballistic missiles assume a larger proportion of the West's total nuclear delivery capability. (Paras. 82-83)2

[Here follow the body of the paper and two annexes, totaling 25 pages.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret. A dissemination notice and table of contents are not printed. According to a note on a covering page, the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff participated in the drafting. The estimate was concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board on January 17. The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained because the subject was outside their jurisdiction.

1 Includes defenses against missiles and satellites. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 NIE 11-3-62, “Soviet Bloc Air and Missile Defense Capabilities Through Mid-1967,” dated October 31, 1962, reached an almost identical conclusion regarding Soviet missile defenses and the overall weakness of Soviet missile and air defense capabilities.NIE 11-3-62 did, however, assign somewhat more effectiveness to Soviet defenses against bombers by the end of the projected period. Also pertinent is NIE 11-5-61, “Soviet Technical Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” dated April 25, 1961. (Both in Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry)

37. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen) 37. Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) and the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen)Source

Washington, July 17, 1961.

The latest version of the Military Section of the BNSP1 (of which I have two copies) is in the following situation.

McNamara has decided he does not wish to push on this now. In McNamara's judgment this would result only in six-eight weeks of arguing inside the Pentagon, which he doesn't want. Nitze feels that the change in local war notions as a consequence of Berlin planning does NOT go deep enough and that the Services consider them an aberration. They have not changed their fundamental attitude and justify their resistance in terms of the old BNSP. Rowen himself has no sense of what the situation is on this point.

Of the 20 copies, only two have been sent outside the DOD, one to Owen2 and one to me.

Rowen thinks that I should push ahead on getting the President's concern focused on these problems, especially for general war problems: See Paragraph 5 and 6 of Policy for General War. Rowen has no view on the tactical problem of whether what should be pushed to the President is the whole BNSP draft or simply a memorandum addressed to the issues of Paragraphs 5 and 6.3

Carl Kaysen4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Carl Kaysen Series, BNSP 7/61-11/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Kaysen.

1 Undated. (Ibid.)

2 Henry Owen of the Policy Planning Council.

3 These paragraphs stressed the progressive adoption of “the concept of flexibility for general war” and stated that the option of engaging “in the destruction of the enemy's principal military capabilities while at the same time minimizing damage to his population, urban-industrial complexes, and government controls” would become available by November 1 and would “represent an addition to SIOP-62.” No documentation has been found indicating a briefing of the President from this draft.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

38. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State Rusk 38. Letter From the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Gilpatric) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, July 17, 1961.

Dear Dean:

We appreciate receiving your views on the draft military section of Basic National Security Policy, as set forth in your letter of July 9th.

I note that your principal concern is over U.S. local war planning. The pertinent provision of the draft which you reviewed stated that, “At the present time the main basis for U.S. local war planning is the plan for the resumption of hostilities in Korea. For the present, the level of forces called for in this plan, including the mobilization of U.S. reserve forces, remains the basis of U.S. local war planning outside of Europe.”

As a result of subsequent work here in the Department of Defense we are considering a modification of the foregoing provision in a manner which I believe you will find more satisfactory. Moreover, we plan to emphasize even more clearly than in the earlier revision that there must be adequate military alternatives to the initiation of general war by the U.S., and that the greatest importance is attached to giving the President the option to commit substantial non-nuclear forces before having to decide to initiate the use of nuclear weapons in defense of U.S. commitments.1

The resolution of the order of magnitude of forces to be used in local war planning may well be the outgrowth of the present intensive re-examination of our forces now going on in the light of the Berlin situation, particularly the analysis of the ways of strengthening our forces by increasing their non-nuclear capability.

Sincerely yours,

Ros Gilpatric

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/7-1461. Secret.

1 See Document 39.

39. Editorial Note 39. Editorial Note

In a memorandum to U. Alexis Johnson dated July 21, 1961, Kitchen discussed Gilpatric's letter to Rusk (Document 38) and commented that the Secretary of Defense had “set aside, at least temporarily,” the BNSP review “partly because of the Berlin situation and party because the interagency clearance process had resulted in the document being filled with old and familiar clichés.” Kitchen noted that the Department of State was not “guilty of encumbering the document as indicated since most of our comments were encouraging and imaginative.” (Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/7-1461)

Activity on the project at the Department of Defense ceased for the remainder of 1961 shortly but not immediately after McNamara's decision. On July 5, the Joint Chiefs of Staff circulated a draft emphasizing retention of “free world” military superiority. In general war, U.S. forces should in the short term be “capable of emerging from a nuclear exchange with a clear military advantage,” and for the longer term should “possess the highest practicable degree of alert and be capable of a range of options, including those made possible by a secure reserve, to increase control of response and enhance military flexibility.” Limited war forces were to be sufficient, “in conjunction with available local forces, [to] retard aggression” long enough to permit reinforcement, “making every feasible effort to keep the war at a non-nuclear level, but being prepared to use nuclear weapons when required.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 BNSP 18 Apr 61)

In a memorandum to Secretary of Defense McNamara, dated July 28, William Bundy enclosed an ISA draft of the same date. Bundy commented that the draft “had been extensively changed from previous ISA versions to embody much thinking from the JCS draft.” It did, however, “retain the fundamental concepts of previous ISA versions: the stress on non-nuclear warfare and the requirement for discriminate and flexible general war operations under tight central control.” Bundy concluded by requesting that McNamara recommend NSC approval of military sections of a BNSP in accordance with the ISA draft.

Regarding the outcome of a general war, the draft stated that the United States should “conduct general war so as to obtain the best achievable outcome” and that “consistent with over-all objectives, the U.S. will conduct general war so as to facilitate the conduct of negotiations to bring the war to an end.” Regarding overall defense posture, the draft spoke of “the capacity to meet any military situation discriminately with sufficient, but not excessive, measures” and of having the “option to engage substantial non-nuclear forces before having to decide to initiate the use of nuclear weapons.” The draft stressed that the desired flexibility, while not in being, was to be “progressively and rapidly created.” (Ibid.; copies of the JCS and ISA drafts also available as JCS 2101/436 and JCS 2101/440, respectively, at National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3001 (14 Apr 61) Sec 3)

In a July 28 note to the JCS, the Joint Strategic Survey Council recommended that the JCS “should not be drawn into discussion of what is specifically wrong with ISA draft of BNSP in manner which would place JCS draft in competition with it,” or which would preclude the JCS giving a copy of their position to the President or to members of the NSC. The JCS disagreed and at their request the Joint Strategic Survey Council submitted to them on August 5 a “talking paper” in support of the positions taken in the July 5 JCS draft. The talking paper stated that the ISA draft was “negative and inhibiting in nature and tended to over-emphasize control of military forces, avoidance of casualties and damage, defense, survival, without comparable concern for combat effectiveness, the offensive, or the will to succeed.” The paper further noted: “An overly inhibited BNSP could permeate the whole structure of a people and government to the point where the all-important will to win disappears.” The BNSP “should reflect confidence, determination, combat effectiveness, and the offensive spirit, if the United States is to survive and prosper.” The JCS believed in “control of military operations by constituted authority” but believed “that it [control] should be covered broadly and succinctly in BNSP with specific details left to technical plans and policies.” The ISA draft tended “to emphasize non-nuclear weapons even more than current policy emphasizes nuclear weapons.” The covering note to the talking paper recommended the Secretary's adoption of the July 5 JCS draft as the position of the Department of Defense. (Ibid.) Available records do not indicate whether McNamara saw or was briefed on the talking paper.

40. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 40. Memorandum of Conference With President KennedySource

Washington, July 27, 1961, 4 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Lemnitzer

General Decker

Vice Admiral Russell

General LeMay

General Shoup

General Clifton

General Lemnitzer opened the discussion with a briefing on what happened on the Hill.

[Here follows discussion of JCS testimony that morning before the Senate Armed Services Committee on the call-up of reserves in the Berlin crisis and of aircraft procurement.]

General Lemnitzer then continued the discussion of the Committee reaction and stated that they had been very greatly concerned about the question of when the President might use nuclear weapons if we actually got into war. They also wanted to know how long we could fight a conventional war prior to employing nuclear weapons with the buildup now being anticipated and asked for. It was the sense of the Committee that we must prove our willingness and agree to use nuclear weapons if this crisis continues. They had the feeling that our de-emphasis on nuclear weapons might encourage Premier Khrushchev to think that we would not be willing and able to use nuclear weapons, and consequently, they urged the Administration to hold this line firmly so that Mr. Khrushchev might not misinterpret our conventional buildup.1

The President then talked about the difficulty in Central Europe with a conventional war and stated that he felt that the critical point is to be able to use nuclear weapons at a crucial moment before they use them. He inquired as to our capabilities of making such a decision without letting the enemy know that we are about to do it.

General LeMay first responded to this inquiry with a description of when and how SAC could be used and the amount of warning time under various conditions that the Soviet Union could derive from our attack approach. The President then asked several questions about the Soviet capability to detect and to react.

There was a further discussion of the command and control centers which now exist especially in regard to the NATO use of nuclear weapons. General LeMay pointed out during this discussion that there is a SAC Airborne Command post which could be used in case of disaster and Admiral Russell pointed out that the Navy has a Command Post afloat.

During this latter discussion the President directed that we get out all the letters of agreement with our allies, especially the British, the French, and the Canadians, to our consulting them before a nuclear attack is launched.

During this discussion, General LeMay told the President that we could take off from the bases in Spain without any previous notification, but all the rest had strings on them, one kind and another.

[Here follows discussion of the Berlin crisis and Cuba.]

General Lemnitzer then pointed out that the program on Capitol Hill was pretty well set, but that civil defense didn't get much play in the hearing. The President asked some specific questions and General Lemnitzer said the Nike-Zeus was not mentioned, but that Senator Symington had made quite a point about manned bombers. There had been some discussion of the B-70, but the greatest concern in the Committee was the adequacy and modernization of our fighter bomber force.

One additional point from the Committee was that they feel we should take stronger measures to “fire up our production lines” for the long pull even though we may not be taking much end product from these production lines at the moment.

[Here follows discussion of Cuba and the Berlin crisis.]

General Lemnitzer then reported that the Joint Chiefs had been reviewing our overall National Security Council policies in an effort to derive a new statement of military policy. He pointed out that the Joint Chiefs had not confined themselves to the military policy section, but had studied and commented upon the overall NSC policies, but had paid the most attention to the military section. He said that this recently completed review had been forwarded to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Defense had Mr. Gilpatric and Mr. Nitze both going over it and coming up with a paper of their own,2 which included portions of the JCS paper described above.

The President directed that they discuss this more completely at their next meeting, and, in the meantime, he would probably get a look at the McNamara paper too. (Note: This matter has been deferred as the result of the developments on the Berlin situation.)

[Here follows discussion of Berlin and NATO.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume I. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton.

1 This issue was also discussed at the meeting of the National Security Council on July 20. (Memorandum by McGeorge Bundy; ibid., Meetings and Memoranda Series, 489th Meeting of the NSC)

2 Apparent references to the July 5 JCS draft of military sections of a basic national security policy and the ISA draft then in preparation (forwarded to the Secretary of Defense on July 28). See Document 39.

41. Editorial Note 41. Editorial Note

On August 18, 1961, the Joint Chiefs of Staff sent to Secretary of Defense McNamara their divergent views on the guidance for the preparation of SIOP-63. The principal divergence was over [text not declassified] for the use of strategic nuclear weapons. Generals Anderson, Decker, and Shoup all set forth a [text not declassified].

The Chiefs agreed on recommendations for increasing flexibility by providing for the possible withholding of attacks against Communist China and the satellites and/or governmental control centers in any Communist country. General Lemnitzer endorsed the views of the Army, Navy, and Marine Corps, stating that [text not declassified]. (Memoranda from Lemnitzer to McNamara, August 18, with attachments including draft guidance for the preparation of SIOP-63; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3105 (8 Mar 61) (3) Sec 1)

On August 25, Secretary McNamara replied in a memorandum to Lemnitzer that in general he concurred with Lemnitzer's recommendations. However, he [text not declassified]. (JCS 2056/278, August 25, with attachments; ibid.) On October 16, McNamara submitted to the Joint Chiefs a redraft of the suggested guidance prepared primarily by Dr. Alain Enthoven, Deputy Comptroller of the Department of Defense. (JCS 2056/284, October 16, with attached draft guidance; ibid.) After further discussion between McNamara and the JCS on October 23, the JCS issued the final guidance on October 27; see Document 52.

42. Editorial Note 42. Editorial Note

On September 13, 1961, SIOP-62 was briefed to President Kennedy. (Enclosure to JCS 2056/281, September 13; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, CCS 3105 Joint Planning (13 September 1961)) A partially declassified text is printed in International Security, Summer 1987 (12:1), pages 41-51. For information on the origins of SIOP-62, see Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, volume III, Documents 1ff.

43. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 43. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, September 19, 1961.

SUBJECT

Strategic Air Planning and Berlin

1. This paper summarizes a 31-page memorandum to me from Carl Kaysen (dated 5 September 1961).1 That memorandum comprises four major parts: a basic memorandum outlining why he believes strategic air planning needs review in conjunction with Berlin planning; an alternative to SIOP-62, an annex which spells out a possible substitute for the initial attack of SIOP-62, [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] a brief analysis of SIOP-62, outlining its target philosophy, planning factors, and limitations; and an unaddressed draft request for a planning study on an alternative to SIOP-62. Each of these parts is summarized below.

2. Basic Memorandum. SIOP-62 is built around two concepts that may not be appropriate in a Berlin crisis: (a) it is essentially a [2 lines of source text not declassified]. Two sets of possible circumstances suggest the need for supplementary and alternative plans, namely, we might be lured out of position by a false alarm or strategic feint by the Soviets, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. a. A false alarm, if it resulted in the launching and recall of the Alert Force, would degrade our capabilities significantly for about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] at least. Further, the forces held back might not be prepared to attack appropriate targets, the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] having been assigned the Alert Force, now recalled.

b. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]might occur from escalation of military action around Berlin, which could force U.S. to move from the local military action to the general war level.SIOP-62 execution of Alert Force [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. This does not appear an appropriate response to the repulse of a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]attack, especially since SIOP-62 will almost inevitably alert the Soviets and, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] they will respond in kind. [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

c. Two recommendations follow: (1) CINCSAC should look at the false alarm problem and make any necessary changes in his plans to minimize degradation of his force under such a development.

(2) The JCS, Director STP,2 and CINCSAC should consider an alternative to SIOP-62 for use in context of Berlin contingency planning, with emphasis on a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

3. An Alternative to SIOP-62. [5-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] a. Reliability of present missiles is low, their accuracy uncertain, and problems of achieving simultaneity on target formidable. Therefore, ICBMs, theoretically ideal for this kind of minimum-warning attack, are ruled out at present time.

b. Bombers normally have been rejected as minimum-warning vehicles, primarily because they have operated in mass. But, if [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] DGZ's—[less than 1 line of source text not declassified]—are assumed to constitute the essential targets, the destruction of which would paralyze nuclear threat to U.S., bomber use becomes more attractive. Further, if 26 of essential targets are [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]that do not need to be hit in first wave, if 42 targets, close together, can be hit by 21 bombers (each bomber striking two targets within 20 minutes of one another), then to carry out this plan the U.S. must only get [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]bombers into Soviet airspace and over their initial targets within a 15 minute period. ([less than 1 line of source text not declassified] DGZ's-[less than 1 line of source text not declassified]) Allowing a 25% attrition rate would mean that [less than 1 line of source text declassified] aircraft, instead of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], would have to penetrate Soviet airspace. It is further assumed that these aircraft could [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. This kind of attack, [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

c. Two questions arise: How valid are the assumptions, and do we possess the skill and capability for such a raid. There are reasons to believe assumptions are reasonable. (These are amplified in some detail, based on statements in NIE's, with emphasis on deficiencies in Soviet low-level detection capabilities.) The Air Force, of course, must provide the answer to the second question.

d. There are risks as well as opportunities in this approach. With the initiative, the U.S. could reduce the consequences of partial success and exercise some control over Soviet behavior. Once bombs had fallen on USSR, U.S. non-committed forces could be altered, civil defense measures instituted, air defenses alerted. Compared with SIOP-62, the small-scale minimum-warning attack—coupled with follow-on raids—has distinct advantages with respect to recall, achievement of surprise, reduction in Soviet long-range capabilities before launch, and control over the number and character of initial and subsequent attacks.

e. Appendix. Damage assessment to the U.S. from such a minimum-warning attack must deal with uncertainties, but rough calculations can be made. (1) Damage to U.S. will be affected by the number of Soviet long range forces surviving the initial attack; the numbers and types of targets the U.S. attacked, and the influence of this on USSR war plans; the numbers and yields of USSR weapons per U.S. target, especially in urban areas; the height of burst (which determines fall-out); civil defenses available to U.S., and uses made of them.

(2) U.S. can attempt to influence Soviet behavior in peace by declaring use of nuclear weapons only against military targets unless enemy initiates a counter-city campaign. This may influence Soviet retaliatory choices by offering Soviets a powerful incentive to use whatever residual forces they command in a sensible way.

4. An Appreciation of SIOP-62. The SIOP-62 target list is constant, with [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]DGZ's, of which the Alert Force hit. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. a. President Eisenhower established requirement that U.S. forces should have the capability to achieve [3 lines of source text not declassified]. To achieve specified assurance major tactics include: (1) [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Degradation factors are also calculated and allowed for. Allowing for these, the average assurance that at least one weapon will detonate on target is [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

b. Flexibility of SIOP-62 only comes from ability to withhold preplanned strikes. Once the Alert Force is launched, however, selective withholding of its forces is not presently possible.

c. Outcome of SIOP-62 execution will produce U.S. casualties of about 16 million at a minimum. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

d. SIOP-62 is a rigid, all-purpose plan, designed for execution in existing form, regardless of circumstances. Rigidity stems from: (1) Military belief that USSR will strike cities, or urban-military targets; hence there is no need for selective U.S. targeting.

(2) Military belief that, regardless of circumstances, USSR will be able to launch some weapons against U.S. Nowhere is real consideration given to possibility of interaction between ours and their targeting philosophy.

(3) Belief that winning general war means coming out relatively better than USSR, regardless of magnitude of losses.

(4) A fear that retaliation against cities after a surprise attack may be all we can do; with U.S. command-control knocked out, alternative plans might leave residual U.S. forces uncertain as to what to attack; U.S. flexibility would become known, and decrease deterrence.

e. SIOP-62 is a blunt instrument, and its tactics almost make certain fulfillment of prophecy that enemy will be able to launch some weapons.

5. Draft Request for Planning Study. Alternative plans should be developed which concentrate on [2 lines of source text not declassified]. Unless justified, attack should be restricted to USSR. Emphasis should be given to minimum-warning attack with minimum sized force. Evaluation of plans should include Soviet force survival, damage to USSR, warning given USSR, damage to U.S., damage elsewhere, and U.S. follow-on force capabilities. A progress report is requested by 25 September.3

Maxwell D. Taylor

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, 38 500a Air Access. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

2 General Power was also Director, Strategic Target Planning.

3 The progress report has not been found. Also on September 19, Taylor sent the President a list of questions pertaining to the operation of the SIOP with the suggestion that they be forwarded to General Power so that he could answer them at the President's meeting with Power the following day. Kennedy agreed and the list was sent. (Memoranda from Taylor to Kennedy and Taylor to Lemnitzer, September 19; both in the National Defense University, Taylor Papers, 33 66 NATO) Regarding the meeting with Power, see Document 44.

44. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 44. Memorandum of Conference With President KennedySource

Washington, September 20, 1961.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Lemnitzer

General Power

General Taylor

General Clifton

General Power approached the President with a proposal on intelligence and in all the discussion several requirements came forth:

The President directed that General Taylor take an active hand from the intelligence viewpoint to see that General Power and General LeMay came up with an explanation of the difference in their opinion on what could be done.

General Taylor then said that, to formalize this, the requirement should be placed on General Lemnitzer to study the problem and present the President the viewpoints of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—not necessarily a Joint Chiefs' agreed position—and if General Power's estimate was different, to have his comments attached. This could give the President the necessary information on which to base a decision for or against General Power's suggestion. The President agreed.

General Power expressed great concern over the lack of information on Soviet ICBM sites, stating that we had only 10% usable photographic coverage of the USSR. Since in the photographed area 20 ICBM pads had been found, there might be many times more in the unphotographed area. Generals Lemnitzer and Taylor contested the accuracy of this estimate of useful coverage and the conclusion drawn from it.

In view of our lack of information, General Power strongly recommended the resumption of U-2 flights.

In response to questions by the President, General Power indicated his belief that the time of our greatest danger of a Soviet surprise attack is now and during the coming year. If a general atomic war is inevitable, the U.S. should strike first—presumably after locating the essential Soviet nuclear targets.

The President also directed that the group come up with an answer to this question: how much information does the Soviet Union need, and how long do they need to launch their missiles?

C.V. Clifton
Major General, USA
Defense Liaison Officer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, Conferences with the President 3/61-9/61. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton. According to an earlier draft of this memorandum, the fourth, fifth, and sixth paragraphs are based on notes taken by General Taylor. (Ibid.)

45. National Intelligence Estimate 45. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, September 21, 1961.

NIE 11-8/1-61

STRENGTH AND DEPLOYMENT OF SOVIET LONG RANGE BALLISTIC MISSILE FORCES1

The Problem

To estimate current Soviet operational strength in ICBM's and other ground-launched ballistic missiles with ranges of 700 n.m. or more, to identify present areas and methods of deployment, and to estimate the probable trends in strength and deployment over the next few years.

Conclusions

1. New information, providing a much firmer base for estimates on Soviet long range ballistic missiles, has caused a sharp downward revision in our estimate of present Soviet ICBM strength but strongly supports our estimate of medium range missile strength.

2. We now estimate that the present Soviet ICBM strength is in the range of 10-25 launchers from which missiles can be fired against the US, and that this force level will not increase markedly during the months immediately ahead.2 We also estimate that the USSR now has about 250-300 operational launchers equipped with 700 and 1,100 n.m. ballistic missiles. The bulk of these MRBM launchers are in western USSR, within range of NATO targets in Europe; others are in southern USSR and in the Soviet Far East. ICBM and MRBM launchers probably have sufficient missiles to provide a reload capability and to fire additional missiles after a period of some hours, assuming that the launching facilities are not damaged by accident or attack.

3. The low present and near-term ICBM force level probably results chiefly from a Soviet decision to deploy only a small force of the cumbersome, first generation ICBMs, and to press the development of a smaller, second generation system. Under emergency conditions the existing force could be supplemented somewhat during the first half of 1962, but Soviet ICBM strength will probably not increase substantially until the new missile is ready for operational use, probably sometime in the latter half of 1962. After this point, we anticipate that the number of operational launchers will begin to increase significantly. On this basis, we estimate that the force level in mid-1963 will approximate 75-125 operational ICBM launchers.3

4. In addition to 700 and 1,100 n.m. missiles now available, the USSR will probably have a 2,000 n.m. system ready for operational use late this year or early next year. The USSR's combined strength in these missile categories will probably reach 350-450 operational launchers in the 1962-1963 period, and then level off.

5. Soviet professions of greatly enhanced striking power thus derive primarily from a massive capability to attack European and other peripheral targets. Although Soviet propaganda has assiduously cultivated an image of great ICBM strength, the bulk of the USSR's present capability to attack the US is in bombers and submarine-launched missiles rather than in a large ICBM force. While the present ICBM force poses a grave threat to a number of US urban areas, it represents only a limited threat to US-based nuclear striking forces.4

Discussion

6. The requirement to revise our estimates on Soviet long range ballistic missile forces stems from significant recent evidence [1 line of source text not declassified] 1961 activities at the Soviet ICBM and space vehicle test range has provided information on the new types of ballistic vehicles now being developed and on the pace and progress of the developments programs. [1 line of source text not declassified] the first positive identification of long range ballistic missile deployment complexes, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] excellent guidance as to Soviet deployment methods. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]useful evidence on the general status and organization of long range missile forces. Therefore, although significant gaps continue to exist and some of the available information is still open to alternate interpretations, the present estimate stands on firmer ground than any previous estimate on this critical subject.

[Here follows discussion of Soviet missile tests and ICBM deployment.]

Adequacy of Recent Intelligence Coverage

19. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]since mid-1960, our coverage of suspected deployment areas in the USSR has been substantially augmented. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Soviet missile test range installations, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are now known to bear a close resemblance to deployment sites in the field. On the basis of this activity, combined with other information and analysis, we now estimate that we have good intelligence coverage of [7 lines of source text not declassified] more than 50 percent of those portions of the USSR within which ICBM deployment is most likely.5

20. Of the five confirmed or possible ICBM complexes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Yur'ya, Plesetsk, and Verkhnyaya Salda were previously suspected [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. We previously had not suspected Yoshkar-Ola or Kostroma. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

21. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]many previously suspected areas did not contain ICBM complexes as of the summer of 1961. Four areas [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]remain under active consideration as suspected locations of ICBM deployment activity (see Figure 9).6 Past experience indicates that some or all of the areas now under active consideration may prove to be negative, and conversely, that deployment activity may now be under way in other unsuspected areas. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Probable ICBM Force Levels7

22. We believe that our coverage of both test range activities and potential deployment areas is adequate to support the judgment that at present there are only a few ICBM complexes operational or under construction. While there are differences within the intelligence community as to the progress of the Soviet program to date and the precise composition of the current force, we estimate that the present Soviet ICBM capability is in the range of 10-25 launchers from which missiles can be fired against the US. The low side of this range allows for the possibility that the Soviets could now fire only a token ICBM salvo from a few launchers, located at the Tyuratam rangehead and an operational complex, perhaps Plesetsk. The high side, however, takes into account the limitations of our coverage and allows for the existence of a few other complexes equipped with first generation missiles, now operational but undetected.

23. The Soviet system is probably designed to have a refire capability from each launcher. The USSR may therefore be able to fire a second salvo some hours after the first, assuming that the launching facilities are not damaged by accident or attack.

24. The reasons for the small current capability are important to an estimate of the future Soviet buildup. The first generation system, designed at an early stage of Soviet nuclear and missile technology, proved to be powerful and reliable but was probably too cumbersome to be deployed on a large scale. One or more first generation sites may have been started but cancelled. [3 lines of source text not declassified]The urgent development of at least one second generation system probably began in about 1958, and an intensive firing program is now underway concurrent with the construction of simplified deployment complexes. We therefore believe that in about 1958 the Soviet leaders decided to deploy only a small force of first generation ICBMs while pressing toward second generation systems.

25. The net effect of this Soviet decision, together with whatever slippage is occurring in the development of second generation systems, has been to produce a low plateau of ICBM strength. Under emergency conditions the existing force could be supplemented during the first half of 1962 by putting some second generation ICBMs on launcher at one or two completed complexes before the weapon system has been thoroughly tested. However, the Soviets could not have very much confidence in the reliability, accuracy and effectiveness of such a force. In any event, operational ICBM strength will probably not increase substantially until the new missile has been proved satisfactory for operational use, probably some time in the latter half of 1962. Alternatively, the possibility cannot be excluded that second generation ICBMs could be proved satisfactory for operational use somewhat earlier in 1962, possibly as soon as the first simplified complex is completed. After this point, we anticipate that the number of operational launchers will begin to increase significantly.

26. We continue to believe, for the many reasons adduced in NIE 11-8-61, that the Soviet leaders have desired a force of several hundred operational ICBM launchers, to be acquired as soon as practicable over the next few years. In addition to the complexes known to be under construction, it is probable that work is under way on other undiscovered complexes and that the construction of still others is scheduled to begin soon. Taking account of this probability, together with our present intelligence coverage and our information on site activation lead-time, we estimate that the force level in mid-1963 will approximate 75-125 operational ICBM launchers. The high side of this range allows for eight complexes of eight launchers each under construction at the present time, with four more scheduled to begin by the end of the year; it would require site activation time to decrease to about 18 months by the end of the year; it builds from a present force level of about 25 operational launchers. The low side of the mid-1963 range would be achieved if six complexes were now under construction, two more were begun by the end of the year, and the present force level were only about 10 launchers.

27. As noted in NIE 11-8-61, Soviet force goals for the period to 1966 will be increasingly affected by developments in US and Soviet military technology, including the multiplication of hardened US missile sites, the possible advent of more advanced Soviet missiles which can better be protected, and by developments in both antimissile defenses and space weapons. The international political situation will also affect Soviet force goals, and there is a good chance that the Soviet leaders themselves have not yet come to a definite decision. We have not been able as yet to review, in the light of the new evidence, these and other considerations pertaining to the probable future pace of the Soviet ICBM program. Therefore we are unable to project a numerical estimate beyond mid-1963. Considering the problems involved in site activation, however, we believe that a rate of 100 or possibly even 150 launchers per year beginning in about 1963 would be feasible. To accomplish such a schedule, the USSR would have to lay on a major program of site construction within the next year, which we believe would be detected [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

Medium and Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles

28. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]confirms the large-scale deployment of 700 and 1,100 n.m. ballistic missiles in western USSR. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] approximately 50 fixed sites with a total of about 200 pads suitable for launching these MRBMs have been firmly identified in a wide belt stretching from the Baltic to the southern Ukraine. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we are virtually certain that there are about 10 additional sites [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Taking account of indicators pointing to still other locations [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we estimate with high confidence that in the western belt alone there are now about 75 sites with a total of about 300 launch pads, completed or under construction. (For known and estimated site locations in this area, see Figure 9.)

29. The new information does not establish whether individual sites are fully operational, nor does it reveal which type of missile each is to employ. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]approximately three-quarters of the identified sites appeared to be complete or nearly so, some were under construction, and the evidence on others is ambiguous. Construction has probably been completed at some sites [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the installation of support equipment and missiles could probably be accomplished relatively quickly thereafter, perhaps in a period of some weeks. Three basic site configurations have been observed, all of them bearing a strong resemblance to launch areas at the Kapustin Yar rangehead (see Figure 8).8 Any of the three types could employ either 700 or 1,100 n.m. missiles, whose size and truck-mounted support equipment are virtually identical. The sites could not employ ICBMs, but one type might be intended for the 2,000 n.m. IRBM which has been under development at Kapustin Yar.

30. On the basis of the new evidence and a wealth of other material on development, production, training and deployment, we estimate that in the western belt alone the USSR now has about 200-250 operational launchers equipped with 700 and 1,1000 n.m. ballistic missiles, together with the necessary supporting equipment and trained personnel. From these launchers, missiles could be directed against NATO targets from Norway to Turkey. On less firm but consistent evidence, about 50 additional launchers are believed to be operational in other areas: in the Transcaucasus and Turkestan, from which they could attack Middle Eastern targets from Suez to Pakistan; and in the southern portion of the Soviet Far East within range of Japan, Korea, and Okinawa. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the presence of some sites in Turkestan and in the Soviet Far East, north of Vladivostok.

31. On this basis, we estimate that the USSR now has a total of about 250-300 operational launchers equipped with medium range ballistic missiles, the bulk of them within range of NATO targets in Europe. This is essentially the same numerical estimate as given in NIE 11-8-61, but it is now made with greater assurance.

32. Contrary to our previous view that MRBMs were deployed in mobile units, we now know that even though their support equipment is truck-mounted, most if not all MRBM units employ fixed sites. Like the ICBM complexes, these are soft, screened from ground observation by their placement in wooded areas, and protected against air attack by surface-to-air missile sites in the vicinity. The systems are probably designed so that all ready missiles at a site can be salvoed within a few minutes of each other. Two additional missiles are probably available for each launcher; a second salvo could probably be launched about 4-6 hours after the first. There is some evidence that after one or two salvos the units are to move from their fixed sites to reserve positions. Their mobility could thus be used for their immediate protection, or they could move to new launch points to support field forces in subsequent phases of a war.

33. The Soviet planners apparently see a larger total requirement for MRBMs and IRBMs than we had supposed. While the rate of deployment activity in the western belt is probably tapering off after a vigorous three-year program, some sites of all three basic types are still under construction. There will therefore be at least some increase in force levels in the coming months. The magnitude of the buildup thereafter will depend largely on the degree to which the 2,000 n.m. system is deployed, and whether or not it will supplement or replace medium range missiles.

34. With the advent of the 2,000 n.m. IRBM, probably in late 1961 or early 1962, the Soviets will acquire new ballistic missile capabilities against such areas as Spain, North Africa, and Taiwan. To this extent at least, they probably wish to supplement their present strength. They may also wish to deploy IRBMs and MRBMs to more northerly areas within range of targets in Greenland and Alaska. Moreover, evidence from clandestine sources indicates that the Soviet field forces are exerting pressure to acquire missiles of these ranges. In general, however, we believe that the future MRBM/IRBM program will emphasize changes in the mix among the existing systems, and later the introduction of second generation systems, rather than sheer numerical expansion. Taking these factors into account, we estimate that the USSR will achieve 350-450 operational MRBM and IRBM launchers sometime in the 1962-1963 period, and that the force level will be relatively stable thereafter.

[Here follow 11 pages of tables, illustrations, maps, and charts.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; [codeword not declassified]. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, the Joint Staff, the National Security Agency, and the Atomic Energy Commission. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction. For complete text of NIE 11-8/1-61, see the Supplement.

1 NIE 11-8/1-61 revises and updates the estimates on this subject which were made in NIE 11-8-61: “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack”, Top Secret, 7 June 1961. [2 lines of source text not declassified] The new estimate is issued [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] so that the reader can fully appreciate the quantity and quality of information on which it is based.

A brief summary of this estimate, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], will be included in the forthcoming NIE 11-4-61: “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1961-1966”, now scheduled for completion in December 1961. In that estimate, the treatment of ground launched missiles will be incorporated into a summary of the entire Soviet long-range attack capability, including bombers, air-to-surface missiles, and submarine-launched missiles. For our current estimates on these latter elements of the long range striking force, see NIE 11-4-61, Annex A: “Soviet Military Forces and Capabilities”, 24 August 1961, Top Secret, paragraphs 16-23. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in this sentence. See his footnote following the Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text. The footnote with the position of Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, is not printed. His position was that the Soviets had about 50 operational ICBM launchers in mid-1961 and would have about 100 in mid-1962 and about 250 in mid-1963. The early availability and high performance record of the first generation ICBM launchers indicated that by mid-1961 “substantial” numbers had been deployed, and he believed that the deployed force constituted a “serious threat to US-based nuclear striking forces.” He believed that the Soviets would continue to deploy first generation missiles until the second generation missiles became available.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in paragraph 3. See his footnote following the Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in paragraph 3 and the last sentence of paragraph 5. See his footnote following the Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 [Footnote in the source text (5-1/2 lines) not declassified]

6 Not printed.

7 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not concur in the estimate of ICBM force levels. For his position, see his footnote following the Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text. See footnote 3 above.]

8 Not printed.

46. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 46. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, September 23, 1961.

SUBJECT

Recommended Long Range Nuclear Delivery Forces 1963-1967 (C)

This Appendix summarizes the main factors I have taken into consideration in determining United States' requirements for Long Range Nuclear Delivery Forces in the years 1963-1967. The Appendix includes: I. Recommended Force Levels and their Fiscal Implications;

II. The General Basis for My Recommendations on Force Levels;

III. The Basis for My Recommendations on Specific Weapon Systems.

I. Recommended Force Levels and Their Fiscal Implications

I recommend that you approve, for inclusion in the FY 1963 budget, the procurement of the following operational missiles and aircraft to supplement our Long Range Nuclear Delivery Forces:

Total Purchase Cost To Be Funded FY 1963 NOA

(Millions of Dollars)

a. 100 Minutemen Hardened and Dispersed $461 $284

b. 50 Mobile Minutemen 935 270

c. 6 Polaris Submarines 1,072 963

d. 92 Skybolt Missiles 347 200

e. 100 KC-135 Tankers 287 270

Total for FY 1963 Decisions $3,102 $1,987

Total Funding Requirements from Prior Years' Decisions 6,939

Total for FY 1963 $8,926

Moreover, I recommend that we adopt, for planning purposes, the force structure summarized in the table on the next page. In those cases in which the forces I am recommending differ from those recommended by the Navy and Air Force, the latter are shown in red beneath mine.1

RECOMMENDED FORCESa

End-Fiscal Year

1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Bombers

B-52 555 630 630 630 630 630 630

695 675 675 675 675

B-47 1,125 855 585 450 225 — —

B-58 40 80 80 80 80 80 80

Total Bombers 1,720 1,565 1,295 1,160 935 710 710

1,320 1,205 980 755 755

Air-Launched Missiles

Hound Dog 216 450 522 522 522 522 336b

408

Skybolt — — — — 322 690 1,150

Total GAM's 216 450 522 522 844 1,212 1,468

1,558

ICBM and Polaris Missiles

Atlas 36 75 135 135 135 126 117

Titan 6 51 78 114 114 114 114

132 132 132 132

Minuteman H&D — — 150 600 700 800 900c

1,200 1,700 2,300

Minuteman Mobile — — — — 50 100 100

300 300

Polaris 80 96 144 288 480 560 656

672 720

Total ICBM/Polaris 122 222 507 1,137 1,479 1,700 1,887

1,997 2,930 3,569

Other

Quail 224 392 392 392 392 392 392

KC-135 400 440 520 620 640 640 640

760 800 800

KC-97 600 460 340 240 120 — —

RB-47 45 45 45 45 — — —

RC-135 — — 3 13 23 23 23

Alert Force Weaponsd

No. of Weapons 1,390 2,350 2,450 3,050 3,440 3,870 4,180

2,550 3,140 4,050 5,200 5,890

Megatons 1,530 2,750 3,300 4,350 4,740 5,130 5,450

3,400 4,460 5,600 6,850 7,620

The estimated Total Obligational Authority required to procure and operate these forces over this period is shown in the following table. The difference between the Total Obligational Authority required to finance the forces I am recommending and that required to finance the forces recommended by the individual Services is shown on the second line. Over the five years, 1963-67, the cost of the aircraft and missiles recommended by the Air Force and the Polaris recommended by the Navy exceeds the cost of the forces I am recommending by approximately $10 billion. As will be shown later in this paper, the extra capability provided by the individual Service proposals runs up against strongly diminishing returns and yields very little in terms of target destruction. In my judgment, it is an increment not worth the cost of $10 billion over the five year period.

TOTAL OBLIGATIONAL AUTHORITY

(Billions of Dollars)

FY62 FY63 FY64 FY65 FY66 FY67 FY63-67

Secretary of Defense Recommendations 9.3 8.9 8.0 5.6 4.7 4.1 31.3

Service Proposals over Secretary/Defense +.6 +1.5 +1.6 +3.0 +2.2 +1.4 +9.7

The forces I am recommending for procurement in FY 1963 are compared with the recommendations of the Service Chiefs in the following table. The numbers represent operational aircraft or missiles.

INITIAL RECOMMENDATIONS OF CHIEFS

Secretary of Defense Chairman JCS Army Navy & USMC Air Force JCS 9-11-61 Recoms.e

B-52 Aircraft 0 0 b b 0 a 45 45

Skybolt 92 92 0 0 92 92

KC-135c 100 100 100 100 120 100

Titan 0 18 0 0 18 18

Minuteman H&D 100 d 300 d 100 d 100 600 300

Minuteman Mobile 50 50 0 0 50 50

Polaris 96 96 96 160 0 128

The aircraft and missiles recommended for procurement in FY 1963 by the Air Force and the Polaris submarines recommended for procurement in FY 1963 by the Navy would cost approximately $3.1 billions more to buy than the aircraft and missiles I am recommending. Of this, approximately $2 billions would require funding in FY 1962 and FY 1963.

As well as these forces, I will recommend at a later date that the Air Force be authorized to procure and operate a secure command and control system for SAC. Except for 20 KC-135's which will be available for use as airborne command posts, the cost of this system has not been included in the figures on page 3.2

II. General Basis for Force Level Recommendations

The forces I am recommending have been chosen to provide the United States with the capability, in the event of a Soviet nuclear attack, first, to strike back against Soviet bomber bases, missile sites, and other installations associated with long-range nuclear forces, in order to reduce Soviet power and limit the damage that can be done to us by vulnerable Soviet follow-on forces, while, second, holding in protected reserve forces capable of destroying the Soviet urban society, if necessary, in a controlled and deliberate way. With the recommended forces, I am confident that we will be able, at all times, to deny the Soviet Union the prospect of either a military victory or of knocking out the U.S. retaliatory force. If the most likely estimates of Soviet forces prove to be correct, the forces I am recommending should provide us a capability to achieve a substantial military superiority over the Soviets even after they have attacked us.

The recommended forces are designed to avoid the extremes of a “minimum deterrence” posture on the one hand, or a “full first strike capability” on the other. A “minimum deterrence” posture is one in which, after a Soviet attack, we would have a capability to retaliate, and with a high degree of assurance be able to destroy most of Soviet urban society, but in which we would not have a capability to counter-attack against Soviet military forces. A “full first strike capability” would be achieved if our forces were so large and so effective, in relation to those of the Soviet Union, that we would be able to attack and reduce Soviet retaliatory power to the point at which it could not cause severe damage to U.S. population and industry.

We should reject the “minimum deterrence” extreme for the following reasons: a. Deterrence may fail, or war may break out for accidental or unintended reasons, and if it does, a capability to counter-attack against high-priority Soviet military targets can make a major contribution to the objectives of limiting damage and terminating the war on acceptable terms;

b. By reducing to a minimum the possibility of a U.S. nuclear attack in response to Soviet aggression against our Allies, a “minimum deterrence” posture would weaken our ability to deter such Soviet attacks.

On the other hand, we should reject the attempt to achieve a “full first strike capability” for the following reasons: a. It is almost certainly infeasible. The Soviets could defeat such an attempt at relatively low cost. For example, we do not now have any prospect of being able to destroy in a sudden attack Soviet missile submarines at sea. Nor would we be able to destroy a sufficiently high percentage of a large hard and dispersed ICBM force.

b. It would put the Soviets in a position which they would be likely to consider intolerable, thus risking the provocation of an arms race.

c. It would be very costly in resources that are needed to strengthen our theatre forces.

The forces I am recommending will provide major improvements in the quality of our strategic posture: in its survivability, its flexibility, and its ability to be used in a controlled and deliberate way under a wide range of contingencies.

Target Destruction Requirements

The following list of high priority targets (aim points) in the Soviet Union has been derived from studies performed in June 1961 by the Staff of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, under the direction of Lieutenant General Thomas Hickey.3 (The estimates have been rounded to the nearest 50 in each category to avoid a misleading impression of accuracy.)

End Fiscal Year

1965 1967

Urban-Industrial Aim Points 200 200

Bomber Bases 150 150

Support Airfields 50 50

Defense Suppression 300 300

Nuclear Storage and Production 50 50

Naval and Submarine Bases 50 50

Soft IRBM Sites (4 missiles per site) 100-300 50-200

Soft ICBM Sites (2 missiles per site) 100-300 50-200

Hard ICBM Sites (1 missile per site) 200-500 400-1100

Total 1200-1700 1350-2200

These totals can be compared with the [less than 1 line of source text not desclassified] aim points included in SIOP-62, the current war plan. There are inevitably uncertainties, especially about details, when looking so far into the future. However, taken as a whole, I am satisfied with this target system as a basis for force planning.

The 200 Urban-Industrial targets and the 150 bomber bases have the highest priority in the sense of required degree of assurance that we can destroy them. The capability to destroy the Urban-Industrial targets is our power to deter attacks on our own cities. The Bomber Bases contain the part of the Soviet Forces that can cause us the most damage if not attacked, and also the part most vulnerable to attack. In the event of thermonuclear war, it is important that we destroy the maximum possible number of Soviet long range bombers. The 150 targets listed here represent a fairly generous allowance for this purpose. They include about 50 bases now known or estimated to be supporting long-range air operations, about 60 now known or estimated to be supporting light bomber operations, most of which would be usable as recovery bases for the long-range bombers, and about 30 staging bases on which the medium bombers depend for range enough to reach the United States.

However, the other targets are also potentially important and worth attacking. The Supporting Airfields (potential recovery and dispersal bases), Nuclear Storage and Production sites, and Naval and Submarine bases all can support delivery of nuclear weapons on the United States. The IRBM sites represent a threat to our Allies and our theatre forces, and are most economically attacked by a system such as Minuteman. The Defense Suppression targets, air defense control centers, interceptor bases, and surface-to-air missile sites, can be effectively attacked by the air-launched missiles Hound Dog and Skybolt. Their destruction would drastically reduce the defense opposition faced by our manned bombers. The number 300 shown here is probably a generous allowance for the purpose. For example, SAC is now estimating a requirement to destroy 160 defense suppression targets in 1968.

The size and basing (i.e. degree of hardening and dispersal) of the Soviet ICBM force in 1965 and 1967 is now a matter of considerable uncertainty. Everything we know about the Soviet long-range nuclear delivery posture to date suggests that the most likely configuration for first-generation ICBM sites will be 2 missiles per site and soft. Such sites would present attractive targets for our forces. However, hard and dispersed basing for their next generation of ICBM's would be such a logical choice for the Soviets that the possibility must be considered reasonably likely even though there is no evidence now to suggest that the Soviets are hardening their missiles.

There are also uncertainties about the performance of our forces in striking back after a Soviet attack—uncertainties associated with the weight and effectiveness of possible Soviet attacks, the ability of our forces to survive under attack, the reliability of our missiles, and the ability of our forces to penetrate Soviet defenses. But these uncertainties are not unbounded. One can place reasonable quantitative limits on them and estimate the effectiveness of our forces under alternatively optimistic and pessimistic assumptions.

This is what has been done in the following analysis. The survival reliability, and penetration factors used are all based on the general assumption that the war begins with a well planned and well executed Soviet attack, with limited warning, against our forces in a state of normal peacetime alert, and that we are hitting back after being attacked. Thus the following estimates do not represent maximum capabilities under the most favorable circumstances. For example, they exclude cases in which we strike first, or cases in which we are attacked during a period of tension and alert. These cases have been excluded because we are testing the adequacy of our forces, and therefore must look at unfavorable circumstances.

Within the general assumption of a well planned Soviet attack, optimistic, median, and pessimistic survival, reliability, and penetration factors have been chosen to reflect the range of uncertainty. It is possible to imagine outcomes lying outside this range, but their likelihood appears small. The optimistic factors represent favorable, but attainable performance. The great weight of likelihood appears to be between the optimistic and median cases. The combination of all of the pessimistic factors describes a very unfavorable and relatively improbable case. For example, it is assumed that in 1967, only [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] per cent of the manned bombers reach the bomb release line and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] per cent of the Titans and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] per cent of the fixed Minuteman missiles are destroyed before launch. These factors were chosen to produce an answer to the question “What happens if everything goes badly?” (The details of the assumed factors, together with an explanation of their choice can be found in Annex 1 to this Appendix.)4

The pessimistic factors do not include an allowance for attrition by Soviet anti-ICBM defenses. We recognize that the Soviets do have a large R&D program in this area. However, we are pursuing a vigorous program of development of penetration aids (decoys and multiple warheads) and we expect to be able to penetrate Soviet defenses in this period. Moreover, if attrition by Soviet ICBM defenses appears at all likely, we will be able to compensate for it in large measure by concentrating our forces on the top priority targets.

The following results are shown in terms of expected percentages of the targets or value in each category destroyed. In the case of Urban-Industrial Floor Space (and Urban Blast Fatalities), the estimates are of damage to the contents of the 170 largest cities (down to a population of 90,000) which contains approximately 80 per cent of the total industrial floor space of the Soviet Union and approximately 50 million out of a total of 210 million people.

The estimates of total population fatalities are percentages of the Soviet total. The “Unsheltered” case corresponds to the effects expected in a population without extensive civil defense preparation, but taking advantage of what shelter is normally available. The “Sheltered” case corresponds to fallout shelter for 40 per cent of the urban population and 20 percent of the rural. The “At Least” reflects the fact that the estimates do not include fallout from attacks on isolated military targets. (The effects on surrounding cities of attacks on naval bases are included in the estimates.)

The assumed number of Soviet ICBM sites varies between the optimistic cases (in which the low end of the range is used) and the pessimistic cases (in which the high end is used). Therefore, the percentages shown should not be interpreted as representing fractions of the same numbers.

Two forces and two years are shown on pages 9 and 10.5

I. Those forces I am recommending for End-Fiscal Year 1965 and 1967, and

II. Those forces proposed by the individual Services (though not jointly by the JCS) for the same years.

The calculations suggest that either force would provide us with a powerful capability to carry out the objectives mentioned earlier. However, as I indicated earlier, the extra capability provided by individual Service proposals runs up against strongly diminishing returns and yields very little in terms of extra target destruction.

Moreover, the theatre forces were not included in these calculations, through SIOP 465:3 '62 includes about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]alert aircraft and missiles from these forces. On the other hand, with the exception of the defense suppression targets, no targets [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] were included. However, we do not now expect [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to develop a significant long range nuclear delivery force in the time period under consideration. If she does, and a change seems indicated, there will be time for us to increase our forces appropriately.

COMPARISON OF TARGET DESTRUCTION CAPABILITIES OF ALTERNATIVE FORCES

END FISCAL YEAR 1965

Percent Expected Kill

Optimistic Median Pessimistic

I II I II I II

Population and Industry

Urban-Industrial Floor Space (or Urban Blast Fatalities) 88 88 80 80 69 69

Total Population Fatalities, Unsheltered, at least 43 43 33 33 25 25

Partly Sheltered, at least 35 35 26 26 20 20

Military Targets

Bomber Bases 99 99 88 93 58 80

Support Airfields 97 99 52 76 7 37

Defense Suppression 76 87 38 38 7 7

Nuclear Storage & Production 96 98 69 69 6 5

Naval & Submarine Basesa 98 98 62 62 7 7

Soft IRBM Sites 96 100 45 80 5 5

Soft ICBM Sites 99 100 45 88 14 59

Hard ICBM Sites 71 75 16 19 1 1

Alert Force Weapons Summary

Alert Force Delivered on Target

Total Optimistic Median Pessimistic

I II I II I II I II

Weapons 3440 4050 2482 2993 1107 1487 399 691

Megatons 4740 5600 3386 4112 1560 2077 574 951

COMPARISON OF TARGET DESTRUCTION CAPABILITIES OF ALTERNATIVE FORCES

END FISCAL YEAR 1967

Percent Expected Kill

Optimistic Median Pessimistic

I II I II I II

Population and Industry

Urban-Industrial Floor Space (or Urban Blast Fatalities) 84 84 79 79 68 68

Total Population Fatalities, Unsheltered, at least 37 37 32 32 25 25

Partly Sheltered, at least 30 30 26 26 19 19

Military Targets

Bomber Bases 98 99 94 99 81 99

Support Airfields 99 99 72 96 7 78

Defense Suppression 88 95 50 67 9 10

Nuclear Storage & Production 95 95 46 79 0 31

Naval & Submarine Bases 97 97 54 54 12 12

Soft IRBM Sites 99 99 85 92 2 96

Soft ICBM Sites 99 99 82 97 43 97

Hard ICBM Sites 54 77 7 25 1 5

Alert Force Weapons Summary

Alert Force Delivered on Target

Total Optimistic Median Pessimistic

I II I II I II I II

Weapons 4180 5890 3028 4578 1508 3826 638 1912

Megatons 5450 7620 3417 5295 1726 3320 740 2272

Relationship of Recommended Force to Soviet Force

The direct comparison of force numbers as such is less important than the ways in which we base and operate our forces. For example, we could out-number the Soviets three to one in ICBM's and still have an inadequate deterrent posture if our missiles were soft and concentrated. However, the force increments which I am recommending are all in a protected mode, hard and dispersed, or mobile.

Given a well protected posture, relative numbers are still important for several reasons: a. A large Soviet superiority in ICBM's could overcome the protection afforded our ICBM's by hardening and dispersal and make it possible for the Soviets to destroy most our fixed-base forces in a missile attack.

b. A large Soviet superiority in missiles would worsen the outcome of a thermonuclear war.

c. A large Soviet superiority in ICBM's would be likely to have a very unfavorable impact on Soviet aggressiveness in the cold war.

Therefore, we have no intention of letting ourselves be seriously out-numbered in ICBM's by the Soviet Union.

How many ICBM's will the Soviet Union have in the mid-1960's? The answer is intrinsically uncertain because it is still subject to Soviet decisions which may not yet have been made, and which will be influenced by our own decisions. However, we do know a good deal about their posture today. We are able to estimate that the Soviets now have from 25 to 50 operational ICBM launchers. Their ICBM build-up appears to be deliberately paced, not a crash program. On the basis of what has been observed so far, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the Soviets will have from 200 to 400 ICBM's in mid-1964. But even if the most pessimistic (Air Force) estimates prove to be valid, in mid-1964 we will still equal the Soviet Union in ICBM's at about 850 each. This will be combined with a substantial U.S. superiority in all other categories of long range nuclear delivery systems.

Moreover, if the Soviet Union exceeds our most pessimistic estimates and builds up a much larger force by 1965 or 1967, we are confident that we will find out about it in time to expand our program appropriately. As a hedge against this unlikely possibility, we are expanding our Minuteman production capacity to over 60 missiles a month. When this is done, the lead time for hard and dispersed Minuteman ICBM's will be about 26 months. Therefore, we will have a great deal of flexibility to expand the program at a later date if it should prove to be necessary to do so.

In other categories of long range nuclear delivery systems, we will have a substantial superiority. Soviet long range aviation now comprises about 1,000 medium bombers (or tankers), and about 150 heavy bombers (or tankers), equipped with air-to-surface missiles. The heavy bomber category is far more significant than the medium bomber category. We will have 630 heavy bombers, plus almost as many tankers. Because the Soviets would have to use some of their bombers as tankers, this will mean an effective U.S. heavy bomber force approximately four or more times as large as that of the Soviets.

The USSR now has about 20 conventionally powered submarines which are probably capable of launching short-range ballistic missiles (approximately 150-300 nautical miles), though not while submerged. By 1963, the Soviets could probably introduce nuclear powered submarines with a submerged launch system employing medium range ballistic missiles. There is no evidence to suggest that the Soviets have a program approaching our Polaris program, either in size or quality.

III. Basis for Recommendations on Specific Weapon System Choices

Within the general quantitative requirements for additional long range nuclear delivery systems, suggested by the above considerations, the following are the reasons for my specific program recommendations:

B-52's

The Air Force has proposed the procurement of 52 additional B-52's (45 wing unit equipment plus 7 command support) with FY 1962 funds. The cost of procuring and operating these aircraft, with (30) associated tankers and Skybolt missiles, for a 5 year period would be about $1.4 billions. My reasons for recommending against this procurement are the following: a. We already have a large force of intercontinental bombers. In mid-1965 it will comprise 630 B-52's, 80 B-58's and, if we do not decide to phase them out sooner, 225 B-47's. The alert B-52's and B-58's alone will be able to carry about 1500 bombs plus 1,000 air launched missiles. The alert B-47's will be able to carry another 200 bombs.

b. An examination of the target system shows that most targets, and all of those of the highest priority, are best attacked by missiles; first, because the targets are soft, fixed, and of known location, and therefore vulnerable to missile attack; and second, in the case of the military targets, the missiles reach their targets much faster than do bombers, and therefore would be more effective in catching enemy bombers and missiles on the ground; and third, our missile systems have a much greater survival potential and endurance in the wartime environment, and therefore can be used with more control and deliberation.

c. The bombers are soft and concentrated and they depend upon warning and quick response for their survival under attack. This is a less reliable means of protection than hardening and dispersal or mobility. Moreover, it means that the bombers must be committed to attack very early in the war and cannot be held in reserve to be used in a controlled and deliberate way.

d. Bombers are expensive. For the same cost (in total five year system costs) as a wing of B-52's with tankers and Skybolts, we can buy 250 Minutemen hardened and dispersed, or 6 Polaris submarines.

GAM-87 Skybolt

Air defense studies indicate that the most effective means for penetrating air defenses are low altitude penetration and defense suppression, both of which are more effective than attempting to out-run the defenses at high altitude. The Skybolt is intended to provide a major improvement in the penetration capability of the programmed B-52 force at a relatively low cost. The 800 Skybolt missiles on alert bombers ought to be able to overcome almost any Soviet defense and make it possible for the bombers to go into their targets and attack them with gravity bombs. The total cost for 1150 Skybolts for the period FY 1962-1967 is estimated to be $1.6 billion.

KC-135

Twenty-seven squadrons of KC-135's (540 operational aircraft) have been procured through FY 1962. Air Force studies indicate that 800 KC-135's are required, with most of the increment going to support the B-52 force. (About 70 KC-135's are required to support TAC, 20 for command posts, and 80 to support the B-58 fleet.) However, beyond approximately 470 tankers, more KC-135 are not required to enable the B-52's to reach their targets. Rather, the basis for the Air Force stated requirement for more tankers is to improve the ability of the bombers to penetrate enemy defenses by allowing them to choose more favorable routes or to fly more at low altitude. Improved penetration capability achieved this way and Skybolt for defense suppression are not both required. Moreover, Skybolt appears to be more effective. Therefore, in my judgment, the expenditure of approximately $1.1 billions to procure 160 extra tankers and operate them for 5 years is not required. The force of 640 tankers which I recommend will provide 470 to support the B-52's; 80 for the B-58's; 70 to support TAC; and 20 for command posts.

Titan II

The 18 extra Titan missiles proposed by the Air Force would cost approximately $372 millions to procure and operate for 5 years. The Titan II has a substantially larger payload than Minuteman. It will be able to deliver [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] rather than [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] warheads now programmed for Minuteman. But the total system cost of Titan II is about four times that of Minuteman hard and dispersed. At equal cost, four Minutemen are to be preferred to one Titan because, first, they are less vulnerable, and second, they provide more target coverage. Moreover, we already plan to have a substantial force of Atlas and Titan which should be adequate for those special purposes requiring large payloads. Therefore I do not recommend procurement of additional Titans.

Minuteman Hard and Dispersed

Minuteman H & D has the lowest system cost of any of our ICBM's at about $5.5 millions per missile in 5 year costs. It is clearly the preferred way to acquire more ICBM's. However, I am not recommending that we procure more than 100 in FY 1963 because our over-all force requirements do not make it necessary. The difference between the Air Force proposed procurement of 600 missiles in FY 1963 and the 100 I am recommending, in 5 year system costs, is approximately $2.75 billions.

Mobile Minuteman

Mobile Minuteman would serve as a hedge against our being heavily outnumbered by the Soviet ICBM force, a low Soviet CEP, or unexpected failure of the hardened Minuteman to meet estimated blast resistance—conditions lowering the survival potential of hard and dispersed Minutemen. It would also serve as a hedge against unexpected advances in Soviet anti-submarine warfare capability that would reduce the security of Polaris. However, Mobile Minuteman may have troubles of its own, including wartime fallout (which may reduce substantially its wartime endurance), peacetime sabotage and espionage and operational problems associated with the transport of explosives and attempted random operation. Moreover, if we were to complete the Air Force recommended program of 300 Mobile Minutemen, Mobile Minuteman would cost about 2.5 times as much per missile as Minuteman hard and dispersed.

Therefore, we are not yet certain that Mobile Minuteman will be required. The action I am recommending is in the nature of lead time reduction on the missile production program. If the combination of contingencies favoring Mobile Minuteman does not occur, I shall reconsider the decision and recommend cancellation of the production program.

Polaris

This system has the most survival potential in the wartime environment of any of our long range nuclear delivery systems. Polaris missiles do not have to be launched early in the war, they can be held in reserve and used in a controlled and deliberate way to achieve our wartime objectives. For example, Polaris is ideal for counter-city retaliation. However, as the calculations shown above indicate, the force already programmed is large and can cause great damage to the population and industry of the Soviet Union. This reduces the urgency of more Polaris missiles. Consequently, I recommend that we procure 6 more Polaris submarines in FY 1963. The cost, on a 5 year basis, of the 6 submarines will be about $930 millions less than the cost of the 10 submarines proposed by the Navy.

Robert S. McNamara

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 63, 1/61-10/61. Top Secret. This draft memorandum was received in the White House shortly after September 23. It is Appendix I to Document 50.

1 The handwritten numbers on the table are printed in italic type.

a Numbers of aircraft and missiles are derived by multiplying authorized squadron unit equipment by the numbers of squadrons. They do not include R&D, Combat Training Launch or maintenance pipeline missiles or command support aircraft. Effective 1 August 1961, approximately 50% of the bombers will be on 15 minute ground alert. ICBM numbers represent operational launchers. Numbers of Polaris missiles represent the total number of missiles in operational submarines. Approximately 67% of these submarines will be on station or at sea. The table excludes 17 Regulus missiles in operational submarines from end-FY 61 to end-FY 64 and 5 at end-FY 65.

b This difference is a consequence of the difference in recommended B-52 forces.

c 1,000 by end-FY 68, 1,100 by end-FY 69, and thereafter.

d Bombers have flexibility in choice of weapons and yields. For purposes of this comparison, it was assumed that B-52's carry four [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] bombs, plus air-launched missiles.

e During a discussion between the Secretary of Defense and the Chiefs, on September 11, 1961, they stressed their concern about the reduction in our nuclear capability as the B-47's were phased-out. The Secretary of Defense therefore added 5 Wings of B-47's to his recommendation for FY 1963 and FY 1964, bringing it to the level shown on page 2. [Reference is to the table above entitled “Recommended Forces.” The JCS recommendations are contained in their memorandum JCSM 620-61 to McNamara, dated September 11. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, Atomic 471.61 (29 Aug 61)) The Chiefs expanded on their rationale for the September 11 recommendations in JCSM-657-61 to McNamara, September 21. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 General (6 Mar 61) Sec 6) General LeMay critiqued McNamara's force levels and strategic rationale in a September 18 memorandum to Zuckert. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD (McNamara) Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Miscellaneous Budget)]

b The Chief of Staff, USA, agrees “to a limited procurement of the system to minimize engineering and economic risks.” The CNO and Commandant, USMC, believe “research and development should continue”, and “budgetary planning should proceed, but the decision to allocate substantial funds for production should be delayed…”.

a B-52's recommended by the Air Force for 1962 procurement.

c The Secretary of Defense, along with the Chief of Staff, USA, the CNO, and Commandant, USMC, recommend a total strength of 640 aircraft; the CJCS recommends 760, the Chief of Staff, USAF, 800. In each case, command support aircraft would be in addition to the numbers shown.

d These recommendations are for “at most” the stated number of missiles.

d These recommendations are for “at most” the stated number of missiles.

d These recommendations are for “at most” the stated number of missiles.

2 Reference is to the table above entitled “Total Obligational Authority.”

3 “A Study of Requirements for U.S. Strategic Systems: Preliminary Report,” dated June 1961. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3463, 381 Hickey Report 19 Apr 61)

4 “Assumed Operational Factors for 1965 and 1967 Target Damage Calculations,” not printed.

5 Reference is to the two tables below.

a Successful attack would render the bases inoperable but, of course, would leave untouched missile submarines at sea.

47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to President Kennedy 47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) to President KennedySource

Washington, September 27, 1961.

CM-372-61

SUBJECT

Reaction Time Required by the Soviets to Launch an Attack with Currently Available Medium and Intercontinental Range Ballistic Missiles

1. During your recent conference with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and with General Power,1 you inquired regarding the reaction time of Soviet medium range and intercontinental ballistic missiles. Reaction times of the Soviet operational ballistic missiles deployed to fixed sites have been estimated on the basis of alternative conditions of alert or readiness. These times are believed to be approximately the same for the three classes of missiles now operational (the 700 n.m. and 1,100 n.m. MRBM; the 5,000/7,000 n.m. ICBMs) and also for the 2,000 n.m. IRBM, which is estimated to become operational late this year or early next. These missiles have quite similar characteristics. Each is liquid-fueled, has radio-inertial guidance, and is considered to be deployed on fixed “soft” base with very substantial and complete support facilities. In general, reaction time is dependent upon the prevailing political and military situation, which determines the alert status of the missile force. Three conditions of alert are postulated:

Condition I. —

Crews on routine standby, electrical equipment cold, missiles not fueled.

Reaction time: 1-3 hours.

Condition II. —

Crews on alert, electrical equipment warmed up, missiles not fueled.

Reaction time: 15-30 minutes.

Condition III. —

Crews on alert, electrical equipment warmed up, missiles fueled and topped. This condition probably cannot be maintained for more than an hour or so.

Reaction time: 5-10 minutes.

There is some evidence that rapid reaction time has been a Soviet objective. It is not possible to determine the condition of readiness of Soviet missile launchers at any given time.

2. Salvo times will vary according to the type of missile and the handling capability of the associated radio-inertial guidance system. For all classes, a successful salvo includes those missiles launched within 15-30 minutes of the scheduled time.

3. Available information indicates that all Soviet missile launchers have a refire capability. Assuming that the launching facilities are not damaged by accident or by attack, a second ICBM could be launched from the same pad in about 16 hours. Two additional missiles are estimated probably available for each MRBM launcher and a second salvo could be launched about 4 to 6 hours after the first.

L. L. Lemnitzer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, JCS General 1961. Top Secret. Attached to a September 28 covering note from Clifton to Taylor which reads in part: “When the President returns from Newport we can give him as much material as he needs.” The President and his party arrived in Newport, Rhode Island, from New York on September 26 and returned to Washington on October 2.

1 See Document 44.

48. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 48. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, September 30, 1961.

SUBJECT

Program for Deployment of Nike Zeus

This Appendix summarizes the various factors that were considered in reaching a decision to recommend a program for deployment of Nike Zeus. The Appendix includes the following sections: I. Summary1

II. Possible Courses of Action

III. Description, Status, and Technical Evaluation

IV. Reasons for Limited Deployment

V. Growth Capability of Nike Zeus

VI. Planning and Funding for a Limited Deployment2

I. Summary

The question whether the Nike Zeus anti-missile system should be deployed has been under consideration for several years. I have now decided to recommend that funds be included in the FY '63 budget for Nike Zeus production support. This would make possible its limited deployment in the near future. The Joint Chiefs of Staff support this recommendation.

A recent technical analysis has confirmed that Nike Zeus will not provide soft targets an effective defense against large scale or sophisticated ICBM attacks. A purely technical appraisal would not lead to a recommendation for deployment of a weapon system with so limited an operational effectiveness. This has been the conclusion of past technical evaluations; the current review has revealed no important new technical factors.

On the other hand, the following considerations appear, in my judgment, to favor a limited deployment of Zeus: a. Although the potential capabilities of sophisticated ICBMs are undisputed, they must be balanced against the expectation that the Soviets will make some errors in the design of their ICBM force and have technical, organizational, and resource difficulties which could limit the capabilities of this force. Our own experience with the development and deployment of ICBM forces has provided examples of such limitations.

b. The existence of a deployed defense may substantially increase the degree of uncertainty at the Soviet decision-making level. The offense will find it more difficult to be certain that weaknesses do not exist which may have been discovered by the defense. Recent evidence indicates that existing warheads on our ballistic missiles are subject to destruction at fairly large distances by nuclear detonations. Though this would not in fact make Nike Zeus effective against planned U.S. missile systems, it is an example of the unpredictable elements involved.

c. In Soviet planning for a military operation, there would have to be some diversion of ICBM forces to penetrate a deployed defense, even though the economic exchange ratio is unfavorable to the defense. This may take the form of extra missiles assigned to saturate, confuse, or destroy anti-missile systems or the introduction of sophisticated reentry vehicles with penetration systems and other protective devices.

d. Even limited deployment would inhibit blackmail from secondary powers, provide some protection against accidental attacks and against violations of arms control agreements.

e. Some counter may be desirable against future Soviet claims to a successful anti-missile system. Soviet efforts in the field of ballistic missile defense appear to be more ambitious than our own efforts. Even if U.S. scientists can offer claims of a U.S. capability to counter completely the USSR defense, this will not cancel out the psychological advantage gained by the USSR in announcing or demonstrating an ICBM defense capability.

f. A system in being may be used as the basis for introducing some improved performance capabilities if target identification proves to be more feasible than is now expected or if reentry vehicle vulnerability is greater than now estimated.

These factors are sufficiently compelling to recommend a limited deployment of the Nike Zeus system. An operational capability can be obtained starting in 1965 and, although other city-defense systems of somewhat greater capability are feasible by about 1970, none of the current proposals provides assurance of a truly effective defense of cities. It should be recognized that deployment of any active city defense (including Nike Zeus) presupposes a system of civilian fall-out shelters.

There is at least one danger in deployment of a defense system of doubtful effectiveness such as Nike Zeus: the Executive Branch of the government, the Congress, and the people may develop an unwarranted faith in its capability to deter a Soviet attack or to mitigate its consequences if full-scale nuclear warfare is initiated.

[Here follow sections II-VI.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 63 1/61-10/61. Secret. This draft memorandum is Appendix II to Document 50, but was circulated in advance of it.

1 Only this section is printed here.

2 This section describes the recommended program of 6 Zeus Defense Centers, each with a Zeus Acquisition Radar, and 12 Nike-Zeus batteries, each with one discrimination radar, 6 target track radars, 12 missile track radars, and 96 missiles. The mission of the system, which would take 6 years to complete installation from the time of a decision to construct it, was to defend 6 cities and “about 39 million people.”

49. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to President Kennedy 49. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, October 5, 1961.

JCSM-697-61

SUBJECT

Comparison of Nuclear Delivery Forces of the US Vis-à-Vis the Soviet Union (U)

1. In response to your request, a comparison of nuclear delivery forces of the US vis-à-vis those of the Soviet Union has been accomplished. This comparison has been limited to two time periods, viz., 1 October 1961 and 1 July 1963. US forces in this comparison include those forces based in the CONUS and those deployed overseas which have the capability of striking the Sino-Soviet Bloc. No Allied forces have been included. Soviet forces include those capable of striking the US and US forces overseas.

2. Listed below is a comparison of the combat ready forces available to the US and USSR for the two time periods. In the attached Appendix1 are detailed explanations of the forces immediately available to both sides.

FORCES

1961 1963

US USSR US USSR

a. Long Range Aircraft—Note 1*

(1) Heavy Bombers 574 150 630 145

(2) Medium Bombers 788 975 575 850

Total 1362 1125 1205 995

b. ICBM—Note 2* 42 # 10-25 382 ## 75-125

c. Submarine Launched Missiles—Note 3*

(1) Ballistic 1200 NM 80 0 128 0

(2) Ballistic 500-1000 NM 0 0 0 6

(3) Ballistic 150 or 350 NM 0 78 0 102

(4) Cruise 17 0 17 0

Total 97 78 145 108

d. Other nuclear delivery Forces—Note 4*

(1) Light Bombers 236 250 160 250

(2) Fighter Bombers 2231 ### 0 2381 ### 0

(3) Cruise Missiles 178 0 144 0

Total 2645 250 2685 250

(4) MRBM/IRBM On Launchers

(a) 700nm
1100nm 0 250-300 0 (7-11 & 2000 nm Total)

(b) 2000 nm 0 0 0

Total 0 250-300 0 350-400

3. A comprehensive evaluation of the relative posture of the US vis-a-vis the Soviet Union requires that many factors be considered. One of these factors, and probably the most difficult to assess, is the intention of the USSR. Critical to the Soviet judgment is the number of ICBM's they possess. Their three to five fold increase in this category during this period will materially improve their capability to inflict serious damage upon the US. However, based on the above intelligence estimates of Soviet nuclear delivery assets, the US enjoys a military superiority over the USSR in both 1961 and 1963. Relatively speaking, the superiority is not as great in 1961 as it will be in 1963 because of the increased build-up of hardened US missile sites beginning in late 1961. In the critical period of decision between the present and mid 1963, the decisive superiority of US nuclear delivery capability would strongly influence the Soviet Union not to deliberately initiate general war. After this time, the increasing nuclear delivery capability including additional US hardened and mobile missiles will further decrease the likelihood of a deliberate Soviet nuclear attack.

4. In summary, as of 1 October 1961, despite a strong Soviet military posture, the relative strategic balance of forces is in favor of the US, and it is doubtful, except through miscalculation or misadventure, that the Soviets would initiate general war. In 1962, our strategic force levels and our relatively secure strategic weapon systems assure for the US a decisive retaliatory capability that makes it even less likely that the USSR would risk initiating general war. However, there is good evidence that the Soviets in recognition of the above imbalance are striving for weapon systems that will, in the future, provide them with a distinct military advantage. It is estimated that these research and development efforts will be in the AICBM defense system and in the military application of space vehicles.2

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
L. L. Lemnitzer3
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 2210 (27 Sep 61). Top Secret; Restricted Data.

1 Not printed.

* Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4—See Appendix.

* Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4—See Appendix.

# CSAF believes 65 is the correct figure as of 1 October 1961.

## CSAF believes 250 is the correct figure.

* Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4—See Appendix.

* Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4—See Appendix.

### There is some evidence, not yet conclusive, that the USSR is showing activity toward acquiring a nuclear delivery capability for tactical fighters. USCINCEUR has expressed a belief, although he has no positive proof, that about one-half of the Soviet fighter-bombers possess a nuclear delivery capability.

2 In a memorandum to McNamara dated April 24, 1962, Lemnitzer referred to this memorandum and stated that there had been no significant changes to “alter the conclusions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the short term.” It was “highly probable,” however, that recent Soviet nuclear tests had advanced Soviet “confidence and competence in the area of nuclear systems development.” Any relaxation in the U.S. effort “to maintain a nuclear superiority could result in a deterioration of capability with time to a point where irreparable damage could be done.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 2210 (27 Sep 61)) A memorandum from the JCS to McNamara, dated July 28, 1962, contains a detailed comparison of U.S. and estimated Soviet nuclear stockpiles. (Ibid., JMF 2210 (3 April 62) Sec. 3)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Lemnitzer signed the original.

50. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 50. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, October 6, 1961.

SUBJECT

Recommended Department of Defense FY'63 Budget and 1963-67 Program

I recently completed a preliminary review of the Department of Defense FY'63 Budget and a projection of the Department's Programs for the years 1963-67. Based on this review, I have reached certain tentative conclusions regarding force levels. The detailed financial budgets for the Department are now being prepared, based on these conclusions, and will be submitted to you on December 1 for approval. In the meantime, you may wish to review the major elements of the budget which I propose to recommend—the purpose of this memorandum is to outline those elements for you.

We have divided the budget into the following nine programs corresponding to broad mission areas or to support areas that cannot be allocated to the forces:1

I. General War Offensive Forces (long-range delivery systems),

II. General War Defensive Forces (continental air defense forces and warning systems),

III. General Purpose Forces (forces primarily intended for overseas theater operations),

IV. Sealift and Airlift,

V. Reserve and National Guard Forces,

VI. Research and Development,

VII. Service-Wide Support,

VIII. Department of Defense (DoD agencies, OSD, etc.),

IX. Retired Pay.

The budget has been prepared on the assumption that the Berlin Crisis will have eased by the beginning of FY'63. Alternative plans are being prepared on other assumptions.

The costs of the program I am recommending, and the difference between the costs of that program and those recommended by the individual Services are shown in the following table. As the table indicates, the Services proposals average about $15 billion per year, or about $74 billion over the period 1963-67, more than the programs I am recommending.

Department of Defense Financial Budgeta (Obligational Authority in Billions of Dollars) FY 1962 FY 1963 FY 1964b FY 1965b FY 1966b FY 1967b

I II I II I II I II I II I II

Programs

General War Offensive $9.26 +.62 $8.93 +1.46 $8.02 +1.62 $5.57 +3.04 $4.72 +2.16 $4.10 +1.41

General War Defensive 2.86 +.18 3.03 +.58 3.26 +.80 3.64 +1.05 2.87 +2.50 2.58 +2.10

General Purposes 17.21 -.06 18.81 +3.31 18.92 +3.74 19.85 +3.65 19.38 +4.17 19.96 +3.54

Sealift and Airlift 1.14 0 1.27 +.21 1.15 -.10 1.38 -.13 1.17 0 .87 -.11

Reserve & Natl. Guard 1.78 -.05 1.80 +.66 1.80 +.72 1.80 +.72 1.80 +.69 1.80 +.68

Research & Development 4.29 +.24 5.42 +1.72 5.96 +1.73 6.56 +2.36 7.21 +4.13 7.93 +3.99

Service-Wide Support 10.82 +.01 11.06 +1.97 11.06 +1.71 11.06 +1.55 11.05 +1.67 11.07 +1.63

Department of Defense .56 0 .68 +.06 .64 +.06 .63 +.07 .61 +.06 .61 +.05

Retired Pay .92 0 1.01 0 1.15 0 1.29 0 1.43 0 1.57 0

MAP 1.60 0 1.70 0 1.70 0 1.70 0 1.70 0 1.70 0

Miscellaneous 0 .50 .50 .50 .50 .50

Gross Total 50.44 +.94 54.21 +9.97 54.16 +10.28 53.98 +12.31 52.44 +15.38 52.69 +13.29

Net reduction to be obtained from refinement of cost estimates and elimination of non-essentials 0 -3.00 -3.00 -3.00 -3.00 -3.00

Net Total 50.44 +.94 51.21 +12.47 51.16 +12.78 50.98 +14.81 49.44 +17.88 49.69 +15.79

a Column I lists the amounts recommended by the Secretary of Defense. Column II shows the amounts by which the recommendations of the Services exceed those of the Secretary of Defense.

bThe financial estimates for the proposed force levels for the years 1964 through 1967 may be understated because they do not provide for increases in military pay and allowances and they may not include adequate allowances for new projects to be initiated during these years. To some extent, such increases should be offset by savings from increased efficiency throughout the Department.

The FY 1963 manpower implications of the recommended forces are shown in the following table.

Authorized Strength

End-FY 1962 End-FY 1963

Jan. Budget As Amendeda Service Proposals Sec/Def Recommendations-

Army 870,000 1,008,000 1,092,700 929,000

Navy 625,000 657,000 685,000 640,600

Marine Corps 175,000 190,000 194,259 190,000

Air Force 822,900 881,307 886,000 848,000

Totals 2,492,900 2,736,307 2,857,959 2,607,600

a Does not include the 2 National Guard divisions and supporting forces, with a total strength of approximately 74,000 men, called to active duty on October 15, 1961.

As the table indicates, the manning levels I am recommending are lower than the Service proposals for FY 1963. In part, this is because my recommended programs for FY 1963 call for fewer combat units than the Service proposals. It also reflects my judgment that unit manning levels slightly lower than those proposed by the Services are adequate.

Because a program review of this character and the establishment of a five-year program is an innovation in the Department of Defense, many of the cost estimates used in arriving at these totals are approximate, and in some cases high. They will be carefully refined during the budget review in October and November, and I expect the totals to be reduced somewhat. Moreover, until the program is actually executed, it is to be considered as tentative and for planning purposes only, and I will recommend changes as circumstances demand. I believe, nevertheless, that it is important to have at all times a framework of realistic 5-10 year programs, however tentative, to insure that the Services and agencies of the Department are working on common assumptions in conformity with national policy and objectives.

In this memorandum, I discuss the force levels I am recommending, and the reasons for my decisions, program by program. The tables which introduce each section summarize my recommendations. In those cases in which the program I am recommending differ from those proposed by the Services, the latter are shown in red beneath mine.2

[Here follow a table and notes identical to the table entitled “Recommended Forces” in Document 46.]

In addition to these forces, I will recommend at a later date that the Air Force be authorized to procure and operate a secure command and control system for SAC. Except for 20 KC-135's which will be available for use as airborne command posts, the cost of this system has not been included in the figures on page 2.

The forces I am recommending have been chosen to provide the United States with the capability, in the event of deliberate Soviet nuclear attack to do the following: first, to strike back against Soviet bomber bases, missile sites, and other installations associated with long-range nuclear forces in order to reduce Soviet power and limit the damage that can be done to us by vulnerable Soviet follow-on forces; while, second, to hold in protected reserve forces capable of destroying Soviet urban society, if necessary, in a controlled and deliberate way. With the recommended forces, I am confident that we will be able, at all times, to deny the Soviet Union the prospect of either a military victory or of knocking out the U.S. retaliatory force.

The forces I am recommending will provide major improvements in the quality of our strategic posture: in its survivability, its flexibility, and its ability to be used in a controlled and deliberate way under a wide range of contingencies.

Over the five years 1963-67, the cost of the aircraft and missiles recommended by the Air Force and the Polaris recommended by the Navy exceeds the cost of the forces I am recommending by approximately $10 billion. However, the extra capability provided by the individual Service proposals runs up against strongly diminishing returns and yields very little in terms of target destruction. In my judgment, it is not an increment worth the cost of $10 billion over the five year period.

Because of the special importance of these forces, I am including a detailed analysis of their capabilities as Appendix I to this report.3

II. General War Defensive Forces

Recommended Forces and Programs

End Fiscal Year

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Air Defense Interceptors 900 863 851 839 821 807

906 843 787 702 684 642

Nike-Hercules Battalionsa 34 34 34 34 34 34

Nike-Zeus Batteries — — — — — 12

Bomarc Squadrons 8 8 8 8 8 8

12 15 15 15

a Includes Army National Guard Battalions.

Moreover, I recommend the following program decisions: a. Disapproval of an Air Force proposal to buy 200 additional F-106 interceptors, at a cost of more than $600 million, to replace 10 F-102 squadrons.

b. Continued operation of the Seaward Extensions of the DEW Line throughout the period. The Navy had proposed phase-out of the patrol aircraft and picket ships in 1964 and 1965.

c. Continuation of the Ground Environment (control and warning system), though with maximum reorientation to meet the defense problems of the mid-1960's. The cost of this program will be about $888 million in 1963, declining to $813 million in 1967.

d. Continuation of the BMEWS missile warning system as proposed by the Air Force.

e. Approval, for planning purposes, of a $400 million a year Civil Defense program.

Basis for Recommendation

The existing continental air defense system is based on a concept developed in the early 1950's and was designed to meet the threat anticipated in the mid and late 1950's, that is, mass raids of many hundreds of bombers. By itself, it is inadequate to defend the United States in the mid-1960's because it deals with only part of the threat. Moreover, two developments have rendered it inappropriate as an anti-bomber defense system for the mid-1960's—the mass bomber threat has failed to materialize, and the ICBM has become the major danger.

It now appears that the largest likely raid size that we might have to face will be on the order of 200 to 300 bombers. This is a consequence of several factors, including, first, the size of the Soviet bomber force which now comprises about 150 heavy bombers and about 1,000 medium bombers, many of which would have to serve as tankers; second, the problems facing the Soviets in avoiding giving us advance warning of attack by large-scale bomber activities; and third, the fact that we will have a large Minuteman force capable of destroying the Soviet bomber bases and the aircraft on them, thus cutting off follow-up attacks after the first wave.

The present anti-bomber air defense system is highly vulnerable to ICBM attack. Its control is centralized in 22 soft direction centers, 8 of which are on SAC bases. By diverting a small fraction of their ICBM force to defense suppression, the Soviets could effectively paralyze our air defense system. Moreover, of the 38 air defense interceptor bases in the U.S., 25 are co-located with SAC. Thus most of our air defense system would be destroyed as a by-product of a missile attack on SAC.

For these reasons, I believe the anti-bomber air defense system should be reoriented, to the maximum extent possible, to give it a capability to survive ICBM attack, by such means as back-up control and dispersal of interceptors, while sacrificing to some extent its capacity to deal with mass raids.

The existing air defense system does not defend against two major parts of the nuclear threat to the United States: fallout and ballistic missiles. Without adequate fallout protection, any attempt at active defense of the population of the U.S. is doomed to failure. For example, without fallout protection, even a missile attack on SAC that avoided cities would probably result in the deaths of 50 to 100 million Americans. Therefore, a major fallout protection program should have high priority, and we propose to utilize the major portion of the $400 million budgeted for Civil Defense for this purpose.

The problem of anti-ballistic missile defenses is complex and difficult. It is clear that an impenetrable defense is not feasible at any reasonable cost. There are too many advantages on the side of the offense. However, short of that unattainable goal, a limited anti-ballistic missile defense can achieve some very useful benefits for the United States, including improved protection of key decision centers from surprise missile attack, reduced vulnerability to accidental missile launching, etc. Therefore, I am recommending procurement and deployment of Nike-Zeus defenses for six cities, at a cost of approximately $3.5 billions over the period 1963-1967. The reasons underlying this recommendation are discussed in detail in Appendix II to this report.4

III. General Purpose Forces

My recommended force structure and procurement levels, and those proposed by the Services, are summarized in the following tables. The Service proposals would cost $3.3 billion more in FY ‘63 and $18.4 billion more over the FY ‘63-FY ‘67 period than the program I am recommending.

1962 End Fiscal Years

Pre-Berlin 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Army

Divisions 14 14 14 14 14 14

Brigades 5a 7 7 7 7 7

8 8 8 8 8

Air Force

Tactical Aircraftb1 1179 1327 1498 1577 1588 1567

1302 1311 1329 1329 1254

Tactical Missiles 126 36 36 36 36 36

144 144 144 144 144

Navy

Attack Carriers (CVA) 15 15 15 15 15 15

16 16 16 16 16

ASW Carriers (CVS) 9 9 9 9 9 9

10 10 10 10 10

Other Ships 760 804 800 791 783 765

841 835 828 828 819

Operating Aircraft 2917 2816 2826 2862 2863 2877

3150 3216 3282 3299 3327

Marine Corps

Division/Wing Teams 3 3 3 3 3 3

Operating Aircraft 1123 1130 1098 1096 1132 1139

a Includes an armored-command and non-divisional battle group that will be reorganized as brigades in late FY ‘62 or FY ‘63.Tactical Fighters and Bombers, unit equipment aircraft only.

b Tactical Fighters and Bombers, unit equipment aircraft only.

Selected Items of Procurement Fiscal Years (Millions of Dollars)

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Army Equip. & Matérielb 2609 2600 2600 2600 2600 2600

3500 3500 3498 3382 3224

Navy Ships

Oblig. Authority 1407 1998 1907 2570 2219 2311

2721 2945 3482 3405 3435

No. of New Ships 21 22 29 50 56 59

38 60 67 80 80

No. of Conversions 21 32 36 18 1 1

29 12 5

Naval & Marine Aircraft

Oblig. Authorityc 1219 1391 1363 1453 1566 1472

2366 2425 2214 2128 2000

No. of Aircraft 783 897 872 931 974 914

1486 1471 1458 1389 1330

Air Force Tactical Fighters& Bombers

Oblig. Authorityc 382 565 485 299 290 382

335 468 473 496

No. of Aircraft 262 461 383 116 132 191

192 251 239 226

b Army procurement includes that required for Reserve and National Guard, and a small amount for Continental Air Defense.

c Flyaway costs only.

The recommendations shown above assume that the immediate danger of conflict over Berlin will have moderated by next summer and the reserve units called to active duty for this contingency can be returned to inactive status.

To meet the Berlin crisis, it was necessary to increase the forces by calling-up reserves and by retaining weapon systems previously scheduled for phase-out. Often only small improvements in effectiveness resulted from these increases. For FY 1963 to FY 1967, effectiveness can be increased more efficiently by improving quality rather than increasing quantity. Furthermore, reserve units returned to inactive status will be available for another emergency with improved readiness resulting from their current tours of active duty, and from the “reserve readiness improvement program”.

In reviewing the Service proposals, one of my objectives has been to direct effort towards the creation of more effective non-nuclear forces that will widen the range of military actions open to the United States in future international crises.

The broad policies I propose for strengthening our conventional capabilities are as follows: (1) to concentrate on improving the equipment of the Army and the readiness of Selected Army reserve forces rather than undertaking a major increase in size of the active Army; (2) to strengthen our land based tactical air, which is now seriously inadequate for support of the ground forces; (3) to maintain a Navy which, together with the Naval forces of our allies, will continue the effective control of the seas we now possess—especially in a non-nuclear conflict.

The following sections summarize my major recommendations for the General Purpose Forces of each Service.

Army

The Army proposed a force of 16 divisions, 8 brigades, and an end fiscal 1963 active personnel strength of 1,092,700. I recommend 14 divisions, 7 brigades, and a 1963 personnel strength of 929,000. The force proposed by the Army would cost approximately $860 million per year more than the strength which I recommend. While the number of divisions in my recommended force would be the same as in FY 1961, Army personnel would be 52,000 greater. This increase would permit three major changes.

First, the three active divisions which, prior to the Berlin crisis trained recruits, would remain free of these duties and be retained in a combat ready status. As a result, there would be six Army divisions in the U.S. available for immediate deployment, rather than the pre-Berlin three, and all 14 active divisions would be combat ready. In my judgment, the six U.S. based active divisions and the priority National Guard divisions would provide an adequate strategic reserve for deployment to limited war theaters or for initial augmentation of our NATO forces.

Second, two separate airborne brigades, one for the Pacific and one for Europe, will be activated to provide increased theater reserves.

Third, recent increases in the training establishment will be maintained to provide a basis for the rapid future expansion of the active Army. In addition, the Army will be reorganized under the ROAD 65 concept to increase its flexibility for meeting a wide variety of combat situations throughout the world.

With regard to the procurement of Army equipment, I recommend a level of $2.6 billion. This is about the same level as in the post-Berlin FY ‘62 budget, and about $1 billion more than in the FY ‘62 budget proposed by the previous administration. It is, however, $900 million less than the amount requested by the Army and supported by the Joint Chiefs.

The $2.6 billion I recommend reflects three judgments. First, the procurement of nuclear systems for the Army should be maintained at approximately the level of recent budgets rather than increased as the Army proposes. Second, all non-nuclear items of equipment representing a significant advance in performance can be procured at reasonable rates within a $2.6 billion funding level. Third, Army inventories should be maintained at a level adequate to support 88 division-months of combat operations, as will be discussed further on page 15.5

As noted in the discussion of the Research and Development Program, I recommend large increases in the research program for non-nuclear weapons. These increases should result in substantial progress in this critical area. The guidance issued to the Army indicates that the level of $2.6 billion for materiel will be increased if required to procure markedly superior items when they become available.

Navy and Marine Corps

For combat ships, I recommend returning to the pre-Berlin force levels. This will mean a force of 15 rather than 16 attack carriers and 9 rather than 10 anti-submarine carriers, and a return to inactive status of the aircraft and destroyers called from the reserves. The Joint Chiefs also recommend a force of 15 attack carriers, but otherwise favor retention of the FY ‘62 force levels for FY ‘63. My recommendation reflects the view that these additional Naval forces, which would cost $200 million in FY ‘63, would provide only a small increase in the combat effectiveness of our Armed Forces.

For logistics and amphibious ships, however, I recommend (as do the Navy and Joint Chiefs) that the ships added to the active fleet6 in FY ‘62 be retained for FY ‘63. The 13 additional logistics ships will permit a much needed increase in the flexibility of fleet operations. The 26 amphibious ships will continue to provide transport and an assault landing capability for one Marine division in each ocean. By late FY ‘63 the Marines also will have in each ocean a capability for landing 1/3 of a division by helicopter. This represents a considerable increase in mobility from the pre-Berlin period when amphibious lift was limited to one division in the Pacific and 1/2 of a division in the Atlantic, and included much less capability for helicopter landings.

With respect to shipbuilding, my recommended program includes a conventionally powered attack carrier to be funded in FY ‘63. This ship will replace one of the smaller carriers in FY ‘67, and will provide a considerably improved capability for operating high performance aircraft. The Joint Chiefs did not reach an agreed position on building this carrier. The Chiefs of Staff of both the Army and Air Force questioned the advisability of funding a carrier in FY ‘63.

The Navy proposed that this carrier and a number of other large surface combatant ships in its FY ‘63-‘67 building program be nuclear powered (the incremental construction cost of nuclear power for a carrier amounts to about $100 million). I recommend nuclear power for only one of these ships, a frigate to be funded in FY ‘63. This ship, together with the nuclear powered ships built or building, will provide a one-carrier all-nuclear task force to meet occasional specialized needs for increased endurance. With this exception, I do not believe the extra expense of nuclear power for surface ships is justified at this time. At present, a nuclear powered surface ship costs on the average about 1-1/2 times as much to build and to operate as a conventionally powered ship and offers only relatively minor increases in effectiveness over its conventional counterpart. This is in contrast to submarines where nuclear power has made possible an entirely new mode of operations.

I am also recommending that conversions be substituted for some of the new construction proposed by the Navy and amphibious ships and small destroyers. These conversions offer an inexpensive way of obtaining an early increase in capability. In contrast with the three to four year lead time for new ship construction, conversions can be completed in a year or less.

My recommendations for procurement of Naval and Marine aircraft in FY ‘63 represent an increase of $172 million over the FY ‘62 level. It represents, however, a reduction of $975 million from the Navy FY ‘63 proposal. In my judgment, the increase over FY ‘62 that I am recommending will provide an adequate level of Naval air power.

Air Force

Neither the Air Force nor the Joint Chiefs propose retaining in FY ‘63 the Air National Guard tactical squadrons now on active duty. These squadrons have aircraft of lower performance than regular Air Force squadrons and are generally less effective relative to their cost. I recommend that these squadrons be released from active duty after the Berlin issue has been resolved.

The Air Force proposes adding only 150 aircraft to the pre-Berlin levels of 1,179 squadron aircraft.7 This is not enough aircraft. One of the weaknesses revealed by the Berlin crisis has been a shortage of tactical aircraft in a non-nuclear conflict. The 1,329 aircraft proposed by the Air Force would provide about 80 aircraft per division (or its brigade equivalent) for the Army's 14 divisions and 7 brigades. In contrast, Marine Division-Wing Teams have about 180 tactical aircraft. Furthermore, Marine aircraft have only close support of ground troops as their primary mission, whereas Air Force fighter-bombers have three major missions: air superiority, long-range interdiction, and close support. Finally, aircraft have long lead times so that procurement cannot be postponed until a crisis. I recommend, therefore, a procurement program that will raise the total in squadron service by FY ‘66 to about 1,580 aircraft, 250 more than proposed by the Air Force.

The number of aircraft required is closely related to the type of aircraft to be procured. The Air Force favors exclusive reliance on the multi-purpose fighter-bomber. This aircraft type costs at least twice as much to buy and operate as the single-purpose close support type. Substituting single purpose aircraft on a two for one basis for some of the multi-purpose types would provide a larger mixed force for the same over-all cost. It is important, however, that a mixed force of this kind contain sufficient aircraft capable of air superiority and deep interdiction missions, as well as close support. With these considerations in mind, I recommend a force of about 1,580 tactical aircraft, consisting of 400 single purpose close support aircraft and 1,180 multi-purpose fighters (738 of which are F-105's, the newest of the multi-purpose aircraft). The Air Force program would have provided only 1,330 multi-purpose aircraft including 882 F-105's.

For aerial tactical reconnaissance and surveillance, I recommend that the funds proposed by the Air Force be included in the FY ‘63 budget. However, I am directing the Air Force to submit a new program which will better meet the needs of both the Army and Air Force for reconnaissance and surveillance.

Logistic Guidance

I have also directed that revised logistic assumptions be used by the Services in preparing their budgets. The new general planning base for all three Services is designed to provide logistical support for an average of 6 calendar months of a major conventional war. For the supply of the forces beyond six months, we shall rely largely upon industrial production.

We now have a serious imbalance in the inventories of the three Services and among the items of any one Service. The six calendar month objective will be consistently applied to all items and all Services, but with modifications to reflect the deployment patterns of each. Because of time required to commit the entire force, six calendar months of combat requires fewer months of full combat support.

For the Army, the new guidance of 88 division months of combat operation is based upon a 22 Division force engaged for four combat months in a conventional war.

For the Marines, a force of 4 Divisions would be provided logistical support for 20 division months of combat operations.

In the case of the Navy, the comparable support for 6 calendar months assumes an average of approximately 50 per cent of the active fleet engaged in combat during the same period.

A serious imbalance has existed between the logistic planning for the ground forces and their necessary tactical air support. The logistic guidance for tactical air support is now to be consistent with that for the ground units they should support. As an interim objective for FY ‘63, the Air Force is being directed to acquire a minimum on hand capability of at least three months of combat support. In view of the grave deficiencies in non-nuclear ordnance for tactical aircraft, I am recommending the specific inclusion of $500 million in the FY ‘63 Air Force budget for non-nuclear ordnance.

IV. Sealift and Airlift Forces

The force structure I am recommending is summarized in the following table.

End-Fiscal Year

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Airlift ( No. of UE Aircraft)

C-97 48 - - - - -

C-118 95 80 48 - - -

32

C-121 60 56 32 - - -

60 32

C-123 80 64 - - - -

C-124 300 216 216 216 120 36

220 220 167 76

C-130 240 320 448 448 448 384

C-133 44 44 44 44 40 40

C-135 42 42 42 42 42 38

Cargo Jet - - - 48 96 144

0 0 0

C-141a - - - - 48 96b

32 80 128

Troop Carrier 492 456 520 520 648 612

444 444 408 412 420

MATS 417 366 310 278 146 126

386 390 390 274 206

Total 909 822 830 798 794 738

830 834 686 626

Sealift (No. of Active Ships)

Troopships 16 - - - - -

16 16 16 16 16

Roll-on/Roll-off Cargo Ships 1 1 1 2 3 4c

Other Cargo Ships 59 58 58 57 56 55

Tankers 24 24 24 24 24 24

Total 100 83 83 83 83 83

99 99 99 99 99

a The difference between my recommended C-141 program and that of the Air Force in 1965- 1967 reflects a more conservative estimate of date of availability, not a difference in program objectives. The eventual total I am recommending is lower than that proposed by the Air Force because I am including a fleet of Cargo Jets in my program.

b Increases to 144 in FY 1968.

c Increases to a total of 6 in FY 1969.

The Services have developed the following general deployment objectives, which I have approved, for use in estimating our sea and airlift requirements for limited war in remote areas: a. One airborne brigade with essential combat equipment to any employment area within three days (by airlift).

b. One division (including the above brigade) within seven to ten days (by airlift).

c. One additional division within four weeks (by airlift).

d. The complete equipment of the two-division force within forty-five days (by sealift).

e. Three fighter bomber squadrons and support units to any employment area within one week (by airlift).

f. Seven additional fighter bomber squadrons within four weeks (by airlift).

g. Logistic support for air and ground forces until surface resupply is established (by airlift).

In addition, continued logistic support of the permanent theatre forces would have to be provided. (A two division amphibious lift for the Marine Corps was provided in Package III.)

At present our potential military response is constrained by the limited capability of the current airlift forces and by the current basing and support posture, and is not able to meet the above objectives. My recommendations for meeting this deficiency are to increase both the airlift forces and the theatre stocks of vehicles and consumables.

Pre-stocking of theatre supply points, and airlift directly from the United States, are close substitutes in terms of providing quickly the equipment and supplies needed for combat operations in remote areas. Current deployment concepts, implicit in the Service objectives, specify the airlift and sealift of the above forces from the continental United States. While there are advantages to this concept, an airlift force with four times the current capability would be needed to meet our requirements.

By using theatre stockage, however, we can greatly increase the effective capabilities of the airlift and sealift forces. Nevertheless, for a variety of reasons we cannot afford to rely completely on this approach. The airlift and sealift forces I am recommending, therefore, reflect a choice to use theatre stocks whenever possible, but also to provide a substantial capability for deployment from the United States in the event those stocks cannot be used or have not been established. The cost of this pre-stockage program would be only about 10 per cent of that needed to procure and operate the additional aircraft required under an all-United States deployment concept.

The recommended program is designed to meet all of the objectives listed above. A capability is provided to deploy one airborne division to the Middle East or Southeast Asia within seven days, if a one brigade force from this division plus resupply for the full division is airlifted from the theatre. Alternatively, one division can be deployed from the United States to any area within ten days, with no support from theatre resources.

In addition to these general conclusions, certain aspects of the recommended forces deserve special comment:

The recommended program brings into the force at a relatively early point substantial numbers of additional transport aircraft.

Airlift squadrons are shifted from the high utilization-high cost air transport force where they are surplus to our requirements to the lower cost troop carrier force. Peak short-response readiness is thereby improved while appreciable savings in operating costs are achieved.

Construction of 5 Comet roll-on/roll-off ships at the rate of one a year is begun in FY ‘63. When deliveries begin in FY ‘65, each will replace one general purpose cargo ship now in the active fleet. This will give us a new and valuable capability for rapid loading and unloading of vehicles, particularly where port facilities are limited.

With respect to the balance of the cargo, tanker, and troop ship fleet, I see no need at this time for the construction of replacement vessels. The marginal gains which might be achieved because of their faster cruising speed are completely outweighed by the very substantial expenditure involved. When needed, the service life of the existing vessels can be extended by a “FRAM-type” overhaul program.

I have been unable to identify a military contingency for which the strategic sealift of troops would be necessary or desirable. In an emergency our commercial air fleet alone could airlift more troops than our forces are prepared to deploy. Deployment by air would also provide a faster initial response and shorter transit time.

In routine peacetime operations the movement of almost all personnel overseas by air could result in direct financial savings. Furthermore, the effectiveness of our forces would be augmented by providing the equivalent of 10-15,000 more man years through reduced transit and collection time. I am considering therefore, the retirement of all 16 troop ships now in the active fleet.

V. Reserve and National Guard Forces

My recommended Program, and the Service-proposed programs for FY ‘63 are summarized in the following table: Fiscal Years

Army Navy Marine Corps Air Force

1962 1963 1962 1963 1962 1963 1962 1963

Annual Obligational Authority (Millions of Dollars) 911 911 218 228 115 129 531 531

Paid Drill Strength (Thousands of Men) 700 700 125 125 46 51 136 136

For the Navy, I recommend an increase of $10 million above the 1962 level for operation and maintenance of the ships to be returned from active to reserve status. The Marine Corps program provides an increase of 5,000 in paid drill personnel to strengthen the Reserve Marine Division/Wing Team and to provide general augmentation of the active Fleet Marine Forces during a crisis. With these expectations, the program I recommend continues the FY ‘62 levels of obligational and paid drill strength.

The recent Reserve call-ups have prevented my making decisions on the details of the Reserve and National Guard programs for FY ‘63 or developing a firm program for FY 1964 to FY 1967. I recommend, however, the placing of greater emphasis on the readiness of high priority units needed for immediate augmentation of the active forces during periods of increased international tension. Furthermore, I intend to ensure that the improved readiness of units released from active duty is maintained.

VI. Research and Development

The programs I am recommending, and those proposed by the Services, are summarized in the following table:

Total Obligational Authority ($ Billions)

FY 62 FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67

Basic Research 0.179 0.200 0.220 0.242 0.266 0.293

.250 .266 .281 .301 .313

Applied Research & Adv. Technology 1.059 1.355 1.477 1.515 1.555 1.647

Space (Including National Space Programs) 1.025 1.428 1.610 1.787 2.201 2.406

Advent .072 .090 .090 .050 .025 .010

.056 .016 - - -

Transit .023 .046 .023 .016 .013 .011

.048 .019 .014 .011 .009

Midas .201 .100 .160 .095 .060 .040

.206 .432 .370 .285 .250 .226

Samos .287 .332 .280 .210 .160 .160

.402 .380 .360 .360 .360

Dynasoar .100 .125 .125 .121 .083 .018

.176 .191 .145

Saint .026 .040 .007 - - -

.051 .037 .143 .479 .286

Discoverer .055 .055 .055 - - -

Atlantic & Pacific Missile Ranges .339 .407 .327 .336 .365 .382

.332 .420 .427 .398 .423 .428

Other .094 .284 .337 .266 .173 .101

.086 .644 .616 .927 1.581 1.520

Total Space 1.197 1.479 1.404 1.094 .879 .722

1.263 2.299 2.065 2.248 3.187 2.847

Missiles

Mauler .028 .050 .013 .006 - -

.114 .106 .220 .151 .025

Shilleagh (Incl. Back-up) .019 .044 .034 .024 .010 .008

.019 .009 .014

Typhon .045 .072 .052 .038 .019 .014

.077 .124 .195 .316

Follow-on/Polaris .010 .015 .040 .150 .300 .300

- - - .070 .110 .130

Mid-Range Ballistic Missile - .040 .125 .160 .050 .050

.041 .154 .274 .236 .190

Other .129 .192 .267 .306 .352 .286

.131 .352 .661 .894 1.636 1.784

Total Missiles .231 .413 .531 .684 .731 .658

.273 .598 1.007 1.596 2.338 2.453

Aircraft

B-70 .220 .171 .076 .034 - -

.450 .594 .538 .818 1.423 1.875

VTOL Utility Act .018 .036 .030 .021 .004 .004

.016 .026 .014

Aerial Crane - .020 .025 .020 .015 .015

Other Aircraft .014 .046 .094 .096 .122 .141

.040 .079 .098 .142 .216

Total Aircraft .252 .273 .225 .171 .141 .160

.482 .670 .668 .950 1.584 2.110

Command & Control, Com- Munications & Intelligence .146 .228 .309 .312 .252 .234

.143 .368 .444 .404 . 303 .295

Conventional War Armaments .346 .415 .539 .546 .402 .456

.340 .404 .543 .590 .423 .476

Remote Area Limited Warfare (Special OSD Add-On) - .100 .100 .100 .100 .100

Management & Support .875 .956 .974 .971 .981 1.001

1.126 1.087 1.060 1.016 1.019

OSD Development Planning Increment - - .182 .922 1.906 2.663

Total R&D 4.285 5.419 5.961 6.557 7.213 7.934

4.530 7.413 7.690 8.910 11.353 11.919

My recommendations are based on the following principles: 1. Space-oriented system projects, as contrasted with component development projects, must have either an immediate military use or a reasonable and foreseeable possibility must exist for such use. In addition, DOD must support the National Space Program, according to the NASA-DOD agreements.

2. The B-70 has not been approved as a full weapon system.

3. A substantial R&D effort should be aimed at insuring the safety and the flexibility of employment of nuclear weapons, and at reducing dependence on vulnerable parts of the weapon systems during and after an enemy attack.

4. Joint Army, Navy, Air Force R&D, as exemplified by the agreements reached in connection with the VTOL, VAX and TFX aircraft, should be encouraged; high-altitude drones should be considered from a similar joint point of view.

5. The Army should be given a sharp increase in funding for limited and sub-limited warfare to improve an existing situation that is very unbalanced.

6. It is not possible to support prudent R&D funding levels four or five years hence solely on the basis of those projects which have sufficient validity to warrant even tentative approval at this time. Accordingly, an OSD Development Planning Increment should be added in FY 1964 through FY 1967 to arrive at realistic R&D resource demand levels. As R&D planning progresses this item should be reduced, reaching zero for the annual budget under review in each future year.

7. Basic research is important and the amount of money devoted to it should be increased.

8. The distribution of funds between the Exploratory Development and Systems has been reviewed and the funds devoted to Systems have been decreased in order to delay initiation of large programs until the necessary technology is established. For this reason, among others, a number of proposed new systems, such as extended Pershing, Field Army Ballistic Missile Defense, Typhon II (a Navy anti-aircraft anti-missile system), Space Counter Weapon System, and others have been eliminated. On the other hand increased effort should be placed on technologies required for such items as penetration aides, guidance for mobile ballistic missiles, reconnaissance-strike aircraft, anti-tank weapons, communications, command and control, etc.

The following are some of the highlights of the R&D program.

Space (Including DoD participation in the National Space Program.)

About 20 percent of the total DoD R&D dollars are currently programmed for space projects and systems through FY 1964. Although the levels appear to decline beyond FY 1964, new developments or success in current programs could actually result in increases. Funds for DoD support of the National Space Program are included in these areas.

The costs for the Atlantic and Pacific Missile Ranges comprise about one-quarter of the space R&D funds. Large current R&D programs are Discoverer, Midas, Samos and Advent, a communications satellite. Navigational satellites similar to Transit, an outgrowth of the satellite interceptor program and man in space projects evolving from NASA programs and Dynasoar might become quite important militarily. In the event that military requirements for manned spaced vehicles were to appear substantial, increases in R&D funding could be required during the latter half of this decade.

Missiles

In FY 1962 and FY 1963 R&D for missiles of all types represents about 30 per cent of the total R&D budget. The fraction of the R&D budget allocated to missiles may be reduced in FY 1964 and subsequent years but the funding levels will probably not drop as low as indicated. Some OSD Development Planning Increment funds will undoubtedly be programmed into this area.

Strategic missile R&D will decline rather sharply after FY 1963 reflecting the comparatively small number of new programs anticipated in this area. Conceivably this decline could be reversed if unexpected Soviet developments indicate much greater vulnerability of, or lack of penetrability by our missiles. Current R&D programs include funds to improve the penetration capabilities and reliability of those missiles still in development. R&D funds are also included for an improved longer range Polaris and possible follow-on, for increased flexibility in Minuteman, to retain the option of a decision for early deployment of mobile Minuteman, and to begin development of a highly accurate, fast reacting, mobile, Mid-Range Ballistic-Missile. The MRBM would cost approximately $500 million to develop. Such an expenditure appears warranted in view of: 1. The “range gap” in our present missile program between the Pershing, with a range of 350 miles, and our long-range ICBM's.

2. The possible need to replace the nuclear armed fighter-bombers with a missile as the aircraft become more vulnerable to attack, both on the ground and in the air.

3. The large number of Soviet missiles with ranges between 300 and 2,000 miles.

Funds are programmed for a family of tactical missiles ranging from the Shillelagh (and a back-up anti-tank missile) to Pershing. Air defense missiles include a forward area self-propelled missile (Mauler) and several air-to-air missiles; Typhon is a ship-launched missile with a surface target capability. A number of other missiles of all types are being studied extensively within the three Services.

Aircraft

The B-70 continues as a development program with an estimated development cost of $1.3 billion. A tri-Service fighter which is to be used for interdiction, air superiority, reconnaissance and fleet defense is to be developed in lieu of two single-service fighters, at a savings of $1 billion. A tri-Service close-support aircraft is being studied. At least one (and perhaps as many as three) design of a vertical take-off and landing utility aircraft is being planned in a tri-Service program to evaluate the VTOL concept.

R&D is proceeding on a surveillance aircraft and a light observation helicopter; other aircraft and helicopters such as the Aerial Crane are under study. A number of projects in advanced technology, e.g., the X-15 and the laminar flow research aircraft are directed toward improving our capabilities in conventional aeronautics.

[Here follow Sections VII-IX.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, FY 1963 Defense Budget 1/61-10/61. Top Secret. No final version of this memorandum has been found. It was McNamara's practice to circulate the final versions of budget memoranda in draft form. Concerning the role and significance of McNamara's Draft Presidential Memoranda, or DPMs, see Alain Enthoven and K. Wayne Smith, How Much Is Enough? Shaping the Defense Program, 1961-1969 (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), pp. 53-58.

1 Only the first six sections are printed.

2 Printed in italics.

3 Document 46.

4 Document 48.

5 Reference is to the section below entitled "Logistic Guidance."

6 These ships were obtained either by recommissioning from the Reserve Fleet or by retaining ships previously scheduled for phase-out. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 Numbers cited in this section are for squadron aircraft only. In addition, aircraft would be procured for command support, training, test and attrition. [Footnote in the source text.]

51. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 51. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, October 7, 1961.

In a memorandum to you on 16 August 19611 I recommended that the $514.5 million for additional long-range bombers, the $180 million additional for the B-70, and the $85.8 million additional for Dynosoar, appropriated by the Congress for FY 1962 not be spent. Since that time, I have received and given careful consideration to the report of the Senate Preparedness Subcommittee. I have also completed a review of U.S. requirements for long-range nuclear delivery systems, and for military space research and development, as a part of a review of the Defense program for the period 1963-1967. I remain convinced that the additional appropriations should not be spent.

Let me make clear that my reason for recommending against the procurement of an additional wing of long-range bombers is not a simple belief that bombers are becoming obsolete, either because ballistic missiles are based on more advanced technology, or because of prospective improvements in enemy air defenses. Indeed, as the Stennis Committee report pointed out, bombers can do things that missiles cannot do. As for enemy defenses, I am confident that the capability for defense suppression provided by the 1,000 air-launched missiles to be carried by alert B-52's in my recommended program will be more than enough to enable the bombers to penetrate. My main reason for recommending against more bombers is that they are soft, concentrated, and vulnerable to ICBM attack, whereas I am convinced that most of our long-range nuclear delivery forces must be either hard and dispersed or continuously mobile in peacetime, both in order to be protected from surprise missile attack and to have adequate survival potential in the wartime environment. We plan to protect the bombers by warning and alert response. Besides its “hair-trigger” aspects, this mechanism has other limitations, even if successful. First, it leaves the non-alert half of the force unprotected. Second, it leaves us no alternative but to commit essentially all of the surviving bombers to attack in the first few hours of the war or to lose their capability as they run out of fuel and as their soft bases are destroyed. Moreover, the bombers have to penetrate enemy defenses in large numbers and after “rolling back” the defenses with missiles. They cannot be used in a selective and controlled way.

For these reasons, I believe that we should concentrate our procurement funds for long-range nuclear delivery systems on hard and dispersed and mobile missiles.

This is not to say that we should not have a bomber force. Because of the special things bombers can do, we should have a mix. But we already have a large bomber force. In mid-1965, it will include 630 B-52's, 80 B-58's, and, if we do not decide to phase them out sooner, 225 B-47's. The alert B-52's and B-58's alone will be able to carry about 1,500 gravity bombs plus 1,000 air-launched missiles. The alert B-47's will be able to carry another 200 bombs. The B-52 and B-58 force will be able to be maintained substantially intact at least until 1970. These bombers can give us more than enough capability to perform the specialized tasks for which bombers are particularly well suited.

Furthermore, an examination of the target system shows that most targets, including all those of highest priority are best attacked by missiles, for several reasons. First, the existing targets are soft, fixed, and of known location, and therefore vulnerable to missile attack (though often well defended against bomber attack). Second, in the case of military targets, the missiles get there faster than do bombers, and therefore would be more effective in catching enemy bombers and missiles on the ground. Third, in the case of attacks on Soviet cities, it is clearly desirable to have the option to delay commitment, perhaps for many hours. For example, Polaris, which can be held in reserve for days if necessary, is much better than a bomber for this task.

Moreover, bombers are expensive particularly if kept on air-borne alert. The total system cost over the next five years to which we would be committing ourselves if we bought the extra B-52 wing plus supporting tankers and air-launched missiles, would be approximately $1.4 billion (assuming ground alert only). The extra 1962 appropriation would cover only the initial procurement of the bombers themselves.

Many of the same considerations apply to the B-70. It was conceived and designed in a period in which we had no ICBM or Polaris. Its design, in effect, duplicates rather than complements the ICBM force. It is predicated on the assumption that high speed is the best way to penetrate enemy defenses. This speed has made the system very expensive and quite ineffective for the special tasks for which bombers are well suited. Ironically, it now appears that prior defense suppression with missiles (e.g., B-52 with Skybolt) is a much more effective way than speed to assure penetration. The B-70 weapon system as presently designed would not really have a capability to search for targets of unknown or uncertain location, or to seek out and attack mobile targets. The Air Force is examining the use of the B-70 in a strike-reconnaissance role. However, even if it can be modified for this purpose, the changes in subsystems and doctrine would be so extensive that it does not appear reasonable to commit it to production at this time. Moreover, the problem of adequate pre-launch survival potential for bombers in the wartime environment has not been solved.

The B-70 funding request to the Congress totaled $220.0 million. This is the required 1962 budget amendments. I know of no justification for obligating an additional $85.8 million in FY 1962. There is no known military requirement for Dynosoar. There is at most merely a possibility that something of this character may be required at some time in the future. Under the circumstances, it seems to me to be best to concentrate on reducing lead time against the day when such a system might be required. The best way to do this is to reorient the project to solve the difficult technical FY 1962 increment of a $1.3 billion program extending through FY 1965 to provide and test three prototype aircraft, one of which will be equipped with a Bomb Navigation System. Under this program, flight tests of the first aircraft will begin in December 1962, with the other two aircraft to follow at nine month intervals. The program permits the continuation of essential technological development and retains the option to proceed with the development of a complete weapon system at a later date, should it be determined to be necessary. In view of the uncertainty about the need for additional long-range bombers and the suitability of the B-70, I believe that the scope of the B-70 program as contained in the FY 1962 budget request adequately meets our defense needs. To spend the extra money in 1962 would be to restore the B-70 to the Air Force proposed full scale weapon system development program. The extra cost of the Air Force program over the cost of the program I am recommending would be not only the $180 million FY 1962, but also $3 to $5 billion over the period 1963-1967.

In the case of Dynosoar, we added $30 million to expedite development in the first set of FY problems involved in boosting a body of high lift into orbit, sustaining man in it, and recovering the vehicle at a designated place, rather than to press on with a full system development program. It has been so oriented in the past and has tended to become a full system development program of unspecified objectives. I am studying the reorientation now, and when this study is completed, I shall be able to estimate appropriate funding requirements. Until then, I believe that we should hold the extra $85.8 million. Indeed, it is not clear now that more money for Dynosoar would result in any advancement of the date of first successful manned flight.

Your approval of the above recommendations is requested.2

Robert S. McNamara

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Budget 63, 1/61-10/61. Secret.

1 In this memorandum McNamara stated briefly many of the arguments set forth in the memorandum printed here. In a memorandum for the record, dated August 21, Ewell reported that Taylor discussed with McNamara Congressional increases in funds for the B-52 bomber and other programs, and informed him that the President hoped that McNamara could “find some formula by which the money could be usefully employed” because Kennedy “was under heavy political pressure to be forthcoming in this regard.” McNamara had indicated to Taylor that he was “very firmly of the opinion that the money should not be spent for the purposes in the bill, and that he could see no reason at this time to change his position at a future date.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, #11 Miscellaneous (H) 8)

2 In an October 28 memorandum to McNamara, McGeorge Bundy reported to McNamara “what you already know,” Kennedy's approval of these recommendations. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Budget 63, 1/61-10/61)

52. Paper Issued by the Joint Chiefs of Staff 52. Paper Issued by the Joint Chiefs of StaffSource

Washington, undated.

National Targeting and Attack Policy For General War: Guidance For the Preparation of the Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP)

I. Purpose

To provide guidance for the annual preparation of capabilities plans for employment of United States nuclear offensive forces in that range of contingencies in which the United States would execute major nuclear attacks against the Sino-Soviet Bloc.

II. Scope

The Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP) will provide for the optimum integration of committed forces of the unified and specified commands and for coordination with appropriate external commands, for all preplanned attacks on targets the destruction or neutralization of which will accomplish the objectives enumerated in Section III, below. It will determine the DGZ's to be attacked, and the weight of effort against each installation consistent with its worth and the capabilities of committed forces.

III. Objectives

a. United States plans for nuclear offensive operations in the event of general war will be designed to achieve, in concert with other US and Allied offensive and defensive operations, the following objectives: (1) To destroy or neutralize the military capabilities of the enemy, while retaining ready, effective and controlled US strategic capabilities adequate to assure, to the maximum extent possible, retention of US military superiority to the enemy, or any potential enemies, at any point during or after the war.

(2) To minimize damage to the US and its Allies, and in all events to limit such damage to a level consistent with national survival and independence.

(3) To bring the war to an end on the most advantageous possible terms for the United States and its Allies.

b. SIOP will contribute to the achievement of these objectives by accomplishment, as directed, of the following three tasks:

Task I: [11-1/2 lines of source text and footnote in the source text (4 lines) not declassified] Task I will also include penetration attacks essential to the accomplishment of the above. [1 line of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (4 lines of source text) not declassified]

Planning for accomplishment of Task I will provide for the possibility of selective withholding of all attacks [2-1/2 lines of source text and footnote in the source text (2 lines) not declassified].

Task II: The destruction or neutralization of other elements of [7 lines of source text and footnote (4 lines) in the source text not declassified]. Task II will be accomplished in such a way as to [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

Planning for accomplishment of Task II will provide for the possibility of selective withholding of all Task II attacks [1 line of source text and footnote in the source text (2 lines) not declassified].

Task III: The threat or execution of controlled, deliberate, attacks [4 lines of source text not declassified] the destruction of which will most effectively reduce Sino-Soviet wartime and postwar capability and will to continue the war.

Task III attacks are to be programmed primarily for [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

IV. National Strategic Target List

a. A National Strategic Target List (NSTL) will be developed and maintained by the Director of Strategic Target Planning. It will include all target installations in Tasks I, II and III.

b. The NSTL will be developed from the Target Data Inventory without regard to the magnitude of US and Allied forces available for the execution of nuclear offensive tasks in general war.

c. The NSTL will identify the target installations corresponding to Tasks I through III and indicate those programmed for attack in the SIOP.

d. The NSTL will encompass all of the targets which may require attack under any of the varying circumstances of general war engagement. There is no single combination of targets which will represent the task of nuclear offensive forces under all circumstances. The strike task to be accomplished in initial operations will depend upon the specific circumstances attending initiation.

V. Target Priorities and Expected Damage1 a. Expected damage, or an expectation of damage, is the average of damage that would be achieved if the attack were run many times.

b. In achieving the damage levels prescribed below, plans will take into account all pertinent operational factors including pre-launch survivability (appropriate assumptions described below), and cumulative damage effects from adjacent nuclear detonations. Expectation of damage against individual installations should be allowed to vary freely in order to take advantage of differences in target hardness and worth, enemy defenses, yields and CEP's of available weapons, and other factors. The total reduction in enemy strength from all attacks against the categories of installations listed below should approximate what would have resulted if the established expectation had been achieved against each installation.

c. Available forces will be used to maximize the achievement of the objectives of the plan. The order of target categories prescribed in d(1) below are chosen to indicate relative priorities. The expected damage levels prescribed below are neither maximum nor minimum limits to the damage to be inflicted. If programmed capabilities will not permit the achievement of the prescribed levels of damage, lower levels will be accepted, with due regard for the indicated order of priority. If programmed capabilities will permit, higher expectancies of damage against the prescribed targets and the destruction or neutralization of other targets will be achieved in such a way as best to accomplish the strike tasks.

d. In the programming of forces under all options, priority will be given to the achievement of damage as follows:

[7 paragraphs (24 lines of source text) not declassified]2

(2) Programming of forces for (1) above will be done in a manner that will permit assignment of forces to Task III which are adequate to inflict significant damage.3 [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]3 DGZ's for these forces will be selected in such a way as best to achieve Task III. (Floor space as such is introduced only to define the size of the forces to be allocated to Task III, not to define the targeting objectives.)

e. Programming of available and capable forces to other urban targets in Tasks I and III will be divided between destruction or neutralization of other military targets, and reassignment to reserve forces, in such a way as best to achieve the objectives and Tasks defined in Section III, above.

VI. Options and Flexibility

a. SIOP will be prepared in consideration of the following alternative circumstances of outbreak of war:

[2 paragraphs (14 lines of source text) not declassified]

The following pre-launch survival probabilities are provided to give an approximate quantitative expression to the intent underlying the contingencies defined above for the FY 1963 time period.

[headings not declassified]

Air Alert Aircraft and Polaris on/near Station 1 1 1

Minuteman, Titan II 1 .95 .80

Hard Atlas 1 .95 .75

Alert Carrier Aircraft (At Sea) 1 .95 .70

Ground-Alert/*/ Land-Based Aircraft (ZI) 1 .85 .50

Ground-Alert/*/ Land-Based Aircraft (Forward Area) 1 .50 .05

Titan I, Medium Atlas 1 .80 .40

Soft Atlas 1 .40 .10

Non-Alert* Carrier Aircraft .90 .70 .30

Non-Alert* Land-Based Aircraft (ZI) .80 .15 .05

Non-Alert* Land-Based Aircraft (Forward Area) .80 .05 .05

* Refers to normal peacetime readiness.

The Director of Strategic Target Planning will evaluate these factors in the light of the changing threat, changing composition and readiness of US forces, and the experience resulting from the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff analyses and war gaming, and other sources, and report any changes made, with the reasons therefore, to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

b. SIOP will provide for execution, when directed by competent authority, of the following:

Attack Option I. Execute Task I under conditions o. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] while withholding for possible subsequent use forces programmed for Tasks II and III.

Attack Option II. Execute Tasks I and II under conditions of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] while withholding for possible subsequent use forces programmed for Task III.

4 Attack Option III. Execute Task I under conditions o. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] while withholding for possible subsequent use forces programmed for Tasks II and III.

Attack Option IV. Execute Tasks I and II under conditions of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] while withholding for possible subsequent use forces programmed for Task III.

Attack Option V. Execute Tasks I, II, and III under conditions of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

SIOP will also provide for selective withholding of attacks [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] under each Attack Option, as indicated in Section III.b., above. (For example, there should be provision under Attack Option II for selective withholding of Task II attacks from [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].)

c. Any conflicts which arise in force programming for the various attack choices will be resolved in favor of optimization for Attack Option V.

VII. Role of Theater Forces

a. Subject to the requirements of contingency plans and other theater requirements, unified and specified commanders will [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. SIOP tasks will be the first priority commitment for SAC and Polaris under all circumstances.

b. [13-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

c. [8-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

VIII. Constraints

a. All plans will minimize civilian casualties and civil destruction in friendly, neutral, and satellite areas (i.e., all countries except the USSR [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to the extent that military necessity permits.

b. In attacks to accomplish Tasks I and II, surface bursts, weapon yields and damage to population and industry will be held to a minimum consistent with military necessity.

c. Maximum permissible “expected doses” in key areas, computed as specified in “d” below are as follows:

[List (15 lines of source text) not declassified]

d. Expected doses from individual surface bursts will be determined as specified in Supplement No. 3 to WSEG Staff Study No. 46 and the mean annual templates referred to therein, which have been forwarded separately to DSTP and the commanders of unified and specified commands. The total expected dose at each key area will be determined by the following:

First obtain the expected dose from each programmed surface burst by interpolation using the mean annual templates referred to above. Then multiply each expected dose by the probability5 of detonation of the weapon in the target area. (This is the “probability weighted expected dose”). Finally, add all the probability weighted expected doses together to obtain the total expected dose.

e. In order to calculate total expected doses, it is necessary to know the detailed plans for all programmed surface bursts. This knowledge is not available until SIOP and the commanders' plans have been prepared. Initial planning for surface bursts will be based on SIOP forces not exceeding 90% of the total expected doses (see c. above) and the other forces not exceeding 10% or the difference between allowed dosage and those expected to result from SIOP strikes.

IX. Responsibilities

a. Joint Chiefs of Staff (1) Prepare annual guidance for the SIOP which will be incorporated in the Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan.

(2) Review and approve annually the NSTL, the SIOP and the plans of the commanders of unified and specified commands.

(3) Provide a permanent JCS liaison group with the DSTP.

b. Director of Strategic Target Planning (DSTP). The DSTP will be responsible to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the following actions: (1) Maintain a Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff (JSTPS) according to an approved manning table and the guidance provided by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

(2) Develop and maintain the NSTL and SIOP in conjunction with the commanders of the unified and specified commands.

(3) Resolve differences that occur during the development of SIOP; and highlight them when presenting the NSTL and SIOP to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for review and approval.

(4) Submit the NSTL and SIOP to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for approval.

(5) During the effective period of the SIOP, advise the Joint Chiefs of Staff as appropriate of any temporary inability to attain the levels of destruction or neutralization approved in the SIOP.

(6) The foregoing responsibilities of the DSTP do not include command authority over forces committed to SIOP.

c. Commanders of Unified and Specified Commands. The commanders of appropriate unified and specified commands shall: (1) Provide permanent senior representation with the DSTP for participation in the preparation and maintenance of the NSTL and SIOP and for liaison purposes.

(2) Advise the DSTP of those forces of their commands which have an appropriate capability and which are available for commitment to the SIOP and which should be included therein.

(3) Commit forces to the SIOP, in consonance with this guidance.

(4) Program no attacks against SIOP targets unless provided for by SIOP.

X. Analysis and Review

a. DSTP will perform a set of Monte Carlo damage runs for each Attack Option and selected withholding provisions, using all pertinent operational factors, determining AGZ's, and will report the following: (1) Destruction achieved against military targets, by target category.

(2) Destruction (casualties, fatalities, floor space)6 in friendly, neutral, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and the Soviet Union.

(3) Fallout radiation levels in the cities listed in Section VIII.c, above, and in the [1 line of source text not declassified].

b. DSTP will prepare an analysis of the impact on penetration and target destruction of the exercise of the option to withhold selectively penetration attacks against [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

c. All data used in the preparation of the NSTL, SIOP, and their analysis, will be available for analysis and review by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

XI. Effective Period

a. To the extent that there are any conflicts with other guidance, this guidance represents national policy and supersedes all other SIOP guidance.

b. The SIOP will be prepared and reviewed annually, and amended as necessary to keep the plan current.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, SIOP. Top Secret. This paper forms the appendix to an October 27 memorandum signed by Rear Admiral F. J. Blouin, Secretary of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which distributed it for implementation to the Joint Chiefs, major commanders, and to CINCSAC in his capacity as Director of Strategic Target Planning.

1 Priorities in this section are to be understood in the sense of allocation of limited forces, not in the sense of time urgency. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Severe and significant damage as used throughout this document is defined in JCS Publication No. 5, 1 December 1960. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Built up area may be used when tract data is not available. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 Chances of using this Attack Option are remote and it is, therefore, to be programmed as a last priority. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 This is the product of a prelaunch survivability, reliability and probability of penetration to the target area. Any “dead-man fuzed” weapons should be assumed to surface burst if the delivery vehicle penetrates into enemy territory. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 See footnote e on page 6. [Footnote in the source text. Reference is to footnote 4 above.]

53. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the President's Military Representative (Taylor) 53. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Washington, October 29, 1961.

Dear Max:

I have given Bob McNamara certain comments on his excellent Memorandum to the President of September 30, 1961,1 dealing with FY '63 defense budgetary requirements. As I pointed out to Bob, though his memorandum adequately provides for a considerable portion of the requirements which I can foresee arising out of projected foreign policy developments, and which I referred to in my letter to him of February 4, 1961,2 there are still a number of questions which trouble me. I think it would be useful for you to have copies of the comments I am providing him (Attachment A), so that we might all have the opportunity to consider them further.

I am sending identical letters to Mac Bundy and Dave Bell.

Sincerely,

Dean

Attachment3

General

We fully support the proposition that the U.S. should seek improvements in its strategic force which would increase its survivability, its flexibility, and its ability to be used in a controlled and deliberate way under a wide range of contingencies. This has been assured by the planned Defense program. If there is any imbalance, it would appear to be weighted on the side of strategic needs as compared with likely requirements for conventional forces arising out of potential foreign policy developments during the period covered by the budget.

If a reallocation of resources between these alternative needs seems militarily inadvisable consideration should be given to some increase in the total planned Defense budget.

Program I: General War Offensive Forces

1. Command and Control. It is strongly in our foreign policy interest that the plans and capabilities of our strategic forces be sufficiently flexible so that they could be used with discrimination in any one of a number of alternative ways, as circumstances may dictate. To this end, it is of vital importance that our command and control arrangements be sufficiently effective and well protected to permit continuous civilian control over the use of these forces during grave crises and during actual hostilities.

It is also desirable that use of tactical nuclear forces be subject to centralized effective control, both because limited use of these forces may be a significant form of political bargaining and pressure short of general war and because any such use would clearly involve a very high risk of general war. We will want to ensure that use of these weapons is not initiated without a political decision and that any such use is subject to constant and specific political control if it is begun.

We are especially interested, from this standpoint, in ensuring effective control of such front-line weapons as the Davy Crockett which we understand are to be deployed to Europe. Our concern is the greater since we doubt it will be possible to deploy these weapons to U.S. forces there, without also generating European demands for these weapons which it would be difficult to resist. (We have never been able to resist such pressures in the past.) We would suggest that you appraise the military significance of delaying deployment of these weapons to Europe until the institution of effective arrangements for their control, e.g., by means of the “permissive link,” to ensure that these weapons will not be used without proper authorization by U.S. or allied front-line units.

Program II: General War Defensive Forces

2. Need to limit Soviet opportunity for exertion of diplomatic pressure by enhancing our defenses against strategic attack. As the program indicates, all available information suggests that the “Soviet efforts in the field of ballistic missile defense appear to be more ambitious than our own.”4 Current intelligence estimates predict that this high level of Soviet effort will result in an initial operational anti-missile capability during the 63-66 period. Should the Soviets achieve an effective operational system by that time, it would afford them an opportunity for exerting immense pressures on the Western Alliance. The initial psychological impact on allies and even conceivably on the U.S. public of claiming a defense against U.S. strategic striking power would be adverse.

Of even greater importance, such a capability, if not offset by U.S. technological advances, could provide a military advantage to the Soviet Union sufficient to encourage it into launching increasingly aggressive policies. Under such circumstances, the ability of U.S. foreign policy to maneuver successfully and with the necessary flexibility required to keep the U.S. out of a war while at the same time protecting U.S. vital interests, would be limited.

(a) Anti-Missile-Missile Program. As set forth at considerable length in Appendix II to the DOD Budget,5 Defense has decided on a limited program of Nike-Zeus production which will provide 12 batteries of such weapons, enough to defend six or seven cities, by 1967. A program of such limited size seems largely to result from serious reservations concerning the weapon's effectiveness. Despite these reservations the program is justified at least in part on the grounds that “the existence of a deployed defense may substantially increase the uncertainty at the Soviet decision making level.”

We seriously doubt that so limited a program, coming into operation as much as four years after the Soviets may have their own much more ambitious program operational, satisfactorily meets our objective. Either a substantial increase in this program should be decided upon or other alternatives explored. A much larger program, such as the 70 battery program recommended by NORAD, might considerably enhance the possibility of sowing uncertainty in the Soviet mind. Whether so ambitious a program is warranted given the added expense, largely revolves around the question of the weapon's effectiveness. The judgment as to the effectiveness of the weapon system is of course one for the Department of Defense to make. However, if the weapon is deemed not militarily effective we would seriously question the advisability of investing some $3.6 billion in the limited program of 12 batteries on the assumption this will have any appreciable effect of creating uncertainty at the Soviet decision making level. In fact I fear, quite to the contrary, the limited, time-lagging effort cannot help but be viewed as a clear indication of U.S. impotence in this field.

As to whether other avenues are open to us to offset this serious potential Soviet advantage, we take it that all current alternative missile systems are being fully explored with no current prospect of a more reliable system in sight. We would hope that no reasonable effort in this field is being restricted by virtue of budgetary unavailability.

(b) Civil Defense. There is one area, other than in the development of an effective U.S. anti-missile-missile, where we could achieve a significant neutralizing impact on any Soviet anti-missile successes. The Defense budget recognizes that an effective anti-missile system presupposes an effective civil defense, fallout shelter program. For this purpose $400 million is included in the budget. If our objective, as in the case of the anti-missile-missile, is at least in part designed to impress the Soviets with our ability for a second-strike effort in the event of a general nuclear war our effort must be large enough manifestly to provide for the survivability of significant portions of our population, war-making potential and second-strike force.

Though we are aware that a rapid increase in our previous level of civil defense activity would pose practical problems of ability to obligate funds effectively, we strongly suggest that we consider whether it is not possible to step up the level of our efforts substantially beyond the modest increase proposed in the FY '63 DOD budget. For the reasons previously stated, having an effective offset to Soviet strategic attack, will become an increasingly vital requirement for a successful future pursuance of our foreign policy objectives.

Program III: General Purpose Forces

3. Need for building an adequate level of military forces to deter non-strategic attack. U.S. preparedness efforts of prior years appear to have been inadequate in deterring limited and ambiguous Communist pressures. The prospects for the future suggest a continuance and even intensification of these limited pressures. From a foreign policy standpoint, therefore, it is desirable to remedy the past imbalance in our defense preparedness: to increase the level of resources going to deter Bloc non-strategic attack, while maintaining the present sufficiency of our strategic forces. We need readily available military force which can not only cope with actual hostilities but also serve as a clear and positive deterrent to limited aggression. In this connection, the DOD budget raises certain serious questions.

(a) Adequacy of force levels. The DOD budget actually projects a cutback in force levels, principally in the Army, below those currently approved. This is presumably based on the assumption that the Berlin crisis will have eased thereby permitting such a cutback. While not unmindful of the qualitative and even to some extent quantitative improvements which will result from the current buildup and which are maintained in the FY '63 DOD budget, we would argue that the surest method for preventing further Berlin crises, if indeed our current effort is successful, is to maintain no less than the present level. As we noted in our letter to the Secretary of Defense of June 27, 1961,6 the Communists have entered on a period of over-confidence. We must disabuse them, if there is not to be a risk of serious miscalculation on their part. An increase in the levels of our non-strategic forces would surely impress the Soviet government, particularly given its traditional preoccupation with ground strength. This would be due not only to the actual increase in U.S. military capability which would result but equally because it would create doubts as to the validity of Communist dogma concerning the unwillingness of democracies to shoulder long-term burdens and to accept risks as Communist states are prepared to do. Finally, and equally important, the higher the level of U.S. force capability which the crises leaves the Soviets to cope with, the more likely the Soviets are to be impressed with the disadvantages of stirring up crises, in the future.

(b) Dependence on Reservists. To some extent reliance upon call up of reservists in the event of emergency is inevitable. However, it is entirely likely that the Soviets, appreciating the difficulties inherent in the democratic process of raising forces and marshalling public opinion to meet emergencies, will periodically create crises which will present the U.S. government with increasing political difficulties in attempting to effect large-scale reserve call-ups. From a foreign policy standpoint, we must count on a continuing series of such pressures. It, therefore, seems important to plan for a higher level of available general purpose forces. It is strongly urged that consideration be given to this course of action, which would have important implications for our tactical air—as well as ground—forces.

(c) Capability to conduct Guerrilla and Counter-Guerrilla Operations. We have been concerned for some time over the need to develop a U.S. capability (i) to give advice and training and assistance to indigenous elements and (ii) to conduct guerrilla operations. Progress in this area has suffered in the past from inadequate funds as well as from a reluctance to accord a sufficient priority to such unconventional type of military activity. We are therefore delighted to see that the Department of Defense has included a special allocation of $100 million for such operations in the 63 budget. This is a move in the right direction but it leaves open the question of whether this amount, primarily to be devoted to research, is sufficient to meet the need. Our current experience in Southeast Asia demonstrates, at least in part, our inability to cope effectively with the type of ambiguous guerrilla military threat presented. We must expect an increase in such Communist activity, not only there but elsewhere—Latin America, the Middle East and Africa—and the need to combat these efforts rapidly and effectively should be given a high priority. We suggest that the Department of Defense reassess this item in light of the above with a view to substantially increasing the priority and funds accorded to it.

Program IV: Sealift and Airlift

3. Need for a Flexible and Highly Mobile Troop Delivery Capability. As suggested in our letter of February 4, 1961, increasing opportunities for the Soviets to exert military pressure along the extensive periphery of free-world borders have created the necessity for a military posture capable of rapid response to such threats. Only with such a capability can we conduct effective political negotiations without the threat of the Communists being able to bring overriding military force to bear as a means of resolving any issue in their favor. The DOD budget attempts to improve our ability to more forces rapidly to any trouble spot. However, the resultant capability, on the surface, still appears to be quite modest: (1) one airborne brigade to employment area in 3 days,

(2) one division (including the brigade) within 7 to 10 days,

(3) a second division in 4 weeks, and,

(4) the complete equipment for this 2 division force in 45 days.

The questions we have are three-fold. First, in terms of the magnitude of force which could quickly be brought to bear by the enemy in remote areas, e.g., Southeast Asia, Korea and Iran, are we making sufficient provision to provide us with an alternative to the immediate employment of nuclear weapons (or acceptance of defeat)? Second, as we mentioned in our letter to the Secretary of Defense of June 27, 1961, assuming that the Communists choose to exert pressure in two places simultaneously, e.g., Iran and Southeast Asia, do our plans provide sufficient conventional force to meet such a contingency? Third, will it be possible to commit forces to distant, underdeveloped areas even in the magnitude contemplated by DOD almost solely through airlift? For example, will not the paucity of adequate airfields in the less-developed areas of the world limit our ability to respond effectively?

All these questions raise questions about the adequacy of projected sealift. For example, we note that Defense plans to build only one of the newly developed, and we gather highly efficient, roll-on/roll-off ships a year. In light of the importance of having an effective and flexible force available for deployment to remote areas, we suggest that the Department of Defense reexamine its lift plan to assure that within the limits of production feasibility they provide adequately for our needs.

Program VI: Research and Development

6. MRBM's. It is highly desirable that the proposed $500 million MRBM development program explore possibilities for sea-based, as well as land-based, deployment.

Sea-based deployment could more readily be reconciled with the April 21 NSC policy toward NATO and the Atlantic nations7 than land-based deployment.

That policy precludes deployment of MRBM's to the forces of individual European countries (whether or not these forces are committed to SACEUR), calls for commitment of U.S. sea-based missiles to NATO, and holds out the long-term possibility of a multilaterally owned and controlled sea-borne NATO missile force, such as the President discussed in his Ottawa speech.

It is in the U.S. interest to hold to this policy. Deployment of MRBM's to the forces of individual countries would be a major step toward creation of de facto national strategic nuclear capabilities. This would create peacetime tensions and divisions within the alliance, as well as greatly lessen our ability to follow a non-nuclear strategy or a centrally controlled nuclear strategy in event of hostilities. On the other hand, deployment of MRBM's to U.S. forces only would probably be politically infeasible. The NSC policy of initial deployment to U.S. forces while holding out the possibility of a multilateral force thus seems the most useful course.

It is difficult, however, to conceive of carrying out this policy with land-based MRBM deployment. Multilateral deployment would be clearly less feasible on land than at sea, since missiles would be vulnerable to seizure by the countries on whose territory they were to be deployed. And, as for deployment to U.S. forces only, the European countries on whose soil the U.S. MRBM's were to be deployed would insist on securing some of these missiles for their own forces as a pre-condition to giving us deployment rights.

These considerations suggest that sea-based deployment is greatly preferable from a foreign policy standpoint. At a minimum, they make it desirable to avoid allowing the question of land-based vs. sea-based deployment to be foreclosed by the nature of development work which is planned within the DOD FY '63 budget.8

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-357-69. Top Secret. A copy of the attachment to this letter is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1963 1/61-10/61. According to a November 6 memorandum for the record by Major William Y. Smith of Taylor's staff, the attachment was drafted in S/P. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, FY 63 Budget #1)

1 Apparent reference to Documents 46, 48, and 50.

2 Document 10.

3 Top Secret.

4 The quotations are from Document 48.

5 Document 48.

6 Reference is to Document 35, which was drafted on June 27.

7 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XIII, Document 100.

8 In his November 6 memorandum (see the source note above), Major Smith discussed the defense budget process. He stated in part: “The impact of the SecState paper evidently was diminished by a Rusk-McNamara conversation, Rusk saying he did not feel strongly about the remarks.” Smith reported also that Henry Owen of S/P and Seymour Weiss of G/PM were among those at the Department of State arguing most strongly for an increase in conventional forces.

54. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 54. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, November 17, 1961.

JCSM-802-61

SUBJECT

Recommended Long-Range Nuclear Delivery Forces 1963-1967 (C)

1. Reference is made to: a. JCSM-620-61, dated 11 September 1961, subject as above.1

b. JCSM-657-61, dated 21 September 1961, subject as above.2

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have examined Appendix I to your draft memorandum for the President,3 subject as above, with particular attention to the target system and the operational factors employed therein as the basis for your force level recommendations.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are in full accord with your objective of improving the US strategic posture with respect to survivability, flexibility and the capability of being used in a controlled and deliberate way. They also agree on the general validity of the target system and the survival, reliability and penetration factors used as the basis for your force recommendations, subject to the views expressed below.

4. With respect to the list of target destruction requirements, this agreement has been possible because of the broad range of uncertainty presented. In terms of total numbers of targets, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the list provides an adequate representation of the threat. In terms of categories, they note that although this target list was derived from studies by the staff of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee, it is not clear whether certain categories of targets listed in the report of the Subcommittee4 have been included, e.g., primary military control centers and primary logistic support installations. Since a final report of General Hickey's group is expected in December,5 it is assumed that a more definitive exposition of target destruction requirements can thereby be expected.

5. Similarly, within the rather wide range resulting from taking the optimistic-pessimistic approach, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are able to accept the validity of the operational factors used. It would be impossible to accept the low numbers of weapons delivered on target by the recommended forces in the pessimistic case, since the factors therein are generally so adverse as to be quite unlikely; on the other hand, it would be imprudent to count on the results obtained by application of the optimistic factors throughout.

6. In the references set forth in paragraph 1 above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff provided you with their agreed views on long-range nuclear delivery forces and their rationale wherein this structure was at variance with your recommendations. It is noted that the figures used in your analysis for purposes of force level comparison are those initially submitted by Services. A comparison of the levels recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for FY 63 projected for the years FYs 64 through 67 with your forces would have shown smaller differences than appear in the analysis. In terms of five year system costs, for example, the difference would have been approximately $3.3 billion instead of the $9.7 billion resulting from comparison with the Service submissions. The essential point of difference in arriving at the two force levels is that while your analysis estimates that the situation at the outset of war would be characterized by intelligence and operational factors between the optimistic and the median cases, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider the median case more likely. To illustrate the degree of increased assurance attained by the higher level of forces, application to them of the median factors for 1965 produces additional alert weapons on target on the order of 100-125. The question becomes one of increased costs versus reduced risk.

7. The subject of long-range nuclear delivery force objectives is one which must be kept under constant scrutiny with a view to refining the factors involved in determining optimum force levels. The analysis contained in Appendix I to your draft memorandum is an important addition to the body of study on the subject. Pending more precise resolution of the factors bearing on the problem, the Joint Chiefs of Staff continue to believe that the force levels they have previously recommended for FY 63 would offer the advantages of increased capability for retaliation in the period considered, and earlier achievement of optimum readiness.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:

L.L. Lemnitzer
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, Atomic 471.61 29 Aug 61. Top Secret.

1 In this memorandum, the Joint Chiefs recommended to McNamara for FY 1963 funding 100 KC 135 tankers and 92 Skybolt, 18 Titan, 300 Minuteman H&D, 50 Minuteman mobile, and 128 Polaris missiles. They also supported expenditure of the FY 1962 appropriations for 45 B-52 bombers. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (6 Mar 61) Sec 5, Pt 1)

2 In this memorandum to McNamara, the JCS set forth the reasons for the size of their recommendations in JCSM-620-61, including growing Soviet confidence in their military strength as evidenced in the Berlin crisis. Producing more of the latest model of the B-52 was the quickest way to improve the retaliatory force. Regarding Minuteman, the JCS maintained that since the Soviet missile force was superior in total yield, the United States had to offset this capability with a greater number of ICBMs. (Ibid., Sec 6)

3 Document 46.

4 See footnote 4, Document 46.

5 “A Study of Requirements for U.S. Strategic Systems: Final Report,” December 1. This study concluded that controlled response strategy could not be implemented until late in the 1960s because a number of necessary advanced weapons systems such as Advanced Minuteman and a manned reconnaissance strike aircraft would not be available until then. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 4700 (1 Jun 61) Sec 1A) With a December 22 memorandum to McNamara, Charles J. Hitch, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), enclosed a 17-page evaluation of the Hickey Report. In the memorandum Hitch stated that his evaluation concluded that the requirements for a controlled response strategy were exaggerated in the Hickey study, and its feasibility underestimated. “I see no reason why we cannot have a satisfactory posture for a controlled response strategy by 1964 if not sooner. I reject the suggestion implicit in the Hickey Study that all of these advanced capabilities must be achieved before it makes sense to abandon the spasm war concept.” There was nothing in the Hickey study necessitating “a change in the decisions you have already made for FY 1963 procurement.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3463, 381 Hickey Report 19 April 61)

55. Editorial Note 55. Editorial Note

In a memorandum for the record dated November 20, 1961, Colonel Julian J. Ewell of Taylor's staff reported on the White House daily staff meeting that day. The memorandum reads in part:

“A procedural discussion was conducted on country and regional guideline papers. The policy and planning shop in State is preparing these papers, which are approved in principle by Mr. Bowles, circulated to the other Departments for comment, and then approved for final policy by Mr. Bowles or Mr. Rusk. State then requests NSC to rescind the old NSC policy paper on the area. The State guideline paper then becomes the substitute for an NSC-type paper on the area involved. Rostow observed that he had told the NSC staff not to bother with these papers, that they can't afford to waste time on them. Bundy agreed, saying that the actual policy was determined by adding up actions that the President had approved on the country concerned or by asking the White House staff how the President felt about a particular country. Bromley and I pointed out that the low level staff officer was not always aware of the decisions or White House thinking, and tended to rely on the guideline paper regardless of whether it was good or not. Bundy recognized this aspect and directed that the NSC staff would do a quick check on such papers before they were finally approved, for substance, not for style.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings 9-12/61) “Bromley” refers to Bromley Smith, Executive Secretary of the National Security Council.

56. Special National Intelligence Estimate 56. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, November 21, 1961.

SNIE 11-14-61

THE SOVIET STRATEGIC MILITARY POSTURE, 1961-1967

The Problem

To reassess the broad outlines of the USSR's military doctrine and posture in the light of recent information on Soviet strategic thinking, present military capabilities, and R&D in major weapon systems, and to estimate future trends in Soviet military strategy and force structure.1

It should be noted that the present estimate does not touch on Chinese Communist military developments or possible actions. There might come to affect Soviet military policies and programs during the period under consideration. [Footnote in the source text. For NIE 11-8/1-61, see Document 45.]

The Estimate

Current Trends In Soviet Military Thought

Basic Principles

1. Soviet thinking about military policy has proceeded from a general outlook which stresses that historical forces are moving inexorably in the direction of communism. This movement is carried forward by the struggle of “the masses,” led by the Communist parties, to overthrow the existing social-economic order, rather than by the direct use of the military power of the Communist Bloc. These beliefs lead the Soviets to view their armed forces as a means to deter Western military action against the Sino-Soviet Bloc, to inhibit the West from intervening militarily in other areas, to maintain security within the Bloc, to lend weight to their political demands and to demonstrate the success and growing power of their cause. At the same time, they wish to have the forces to fight a war effectively should one occur. However, their political outlook, their military programs of recent years, and intelligence on their current intentions, all suggest that the Soviet leaders do not regard general war as desirable or a Western attack on them as probable.

Strategies and Forces

2. Within this general framework, the specific concepts which underlie Soviet decisions about force goals and strategic planning are difficult to discern. These principles can only be deduced, and incompletely at that, from overt Soviet statements, which are carefully framed with an eye to both security and propaganda; from such classified Soviet information as can be obtained; from the choices reflected in the actual military programs undertaken by the USSR; and from the strategic situation which objectively confronts them.

3. It is worth noting that, while the Soviets have made impressive advances in modern weapon systems, a number of factors have hampered the process of integrating these advances into their strategic doctrine. One of these factors is the influence of a long military tradition, strongly reinforced by their experience in World War II, stressing massive movement, protracted campaigns, and the paramount significance of ground combat and the occupation of enemy territory. Another is security barriers within the military establishment, which appear to be far more stringent than in the US. Perhaps the most serious fetter, however, has been the rigid politico-military concepts which Stalin dogmatically imposed upon military thought. It was not until the mid-1950's, for example, that Soviet doctrine began to relax the principle that strategic surprise and the force of the initial blow are relatively unimportant to the outcome of a war between major powers, a position Stalin took in order to divert attention from the USSR's nearly catastrophic unpreparedness at the outset of World War II.

4. The pace of military thought, however, has quickened sharply in the last two or three years, primarily at the initiative of Khrushchev. At about the time when he set in motion a modernization of the Soviet force structure, including a substantial reduction in personnel, the regime began deliberately to encourage controversial discussion among senior officers in an effort to spark original and creative thought. As a result, strategic doctrine is a lively and argumentative field of professional study in the USSR today.

5. Such high-level discourse as we know about does not revolve around the questions of alternative attack strategies and target systems which are at the center of US military attention. Instead, the chief argument ranges “conservative” against “modern” views. Adherents to the first view assert that, despite the advent of new weapons, general war is likely to be protracted, ground combat on a mass scale will continue to be of major importance, and victory will require the combined action of forces of all types, including a multimillion man army. Adherents to the second view charge that their opponents are making only minimal and inadequate adaptations of earlier doctrine to accommodate new weapons. This group argues that a general war is likely to be short, with victory decided primarily in the initial nuclear exchange. Current official doctrine, as it appears in statements by the Minister of Defense, appears to be an amalgam of both these views.

6. The high-level discussions of which we are aware are remarkably deficient in sophisticated analysis of such concepts as first and second strike capability or counterforce strategy. The problems of attacking hardened and mobile strategic forces go completely unmentioned in such information as we have on Soviet targeting for long range attack. While most recommended target lists include nuclear retaliatory forces and control centers, they generally give equal importance to strikes against urban centers and their enemy's broad warmaking potential.

7. We think it certain that the strategic thought which underlies operational planning in the long range striking forces themselves is more sophisticated than this. But we have not acquired detailed Soviet discussions of doctrine for the operations of long range missile and bomber forces. Planning in these forces has certainly been obliged to consider such factors as warning and reaction times and the specific characteristics of different weapon systems and enemy targets. [1 line of source text not declassified] indicates that at least some of these factors have been taken into account, but not in ways that suggest very advanced concepts for dealing with the problems involved.

8. On the whole, the information we have suggests that Soviet military thought generally is still preoccupied with the problems of integrating nuclear and missile weapons into general doctrine and is only beginning to cope with the detailed comparative analysis of alternative strategies and force levels. Nor is this preoccupation completely surprising, since the achievement of an ICBM capability, even in the early stages of its deployment, represents to the Soviets a profound change in their strategic situation. For over a decade, they confronted an opponent who possessed a formidable strategic capability but against whom their own long-range striking capabilities were relatively limited. Now, for the first time, they have a weapon system capable of delivering nuclear attacks against the US with little warning by a means against which there is no present defense.

9. The USSR probably has not elaborated any comprehensive doctrine covering the contingencies of limited and local war between Soviet and Western forces. Public Soviet statements regularly insist that such wars would quickly and inevitably expand into general nuclear war. These statements are clearly intended to deter the West from embarking upon conflict on the Bloc periphery or attempting penetrations of Bloc territory; they are not necessarily to be taken as expressions of Soviet military policy. Confidential sources do not reveal what detailed contingency plans the Soviets have for such a case. We believe, however, that the USSR would wish to avoid direct involvement in limited combat on the Bloc periphery and, if such conflict should occur, would wish to minimize the chances of escalation to general nuclear war. Consequently, it would not in most circumstances take the initiative to expand the scope of such a conflict. Although the degree of Soviet commitment and the actual circumstances of the conflict would determine their decision, we believe that in general the Soviet leaders would expand the scope of the conflict, even at greater risk of escalating to general war, only if a prospective defeat would, in their view, constitute a grave political reverse within the Bloc itself or a major setback to the Soviet world position.

10. Soviet doctrine apparently does not contemplate conflict with Western forces in areas of contention at a distance from Bloc territory. Conflicts involving local anti-Western or Communist forces are treated under the rubric of “national liberation wars.” Such forces are credited, on ideological grounds, with the inherent strength to overcome “imperialist” attempts at military intervention. The Soviet support rather vaguely proffered is intended to be of a general deterrent character, but does not envisage overt Soviet military involvement. Despite the Soviet tendency in recent years to adopt an aggressive political stance in conflicts all over the world, the Soviets have not developed the naval forces and other special components which would give them a capability for military operations at great distances from the Bloc.

Current Strategic Posture

11. The strategic nuclear force the USSR has developed in recent years could permit the launching of large-scale initial attacks on short notice against a large number of Eurasian targets and a more limited number of North American targets. However, the Soviet leaders cannot at present have any assurance that their own nation and system could escape destruction from retaliatory Western attacks even if the USSR struck first. The Soviet leaders evidently believe their current strategic forces provide a strong deterrent against Western initiation of general war and are sufficient to support a more assertive foreign policy, particularly by virtue of the threat they pose to allies of the US in Europe and Asia. But there is no implication in Soviet behavior that they consider themselves in a position deliberately to attack the West, or to undertake local moves which carried with them a serious risk of bringing on general war. These views do not exclude Soviet use of available strategic attack forces to launch a preemptive blow should they conclude that the West was irrevocably committed to an imminent attack.

12. There have been considerable improvements in the Soviet air defense establishment, primarily through the widespread deployment of surface-to-air missiles at major cities and other key installations. Soviet defenses are now reasonably adequate against medium and high-altitude attack by subsonic Western bombers. We believe that the system as a whole, however, is far less adequate to cope with sophisticated penetration tactics, low altitude penetrations or supersonic cruise-type missiles. It has no present capability against ballistic missiles. Most important, because of the susceptibility of their defenses to saturation and degradation, the Soviet leaders almost certainly cannot be confident of the degree to which they could cope with the diverse types and scales of attack the West could direct against the Bloc.

13. In addition to forces designed for long-range attack and for defense against such attack, the USSR continues to maintain large theater field forces. The Soviets regard these forces as part of the deterrent to general war, and their military doctrine considers such forces as essential to the conduct of general war should it occur. The Soviet theater forces now in being could institute large-scale attacks in peripheral areas, but the success of such operations in a general war would depend heavily on the outcome of the initial nuclear exchange. The Soviet leaders also regard these forces as a deterrent to any limited action against Bloc territory or on its periphery, serving at the same time as an essential means of maintaining Communist regimes in the Satellites.

14. Based on the current Soviet naval posture and available writings on doctrine, we believe that the mission of the Soviet Navy is to carry out a variety of tasks in a protracted war, including the support of theater forces in such a war. The USSR has developed some capability to deliver nuclear attacks against land targets, including some in the US, by means of short-range submarine-launched missiles. However, the bulk of the Soviet submarine forces, predominantly torpedo attack types, would engage in interdiction operations in a long war in which the US attempted to maintain extensive logistic support to overseas areas. The Soviet Navy would also conduct defense against hostile naval forces possessing long-range attack capabilities, which the Soviets evidently regard as a major strategic threat. Its capabilities against US missile submarines in the open seas remain severely limited.

Military Research and Development

15. The Soviets are engaged in intensive efforts in weapons research and development to acquire new systems which, by their psychological, political, and military impact, would shift the world relation of forces to their advantage. In making their decisions, Soviet planners will have to consider such problems as rapid technological change, long lead times, developments in opposing forces, and increasing costs of weapon systems. Despite the rapid growth in Soviet economic resources, there will continue to be competition among military requirements as well as with the demands of important nonmilitary programs. Over the last two years, for example, Khrushchev has apparently linked his military arguments for reducing the size of Soviet forces with a further argument that additional funds could in this way be made available for raising living standards. Nevertheless, the USSR is allocating funds generously to military R&D, concentrating major efforts on improving the forces for long range attack and for defense against such attack by the West.

16. Much of the military R&D about which we have recent evidence is designed to fill obvious gaps in the Soviet strategic posture. In the field of long range delivery systems, an intensive program of test firing has been underway to develop second generation ICBM systems, which we believe include missiles of reduced dimensions and lighter weight, more easily deployed than the massive first generation Soviet ICBM. Some of the recent ICBM testing may represent development of systems for delivering warheads with yields on the order of 100 MT. Both a 2,000 n.m. ballistic missile and a supersonic “dash” medium bomber have been developed, and there is some evidence of R&D efforts in follow-on heavy bombers.

17. The principal current Soviet R&D program for strategic air defense, and perhaps the major Soviet military developmental program, is a large-scale effort to achieve defenses against ballistic missiles. It has been clear to us for more than a year that the Soviets are assigning very substantial resources to this effort. In October 1961, Marshal Malinovsky stated that the USSR had “solved the problem” of intercepting a ballistic missile in flight. From intelligence sources, we believe that the Soviets are making good progress in development work for an antimissile system. This effort has resulted in the acquisition of important data, including data on high altitude nuclear effects, and has also involved the testing of at least some system components. Other known R&D in the air defense field over the recent past has included improved radars for early warning and fighter control, a surface-to-air missile system for use against low-altitude penetrators, and new fighter interceptor systems.

18. Soviet research and development activities also reflect efforts at qualitative improvement in the theater field forces and naval forces. The emphasis has been on mobility and fire-power for theater forces, and short and medium-range missiles are now available for their support. Soviet field forces, at least in East Germany, have been allocated surface-to-air missiles for defense against medium and high altitude air attack. Within the next two or three years they will probably also have available missiles for defense against low flying aircraft as well as against ballistic missiles of short ranges. With the advent of US missile submarines, the Soviet Navy has recently placed increased emphasis on new weapons and techniques to extend ASW capabilities to the open seas. We believe, however, that over the next five years, the USSR will have only a limited capability to detect, identify, localize and maintain surveillance on submarines operating in the open seas.

Recent Nuclear Tests

19. The preliminary information now available indicates that the 1961 nuclear test series has given the Soviets increased confidence in current weapon systems, advanced their weapon design significantly, added greatly to their understanding of thermonuclear weapon technology, and contributed vital weapon effects knowledge. Soviet thermonuclear weapon technology in particular appears to be sophisticated and advanced. The 1961 test series will permit the Soviets to fabricate and stock pile, during the next year or so, new weapons of higher yields in the weight classes presently available.

20. Of the 44 shots detected in the 1961 series, 5 to 10 appear to have been proof tests of complete weapon systems, many of them with yields in the megaton range. We believe the Soviets have proof-tested weapon systems of the following types: short or medium range ground-launched ballistic missiles with yields up to about 2 MT and short-range submarine-launched ballistic missiles with yields of about 3 MT. In addition, they have proof-tested bombs with yields up to about 6 MT and have probably delivered more than one such bomb on a single bomber mission. The warheads tested in these various weapon systems are believed to be in stockpile. Those few proof-tested warheads thus far analyzed appear to reflect 1958 technology.

21. Weapon effects test were apparently conducted underground, underwater, near the surface of the water, and at various altitudes up to 100-200 n.m. Those at very high altitudes will contribute valuable effects information needed for Soviet development of antiballistic missile defenses, but were probably not complete systems tests.

22. The majority of the 1961 shots were developmental tests aimed at improving future Soviet nuclear weapons capabilities. Some of the fission weapons tested revealed extensive Soviet efforts to increase efficiency, and to reduce weapon size and weight. Two very large yield tests in this series are particularly significant in that they indicate a high degree of sophistication in weapon design.

a. [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]Preliminary estimates give [2-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. If the actual weight is 10,000 pounds, a 25 MT warhead could be delivered by the first generation Soviet ICBM to a range of about 5,500 n.m.

b. The 58 megaton device probably was actually a 100 MT weapon tested at reduced yield. Used as tested, the device could be of value to a Soviet strategy designed to minimize the fallout from very high-yield weapons. Weapons of this size and weight (probably 20,000-30,000 pounds) could be delivered by aircraft such as the Bear, or could be emplaced offshore. If the actual weight is 20,000 pounds, such a warhead could be delivered by the first generation Soviet ICBM to a range of about 3,500 n.m. We believe that a more powerful vehicle than the first generation ICBM would probably be required to deliver such a warhead against most targets in the US.

c. A few handmade versions of these very high-yield weapons could be available now or in the near future, but series production would probably require a year or more. However, if they are to be employed as first generation ICBM warheads, we would expect tests of ICBMs with modified dummy nosecones prior to operational deployment.

23. Tests of other thermonuclear weapons, which apparently comprised the bulk of the shots in the recent series, indicate a continuing and highly successful Soviet effort to improve efficiencies, improve yield-to-weight ratios, and reduce fissionable material requirements. These tests show a concentration on weapons with yields between about 1.5 and 5 MT (corresponding to weights between about 1,000 and 3,500 pounds), which are suitable for delivery by all Soviet bombers and offensive missiles. The preliminary analysis indicates that, [3 lines of source text not declassified] significant progress in thermonuclear weapons design has been achieved.

Probable Major Developments in Soviet Forces to the Mid-1960's

24. Major Soviet concern will continue to focus on the strategic weapons balance. In this area, a critical question is whether or not the Soviet leaders will consider it feasible and desirable to: (a) seek a capability to destroy the US nuclear delivery forces prior to launching, by means of a first strike; (b) seek no more than a capability to deliver nuclear attacks on population and industrial centers; or (c) seek nuclear attack forces of a type and size which will be somewhere between these two concepts.

25. We believe the Soviets already view the first of these concepts as no longer practicable. This is partly because of the thousands of Soviet missiles and launchers that would be required to destroy all the fixed bases of the US nuclear force programmed for 1963-1967, especially the hardened US ICBM sites. Equally important, US warning capabilities, fast reaction times, and mobile forces such as airborne bombers and missile submarines already tend to offset Soviet capabilities to attack fixed bases. These latter factors would compound the uncertainties inherent in any Soviet strategy for destroying US nuclear forces prior to launch, regardless of the size of Soviet long-range striking forces.

26. As to a capability to attack cities alone, there is evidence from recent statements and writings that some Soviet military men regard destruction of population and industry, not merely as something to be threatened for purposes of deterrence and intimidation, but also as a major determinant in the outcome of a general war. In view of the weight of nuclear attack the US can launch and the impossibility of achieving a fully effective defense, however, we believe that the Soviet leaders have decided that a capability to destroy only urban and industrial centers, while a powerful deterrent, would be inadequate should general war occur.

27. Consequently, we believe that the Soviets will seek a large strike capability. This will probably be one large enough to bring under attack the SAC bomber bases and other soft and semihardened US military installations against which their ICBMs are an efficient weapon system. Further, in determining force goals, they may also wish to provide themselves with an ICBM force large enough to permit them to attack some hardened US targets, and to have a more substantial residual striking capability after a US attack. Although the Soviets would probably not regard a capability on this order as adequate for deliberate initiation of general war, it would put them in a position to strike pre-emptively at an important segment of the US nuclear delivery forces should they reach a decision that such action was required.

28. Taking these considerations into account, we believe that the USSR will have an ICBM force of several hundred operational launchers in the period 1964-1967. The deployment complexes presently in operation and under construction, while protected by concealment from ground observation, some dispersal, and surface-to-air missiles, are unhardened and vulnerable to overhead observation. In view of Soviet concern for US reconnaissance and attack capabilities, we believe that the Soviets will move to increase the survivability of their ICBM force. In the mid-1960's, the bulk of the force will probably be protected by greater dispersal and possibly by semihardening, and some of the later launchers will probably be fully hardened. More than one missile will probably be available for most launchers.

29. In addition, through 1967, we forecast that the USSR will retain a mix of long range weapon systems. This will include a heavy bomber force which will probably remain relatively small but increase in quality, and an expanding force of missile submarines. Medium bomber strength will probably drop to a few hundred by the mid-1960's, but a considerable portion of these will be supersonic “dash” types, perhaps equipped for standoff missile delivery and for armed reconnaissance. After about the next year, ballistic missile forces other than ICBMs will be characterized by shifts to improved, longer range systems rather than by sheer numerical expansion.

30. In addition to strengthening defenses against manned bombers and cruise-type missiles, we believe that a major Soviet objective of the mid-1960's will be to achieve defenses against long-range ballistic missiles before the US has acquired a comparable capability. In Soviet eyes, this would enable them to claim an important advantage over the US. For political as well as military reasons, the Soviets probably would wish to deploy antimissile defense in at least a few critical areas even if the available system provided only a limited, interim capability. Considering these factors and the present status of the Soviet research and development program, we estimate that in the period 1963-1966 the Soviets will begin at least limited deployment of an antimissile system. Soviet cities will probably have priority for deployment of any AICBM defenses available through 1967. We believe that throughout this period, the Soviets are likely to have only a marginal capability for interference with US satellites.

31. We believe that the Soviet leaders will continue to retain large theater and naval forces. The extent to which these forces are reduced in the next few years will depend in part on the prevailing international situation, but we now believe it may rest equally on the course of the internal Soviet discussion regarding the nature and duration of a large-scale war fought with nuclear weapons. In general, we believe that economic and political factors, together with the further growth of nuclear capabilities, will at some point persuade the Soviet leaders to revert to the military manpower reductions begun in 1960 but suspended in 1961. Ground divisions and tactical air forces will probably be reduced and older ships retired or mothballed, but the USSR will retain sizable forces calculated to be sufficient for all types of warfare, nuclear and conventional, limited and general. Moreover, the Soviets will not abandon the reservist and mobilization system designed to augment their forces rapidly should the need arise.

32. The recent nuclear test series does not in itself provide clear guidelines as to possible changes in force structure or strategic concepts. We believe that long-range striking forces have been given priority in the allocation of available nuclear materials, and that limitations in the Soviet stockpile have consequently restricted the nuclear capabilities of other forces. The broad range of proof tests, weapon effects tests, and developmental tests in the 1961 series suggests an effort to improve the nuclear capabilities of all arms of the Soviet military establishment. We had anticipated that in any event the limitations on allocation of nuclear weapons to air defense, theater, and naval forces would have eased by the mid-1960's and this trend may be hastened by the recent tests. These forces will then have a greater variety of nuclear weapons at their disposal.

33. It now appears that the trend in nuclear weapon yields of long-range missile and bomber systems will be upwards. The use of higher yield weapons would tend to reduce Soviet numerical requirements for delivery vehicles to accomplish given objectives, although for attacking military targets the accuracy and reliability of the Soviet weapon systems are generally more critical than warhead yield. Warheads in the 25 MT class, which could probably be made available in quantity within a year or so, would enhance the capabilities of the first generation Soviet ICBM against hardened targets. It is reasonable to believe that some of the new ICBMs now under intensive testing are designed to carry warheads of very high yield. Nevertheless, we continue to believe it unlikely that the Soviets would try to acquire the very large number of ICBM launchers needed for effective attack on all the hardened ICBM sites planned by the US. For the present, the very high yield devices are probably intended to support deterrence and psychological warfare, although we have no doubt that military uses are also intended.

Policy and Strategies to the Mid-1960's

34. From the developments likely to occur in Soviet forces, and from implications found in current discussions of military doctrine, we conclude that, over the next five years or so, the Soviets are unlikely to develop a military strategy and posture aimed at the deliberate initiation of general war. They are likely to continue to believe that their policy goals cannot be achieved by this means. Therefore, their first priority, since they evidently do intend to pursue forward policies involving some level of risk, will be to have a credible deterrent against initiation of war by the West. They will recognize that deterrence may fail, and if completely convinced in some situation of high risk that the West was about to launch a general nuclear attack, would attempt to pre-empt. Their strategy for the conduct of general war will probably call for delivering large-scale nuclear blows against Western striking forces and national centers of power, protecting the Soviet homeland against nuclear attack to the extent feasible, and subsequently committing their remaining forces to extended campaigns probably aimed initially at the occupation of Western Europe.

35. The Soviets will want a formidable military posture primarily to prevent such a war, but they will also want it as a support to vigorous policy initiatives short of war. These latter will include in particular the sponsorship of revolutionary activity directed at advancing Communist or pro-Soviet groups to power in any part of the world where the opportunity exists or can be created. It is this sort of struggle below the level of direct military engagement with the major Western Powers which will almost certainly continue to be the Soviets' principal reliance in seeking the expansion of their power.

36. It is conceivable, however, that by the mid-1960's the Soviets will come to regard the deterrence which they can exert upon the West as strong enough to permit them, without excessive risk, to use their own forces in local military actions. They will certainly continue to have field forces on a scale to permit this in areas peripheral to Soviet Bloc territory, and these will be forces of increased mobility and flexibility. They are also capable of acquiring the naval strength, air transport, and special forces to conduct local military action in more remote areas. On the whole, however, we believe that the Soviets are unlikely to adopt such a course as a matter of general policy, in part because of the risks involved but also because in their view there is likely to be increasing opportunity to advance their cause by nonmilitary means.

37. The use of Soviet forces in local military actions outside the Bloc, if attempted, would be unlikely to take the form of naked military aggression. Instead, any use of Soviet forces outside the Bloc would take the form of support to revolutionary actions by local Communist or pro-Soviet forces, where a pretext could be made that Soviet intervention was intended to forestall intervention by the “imperialists.” We believe there is some possibility that such a strategy will emerge by the mid-1960's and will be applied to vulnerable areas bordering on the Soviet Bloc. We think it more likely, however, that the Soviets will continue to rely on local political revolutionary forces, operating without overt Soviet military support but under the protection of an increasing deterrent power, to achieve a more gradual expansion of the area of Soviet control.

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; Formerly Restricted Data. A note on the cover sheet indicates that the special estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and prepared by the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force, the Joint Staff, the Atomic Energy Commission, and the National Security Agency. The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 Detailed estimates of the present and future strengths and capabilities of the Soviet and Bloc armed forces can be found in Annexes A and B of NIE 11-4-61, “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1961-1966,” dated 24 August 1961, in NIE 11-8/1-61, “Strength and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces,” dated 21 September 1961, and in NIE 11-2-61, “Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” dated 5 October 1961.

57. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 57. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Force Structure and Defense Budget

1. The major issue which was presented by Secretary McNamara's memorandum on the Defense budget1 is that of the balance between the long-range strategic striking force and the general purpose (limited war) forces. Speaking broadly, the Secretary's proposed Planning Guidelines resolved the inevitable doubts and uncertainties on the high side with respect to long-range striking forces, and, on the low side with respect to the general purpose forces. The purpose of the following is to present a case for a different force structure which would resolve these issues the other way.

2. The two elements of the strategic striking force which show rapid growth in the Secretary's memorandum and proposed Guidelines are the hardened and dispersed Minuteman and Polaris missiles. The B-52 force remains constant, and, while the Atlas and Titan both show substantial growth, the new sites involved are now under construction and the missiles have already been bought. The proposed Minuteman and Polaris forces grow as follows:

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Polaris

Submarines 6 9 18 30 35 41

Missiles 96 144 288 480 560 656

Minuteman

Missiles — 150 600 700 800 900

These forces were proposed on the basis of the old estimates of the probable development of Russian missile strength. If we take into account the newer estimates (shown in comparison with the estimates underlying the DOD calculations in Annex I attached), we find we can accept a significantly smaller force as follows:

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Minuteman (HD) 150 300 400 500 600

Polaris

Missiles 144 288 464 464 464

Submarines 9 18 29 29 29

The proposed Polaris force represents the submarines we have already bought, coming into service on the present schedule. The proposed Minuteman deployment involves postponing the achievement of the planned 4th wing from the end of FY 1963 to the end of FY 1967.

The rationale for these lower forces is two-fold. First, as will be explained in the paragraph immediately following, they can do the job. Second, if they can do the job the risks of having higher forces are considerable. In setting the level of our strategic force, we must always consider the possibility of interaction between the size of our force and the size of the Soviet force. It is dangerous for us to seek to achieve a full first strike capability, because such a goal will almost certainly provoke a Soviet reaction in the same direction. Both sides will spend more of their resources on larger forces and neither will gain in security. The present plan provides for an extremely sharp increase in our strategic striking power between July 1963 and July 1964. Our total long-range missile strength, which is now in the neighborhood of 120, will by July 1963 have grown to over 500 and by July 1964 it will have more than doubled again to over 1100. Will not such a sharp increase present the appearance of our seeking a first strike posture, and thus have a high probability of provoking a response in kind by the Soviets? They are perfectly capable of such response. At present, the most sensible interpretation of their own missile deployment is that it rests on the concept of finite deterrence. It is certainly to our advantage to have them continue to hold that concept. The Air Force has in the past equated national security with an ever increasing strategic striking force, and this position has wide popular appeal and support. This view is filled with dangers; to the extent that the best evidence indicates it lacks justification, it is important to move our military planning away from it as soon as possible.

3. We can safely rely on the proposed smaller force for two reasons: First, the number of missiles we expect the Russians to have is lower than that on which the plans were made. On this basis alone, the task the Memorandum shows as requiring 700 Minutemen in the force (Median assumptions, 1965, column I), could be done by some 550. This involves not only a smaller number of targets for us to strike at, but also a higher survival rate for our forces under the Russian first strike, on the basis of which the calculations are made. Second, the targeting concepts underlying the calculations in the Secretary's memorandum are unnecessarily conservative. No targets are assigned to the theatre forces. Only Polaris strikes against cities are taken into account in estimating casualties and destruction in built-up areas. At least the medium-range bomber and recovery airfields and the medium-range ballistic missiles could be assigned to the theatre forces. Some of the surviving SAC B-52's would be available for strikes on cities. The missiles we program against Soviet military targets would cause considerable casualties all over the Soviet Union, which are not taken into account in the casualty estimates from fallout presented in the memorandum. When all these adjustments are made in the calculations, the proposed smaller forces become adequate for the defined goal: to maintain a survivable second strike capability which can both blunt the further Soviet threat and provide a reserve force capable of threatening attack on Soviet cities on a large scale.

4. The Secretary's memorandum offers no explicit rationale for fixing the size of the Army at 14 divisions comparable to the analysis contained in Appendix I on long-range striking forces,2 and the Secretary pointed out in our staff discussions that as yet no such analysis has been made. Nonetheless, the recommendation is similar to that contained in the Secretary's memorandum to the President of May 10, 1961,3 on the reappraisal of the capabilities of conventional forces. That analysis rested on two doubtful assumptions: First, that we would not be engaged in a conventional war on a scale greater than that of the Korean conflict (250,000-300,000 men); second, that we would not be engaged in more than one such war at any one time. If in fact it is our policy to raise the nuclear threshold in the NATO area, as well as in the rest of the world, the first of these assumptions may be inappropriate. The appropriateness of the second one is also open to question, although here a policy question is involved as to the circumstances in which we would be willing to commit U.S. troops in other theatres, that is as yet unsettled.

5. The planned 14-division army raises the question of whether or not the extra forces provided by calling up the reservists and National Guardsmen in connection with the Berlin crisis should be retained on active duty. The Secretary's proposal calls for the return of these men to reserve status and a consequent reduction in the active duty strength of the Army to 920,000 men. This reduction raises a number of questions. It may make it more difficult for us to convince our Allies to increase their conventional war capabilities in NATO. It may diminish significantly the message conveyed by our other military preparations to the Soviets, who are impressed by ground force strength. Further, there is an important efficiency question involved. If there is any substantial probability that future re-examination of the ultimate size of the Army would lead to a higher requirement than 14 divisions, it would seem wasteful to reduce and then increase its size in the course of the next year or two. This in turn raises the question of the extent to which, in fixing the ultimate size of the Army, it is wise to rely on calling up and then demobilizing reserves as crises arise, if, as seems likely, crises will occur with fair frequency in the future.

6. With respect to the size of the Army, the proposed alternate program is to recommend that the Berlin augmentation be maintained in FY 1963 and that otherwise the Secretary's program for strengthening the logistic support and tactical air complement of the present force be carried out. This would involve not only keeping the Army at the level of 16 divisions with 970,000 men. Further, the proposed Planning Guidelines should not now be issued, and the Department of Defense should be instructed to produce an analysis and proposed Planning Guideline for the period 1964-67 early next year. At that point, the question of phasing down can be examined in the light of a clear conception of what our ultimate goals are.

Carl Kaysen

Annex I4

ESTIMATES OF FUTURE SOVIET MISSILE STRENGTH
Projected Number of Launchers

DOD Planning Guide USIB Estimate (9 November)

Type of Site Launchers per Target Median Range Median Range

1965

Soft 2 400 200-600 125 100-150

Dispersed 1 - - 210 150-275

Hard 1 350 200-500 a few a few

Total Missiles 750 400-1100 340 250-325

Total Targets 550 300-800 275 200-325

1967

Soft 2 250 100-400 125 100-150

Dispersed 1 - - 300 200-400

Hard 1 750 400-1100 100 50-100

Total Missiles 1000 500-1500 525 350-650

Total Targets 875 450-1300 465 300-575

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61. Top Secret. Forwarded to the President with several other documents, including Document 58. In a November 22 covering memorandum, Bundy commented that this memorandum “sketches the argument for a much smaller strategic force than McNamara is arguing. This is well worth attention because the argument is not developed anywhere else in your papers.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/16-12/61)

1 Document 50.

2 Document 46.

3 Document 27.

4 Top Secret.

58. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 58. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Nike-Zeus Program, FY 1963 Budget

1. With regard to the Nike-Zeus program, the Department of Defense is faced with the following alternatives: a. Stop the program and start another one, while accepting a further delay in the schedule for operational readiness.

b. Continue the R&D program, but do not go into production.

c. Go into production following the 12 battery program.

d. Go into production with the objective of reaching the NORAD (North American Air Defense Command) goal of 70 batteries.

In addition to these, one other has come up in the budget discussions:

e. “Hand tool” two batteries and deploy them quickly in order to meet some of the psychological pressures for a missile defense.

2. In favor of continuing the Nike-Zeus program in some form is the fact that this is the only system in sight before 1970 which offers a possibility of intercepting ICBMs over cities. Even its critics agree that it should be able to deal with current non-decoyed ICBMs of the type which we are producing. They also recognize that improvements can be injected into the program while production is taking place.

A deployment of Nike-Zeus should have a very considerable psychological effect on our own people and upon the Soviet war planners. At a minimum, it will drive the USSR to a decoy program that will be both expensive and restrictive upon the useful payload of their missile warheads.

3. On the other hand, it is admitted that the development of decoys will present the Zeus missile-makers with a serious problem. A decoyed attack will result in a significant shrinkage of the area which can be protected by a single Nike battery. The radius of effective coverage will be reduced from 75 miles to something considerably less—perhaps as little as 20 miles—and under certain conditions the present defense system could be penetrated. Later developments can offset these disabilities somewhat by increasing the velocity of the Nike missile so that the time for an effective attack is reduced and more time can be allowed for discrimination. The R&D people can always point out how much this can be improved with further research. But if we wait for the ultimate system we shall be permanently undefended.

4. On balance, it appears to me sensible to do two things: to embark upon a limited initial production program for Nike-Zeus, and to accelerate research and development on the radar and missile improvements already in sight with a view toward incorporating them in the later production models. This course has the advantages of affording some protection for certain of our cities, of doing something to offset any psychological gains the Soviets might achieve from their announcement of an anti-ICBM, and of hedging our bets on future improvements. There is no reason to announce now where the missile sites will be located; rather, the batteries should be distributed according to a site priority established by NORAD. While there conceivably is a danger that public opinion would occasion a runaway on the part of the program, there is certainly nothing inevitable about such a development, especially if the Zeus program is brought into prior relation to the offensive elements of our strategic weapon systems, and with civil defense programs as well. The important thing is to embark upon the Nike-Zeus production with enthusiasm and confidence. We have past expressions of pessimism to offset if we are to get a solid psychological return from the decision to go into production.

Maxwell D. Taylor1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61. Secret. Forwarded to the President with several other documents, including Document 57. In his November 22 covering memorandum, Bundy commented concerning this memorandum: “Most of the rest of us do not agree with it, but his argument is interesting.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1963 Defense Budget 11/61-12/61)

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

59. National Security Action Memorandum No. 114 59. National Security Action Memorandum No. 114Source

Washington, November 22, 1961.

TO

The Secretary of State

SUBJECT

Training for Friendly Police and Armed Forces in Counter-Insurgency, Counter-Subversion, Riot Control and Related Matters

The President has noted the reports received in response to NSAM No. 881 and requests that you make a continuing review in collaboration with the Secretary of Defense and the Director of Central Intelligence, of the over-all problem of United States support of friendly police and armed forces and their training in riot control, counter-subversion, counter-insurgency, and related operations. Such review should encompass general United States policies, the assignment of departmental responsibilities, and the general size and scope of United States programs. The general object should be to clarify and strengthen these policies and programs while minimizing duplication and conflicts.

The President further requests that you give him periodic reports on the results of the review, with recommendations of policy and courses of action. Latin America should be the first area covered by the review.

To the extent necessary, you should coordinate the review with National Security Action Memorandum No. 562 on the evaluation of paramilitary requirements, with the MAP and foreign aid programs, and with previous Overseas Internal Security Program reviews.

McGeorge Bundy3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 114. Secret. Copies were sent to McNamara, Robert Kennedy, Director of the Bureau of the Budget Bell, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor.

1 NSAM No. 88, addressed to the Secretary of Defense, was a request for suggestions concerning U.S. training for Latin American armed forces. (Ibid., NSAM 88)

2 Document 33.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

60. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 60. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 22, 1961.

SUBJECT

Support of Conventional Forces in the 1963 Budget

1. One of the most important questions posed by the 1963 Budget is the adequacy of the support accorded conventional forces. There is no doubt that this budget makes more ample provisions for this type of force than the previous Eisenhower budgets. But the inadequacy of the support in previous years accentuates the need for a drastic reversal of former budget patterns and a heavy weighing of effort to compensate for this past neglect. Is the 1963 Budget doing enough in light of these considerations?

2. The effectiveness of our conventional war forces depends upon several factors: their size, modernization and quantity of equipment, mobility, and geographical location. a. Size of Conventional Forces. The decision to retain a 16-division Army structure along with a 3-division Marine Corps provides a divisional structure which will meet anticipated strategic needs within acceptable limits of risk. However, this structure needs to be filled with adequate trained manpower. The Army considers that it needs 1,055,700 men to support this 16-division program, whereas the Secretary of Defense is now proposing roughly 960,000.

It is my understanding that the principal difference between these two figures is represented by the 39,000 reinforcements which have been sent recently to Europe to make our present deployments combat ready. I feel that these men should be kept there as they are necessary for sustained combat. We are not justified to place our troops in the presence of the enemy without giving them all the means necessary to defend themselves.

b. Modernization and Quantity of Equipment. The conventional forces have a large backlog of deferred procurement which has delayed their modernization and prevented the accumulation of the stocks necessary to support a war prior to the availability of new production. At the present time, as a result of logistical shortages, it is doubtful that we could sustain more than three or four divisions in action for a significant period in a distant theater such as Southeast Asia while retaining our readiness for combat in other parts of the world. This is not an acceptable strategic position in which to remain. The 1963 Budget should contain all the funds necessary for an accelerated modernization of forces and build-up of war reserve stockages.

The Army is receiving 2.6 billion in new money to apply against its shortages. Something over a billion dollars of this sum is necessary to offset wearout and obsolescence. Only a little more than a billion is thus available to offset deferred procurement of the past. In my opinion, at least a billion more should be added to the Army procurement account in FY 1963 to allow it to move forward at a maximum orderly rate to maximum logistic readiness.

c. Mobility and Location. The mobility of conventional forces depends both upon their means of transport and their location in relation to areas of employment. The present budget properly emphasizes the need to improve strategic air transport. It does not, however, advance the cause of strategic sea lift. At a minimum, some troop ships and heavy lift cargo vessels should remain in the active fleet under centralized MSTS control and the program for roll on-roll off cargo ships of one per year should be protected.

In addition, because of its vastness special measures to increase mobility are necessary in the Pacific in order to reduce the reaction time of conventional forces, particularly of Army forces. One such measure should be the location of an Army division in the Western Pacific, probably in the Philippines. Another measure would be the preparation of one of our Korean divisions for rapid strategic movement. This action would require the replacement by Americans of the Korean personnel now in the structure of one of the American divisions and the preparation of plans to permit its rapid transport from Korea to some other part of the Pacific area.

3. The foregoing discussion has concerned itself primarily with Army divisions as these are the easy units for assessing conventional strength. Also, those elements of the Marines, Navy and Air Force which contribute to conventional war-making should receive corresponding attention. In particular, consideration should be given to increasing the Air Force manpower to maintain on active status the present tactical fighter units which are due to return to an inactive status following the termination of the so-called Berlin crisis.

4. In summary, the following actions should be considered in order to give greater emphasis on the development of conventional forces in the 1963 Budget: a. An Army personnel ceiling of 1,055,700.

b. An increase of one billion dollars in Army procurement.

c. Increased funds for strategic sea transport.

d. The location of an Army division in the Western Pacific, and the preparation of one of the U.S. divisions in Korea for rapid strategic movement.

e. Retention of the present 25 tactical fighter units in the permanent structure of the Air Force.

Maxwell D. Taylor1

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD Budget 1963 11/61-12/61. Secret.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

61. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 61. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, November 29, 1961.

SUBJECT

FY 1963 Defense Budget

Attached is a copy of a brief memorandum reflecting conversations which my staff has had with General Taylor's people on last weekend's Hyannis Port discussions1 of the FY 1963 Defense Budget (Attachment A).

You will note that, whereas the 16-division level was agreed to, apparently Secretary McNamara felt that this could be done within a 960,000 manning level. This would be about 175,000 below current force levels and about 100,000 below what I understand are the service recommendations. How this can be done, of course, remains to be seen. If such economy of personnel can in fact be obtained it will be most desirable. However, our proper concern in State is how the matter comes out publicly. If it comes out in the form of a 16-division force it would meet our purposes. However, as I understand the budget presentation, it is likely to come out in terms of the manning level and, therefore, in terms of a very marked reduction below our current force levels. This has obviously serious implications with respect to our current Berlin strategy, both in its effects on the Soviet Union and on our allies.

I recommend that you discuss the matter in the foregoing terms with Secretary McNamara.

Attachment A

2 Washington, November 29, 1961.

Memorandum for the Record

SUBJECT

FY ‘63 DOD Budget Decisions

1. The following reflects the debriefing received from Colonel Ewell, of General Taylor's staff, on the status of the decisions on the FY ‘63 DOD Budget as reflected in the series of Presidential meetings held at Hyannis Port over this last weekend:

a. General War Offensive Forces. The only major decision was to omit mobile Minutemen. This reflects the consensus judgment that the GWO category was too large. The mobile Minuteman was considered the least soundly justified of the various components within this category.

b. General War Defensive Forces. The 12 battery Nike-Zeus program was approved. Apparently the so-called six city program as such, was not agreed to. I take it that this means that the Research and Development and the Production will move forward on the 12 battery program, but that the deployment of the missiles is left open.

A Civil Defense program of $700 million per annum, projected over a five year period (for a total of $3.5 billion) was agreed to. As I understand it this represents the mid-range as between a $400 million proposed program and a $900 million program. The lower end of the range would involve maximum individual self help efforts. The $700 million range adds to this, assistance to selected institutions in meeting civil defense requirements (e.g. hospitals). The upper end of the range, the $900 million program, would have included assistance to other major social institutions (particularly in the industrial area).

c. General Purpose Forces. The 16, as contrasted to the 14, division level was agreed to. However, the significance of this decision, from a political point of view, was significantly undermined by virtue of the decision reached on the force levels. Apparently, Secretary McNamara proposed a 960 thousand level for meeting the 16 division requirement. This would be about 100 thousand below the minimum service recommendations and about 175 thousand below current force levels. Apparently the President took the initiative in arguing for a higher level and Secretary McNamara was directed to take another look at the numbers implications. (On this point, however, the best guess seems to be that the likely revised recommendations from Secretary McNamara will probably not exceed 980 thousand. In short, we must still accept a fairly sizeable force cut within the new budget.) Finally, there was apparently no discussion of reserves versus regular forces.

d. MRBM's. These were approved for Research and Development purposes, I gather with an expression of a certain amount of reluctance on the part of the President. Interestingly enough, part of the justification for the MRBM increment was that it would serve to develop a new generation of mobile missiles which would offset the loss of the mobile Minutemen program. By implication this certainly means that some emphasis will be placed on a mobile land-based weapon. There was no indication that sea versus land deployment was discussed.

Seymour Weiss3

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/11-2961. Top Secret.

1 One such discussion at Hyannis Port took place the morning of November 24. Present were Kennedy, McNamara, Lemnitzer, Gilpatric, Sorensen, Bell, Taylor, Bundy, Kaysen, Harold Brown, and Wiesner. No memorandum of the meeting has been found. (Kennedy Library, President's Appointment Book)

2 Top Secret. Drafted by Weiss.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

62. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council 62. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning CouncilSource

Washington, December 5, 1961.

This paper was discussed at the Secretary's Policy Planning Meeting on December 12. Most speakers were not identified by name. The “emphasis on less developed areas drew favorable comment.” While the “idea of a viable community of free nations found favor,” it “was pointed out that the community should not become a pretext for the less savory forms of neutralism.” Also, “the view was advanced that the paper was too much of an essay and not enough of an action paper, but this would be corrected by Mr. Rostow's proposal for adding Part II to the paper.” Rostow stated that the issues in Part II should be limited to those of direct concern to the President. (Summary of discussion, drafter not indicated; ibid.)

BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

[Here follows a table of contents.]

Summary

1. Introduction. This paper outlines a strategy, which could provide a sense of coherence and direction to our total effort in the national security field. It is not intended to furnish a complete guide to every policy action, but rather to provide an over-all doctrine which will be relevant to the more important issues we face. Our decisions on these issues are most likely to be mutually consistent and reinforcing if they are based on a clearly defined strategic doctrine.

2. National Objective. Our basic national purpose is to help in the creation of a world environment in which a nation with values and purposes such as ours can flourish. Such an environment will be one in which countries can concert to promote their progress and security, without losing their freedom in the process. That environment can best be described as a “community of free nations”. A sustained US effort toward this end is needed not only to fulfill our positive purposes but also to defeat the Communist’ attempts to shape in their own image the order which will emerge from the present era of revolutionary change.

I. Needed Tasks

3. Constructive Tasks in Less Developed Countries. The community of free nations must be one in which less developed countries can progress toward becoming modern societies. We should use all the instruments of national policy—diplomacy, military aid, programming guidance and technical aid, capital assistance, and trade policy—to help them achieve evolutionary modernization. We should give higher priority to this objective than to the promotion of special ties with these countries or to securing their support for our political policies. We should urge other Atlantic countries and Japan to take the same view, and to act vigorously on it.

4. Defensive Tasks. The community of free nations must also be made secure against war and aggression. We should meet indirect aggression, the most urgent threat, primarily by strengthening the total capacity of governments under attack to mount effective politico-military programs in defense of their societies.

We should use US forces to defeat direct aggression in such a way as to defeat its purposes with minimum risk of escalation. This will require not only substantial and mobile conventional forces but also a reasonably stable over-all strategic situation, i.e., one which is unlikely to degenerate into general nuclear war under the pressure of crises and limited conflicts. We should seek to create such an environment by maintaining an effective, invulnerable, and flexible nuclear striking force and by prosecuting adequate active and passive nuclear defense programs. The same purpose will be served by an arms control policy which looks to feasible stabilizing measures in the near term, e.g., safeguards against war by miscalculation and against nuclear proliferation, as well as to the long-term goal of general and complete disarmament.

II. Needed Framework

5. The Atlantic Community. To prosecute these constructive and defensive tasks we must mobilize the strength of nations, and groups of nations, which can deploy substantial resources beyond their borders. The European Community is such a grouping; we should vigorously support the movement toward European integration. A major purpose of US foreign policy should be to work toward an effective partnership between Europe and the US, through institutions of the Atlantic Community. We should seek vigorously to strengthen these institutions and the resulting capacity for common action. This partnership should be capable of embracing Japan in the economic sphere at the earliest possible time.

6. Other Ties Between Free Nations. We should, at the same time, seek to develop manifold ties, embracing as wide a range of human activities as possible, which will permit the developed and less developed nations to work effectively together, and which will limit their ability to harass each other or to act with utter irresponsibility. We should work to strengthen bilateral ties, regional associations, and the UN to this end. Such relationships are the warp and woof of the community of free nations.

7. Relations With Communist Nations. We should try to manage our relations with the Communist nations so that they will not divert us from constructive tasks in the free world, and so that they will promote long-term constructive evolution in the Bloc. To this end:

We should seek continuing communication with the Soviets, in business-like attempts to avoid crises and reduce the risk of war, and we should promote exchanges and cooperative ventures conducive to useful change in the USSR. When crises erupt, we should seek to resolve them in a way which will restore equilibrium without incurring the increased costs and risks that would be required to alter the existing balance of advantage drastically in our favor.

We should seek contacts, and extend and encourage assistance, designed to encourage helpful trends in Eastern Europe.

We should move toward policies which will place the onus for continued hostility between Communist China and the US more squarely on Peiping and thus mobilize greater free world support in resisting Chinese Communist expansion. We should try to create a political climate in which the Sino-Soviet rift will prosper; we should not go out of our way to make it look as though Khrushchev's preference for negotiation over fighting is a vain one; and we should make clear that the contrary Chinese view, if put to the test, is likely to entail swift disaster.

Our response to the Soviet ideological offensive should center upon projecting and explaining our own efforts to build a community of free nations. We should promote a free world consensus on this central goal. We should not be drawn away from this goal by a presumed need to react to Communist political and propaganda initiatives, but should seek to keep the focus where it belongs: on our opportunities and affirmative purposes in the free world.

[Here follows the body of the paper; see the Supplement.]

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, BNSP 1961-1962. Secret. The complete paper is 78 pages long, in addition to the summary printed here. For text, see the Supplement. It forms the attachment to a memorandum from McGhee to the Under Secretary and most Assistant Secretaries, stating that the paper represented a “major effort of the entire Policy Planning Staff during recent months” but would need to “undergo many changes of detail before it can hope to meet general approval.” McGhee asked for comments.

63. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President Kennedy 63. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to President KennedySource

Washington, December 9, 1961.

1. The final decisions on the Defense budget are now before you. In making these decisions, you will bear in mind that you are making a choice which will determine expenditures not only in FY 63, but for the whole of the rest of your administration. These decisions thus will shape the availability of budget resources for non-military programs for this whole period of time, as well as for next year. For this reason, I recommend that you not concur in the suggestion of Secretary McNamara's memorandum of December 7 (attached)1 with respect to his currently revised force structure. Instead I suggest that you examine carefully the possibility of a lower strategic striking force for the reasons set forth at some length in my memorandum to you of November 22.2 Briefly, these reasons are that we do not need as large a force as the DOD proposes to do the military job; and that any error on the side of generosity has the undesirable consequence of stepping up the arms race. In a world of missiles and thermonuclear warheads more arms do not in any simple way add more security. This is not an argument for a smaller force than military need requires, but an argument against adding any substantial margin to what a careful examination of the military situation shows to be necessary.

2. I suggest that you consider two alternative programs; one for hardened and dispersed Minuteman and one for Polaris.

The alternative Minuteman program would provide for the following force structure:

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67

Minuteman Program 150 300 450 600 750

as compared with Secretary McNamara's current and original recommendations as shown in the table below:3

Current 150 600 800 950 1100

Original 150 600 700 800 900

If this appears too drastic a cut for Secretary McNamara to accept, it might be preferable to propose an alternate program which achieved his original goal of 900 hardened and dispersed Minutemen in 1967, but followed the same rate of buildup as the lower program. I propose in the three fiscal years 63, 64 and 65, i.e., a force structure as follows:

FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67

150 300 450 700 900

of military needs without too great a risk as we would become aware of an increase of Soviet missile site construction before their deployment was complete.

A slowdown in the rate of procurement and employment of Minuteman forces would bring other significant positive advantages. The missiles now being produced have a number of important technical shortcomings. The goal of 600 in FY 64 can be achieved only by a crash program which permits no time for modifications that can deal with some of these shortcomings. It is expected that after these missiles are in place, a fairly expensive retrofit program will be required to bring them up to desirable standards of performance. The slower the rate of buildup now, the less will be the retrofit requirements later, since the missiles deployed later will be able to incorporate improvements in range and penetration aids from the start. Thus, the present program involves a faster buildup on paper than real capability, and a hidden future cost in expensive retrofitting programs.

On Polaris, I suggest that the additional procurement rate for FY 63 be cut to 3 instead of the 6 now proposed and be maintained at 3 per year thereafter. This would cut the 1967 force from 41 to 35, but there would be no change in the number of submarines available before 1965. This change would save $75 million of expenditures in FY 63.

All the proposed changes are slow downs in the rate of buildup in our strategic forces, not in any sense reductions in them. They would not affect the prospective strategic balance between U.S. and USSR. Annex I shows the effect of the proposed changes on the total strategic force.

3. In addition to these major problems of force structure, there are several other lesser but still important changes from the Secretary's recommendations which ought to be considered.

First is the Nike Zeus Program—The case for the Nike Zeus is dubious. If long leadtime production items are funded now, it may be very difficult to resist going ahead with procurement and deployment of this system. It appears desirable to avoid this. Eliminating these items would save $50 million in FY 63.

Second, in view of the political problems involved in the future deployment of MRBMs, it would seem desirable to defer the beginnings of development of a specific system until next year. Studies on the comparative merits of land- and sea-based systems, as well as research on command and control, and research and development on stellar guidance will continue at high priority. Postponing the development commitment would save $60 million in FY 63.

Finally, the Skybolt will probably fall considerably behind its development schedule. If we recognize this and defer the production, this would save $100 million in FY 63.4

4. The total savings in FY 63 expenditures over the Secretary's program involved in these recommendations are thus:

On items in paragraph 3 $210 million

On Polaris 75 million

On Minuteman 500 million

Total $785 million5

Carl Kaysen

Annex I

6 SELECTED STRATEGIC STRIKING FORCES

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967

Original DOD Proposal:

B-52 630 630 630 630 630

Missiles

Atlas 135 135 135 125 117

Titan 78 114 114 114 114

Minuteman 150 600 700 800 900

Polaris 144 288 480 560 656

Total Missiles 507 1137 1479 1700 1887

Alert Force Megatons 3300 4350 4740 5130 5450

DOD Proposal Increased Minuteman:

Minuteman 150 600 800 950 1100

Total Missiles 507 1137 1579 1850 2087

Alert Force Megatons 3300 4350 4840 5280 5650

Staff Proposal:

Minuteman (1st Alternative) 150 300 450 600 750

Minuteman (2nd Alternative) 150 300 450 700 900

Polaris 144 288 464 512 560

Total Missiles (1st Alternative) 507 837 1313 1452 1621

Total Missiles (2nd Alternative) 507 837 1313 1552 1771

Alert Force Megatons (1st Alternative) 3300 4050 4570 4880 5180

Alert Force Megatons (2nd Alternative) 3300 4050 4570 4980 5330

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD FY 1963 Defense Budget. Top Secret.

1 Not found attached. In it McNamara stated that he had that day submitted the FY 1963 defense budget to the Bureau of the Budget and that Director Bell had concurred in his recommendations with a few exceptions. “As we discussed briefly at Hyannis Port, I am proposing to start the funding of 200 fixed Minutemen in FY 1963, an increase of 100 missiles to compensate for the elimination of the mobile Minuteman from the program. Dave would prefer to eliminate mobile Minuteman with no compensating increase.” (Ibid.)

2 Document 57.

3 In Document 46, McNamara projected 900 fixed and 100 mobile Minutemen by 1967.

4 In another memorandum to Kennedy dated December 9, Kaysen stated that a discussion among the President, Sorensen, Bell, and himself had resulted in decisions to defer the decision on long-lead procurement for Nike-Zeus until after the next nuclear test series, continue on Skybolt “if Douglas [aircraft company] can perform,” reduce Polaris submarine procurement from six to three a year, and accept “McNamara's original target of 900 Minutemen” but procure them at the rate suggested in the memorandum printed here. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Volume II, 11/6-12/61)

5 In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on December 11, Ewell reported that the defense budget had been “put to bed with approval of FY 1963 funding of the 100 extra fixed Minutemen,” for a total of 200. Nike-Zeus would remain in the “R & D” stage. “The President is not convinced that there is any evidence we want to deploy this system.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings 9-12/61)As presented to Congress, the budget proposed FY 1963 funding of 200 fixed Minutemen with the objective of a total of 1,100 by FY 1967, tentatively 1,200 by FY 1968, and procurement of 6 additional Polaris submarines. (“McNamara Testimony Before Senate Armed Services Committee, January 19, 1963”; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Volume III, McNamara Testimony)

6 Top Secret.

64. Editorial Note 64. Editorial Note

On December 11, 1961, Richard M. Bissell, Jr., Deputy Director (Plans) of Central Intelligence, submitted, as Chairman of the NSC Counter-Guerrilla Warfare Task Force, to McGeorge Bundy and General Taylor a report entitled “Elements of U.S. Strategy To Deal with ‘Wars of National Liberation.'” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, CIA General 12/61) See the Supplement. The other members of the Task Force were Edward Lansdale, Walt Rostow, and Henry C. Ramsey of the Policy Planning Council. According to a December 13 memorandum from Rostow to George McGhee, the members served as individuals, not agency representatives. (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Dec 61)

The report concluded that while there existed a “clear consensus within the U.S. Government as to the magnitude and urgency” of the problem presented by Communist indirect aggression, there was “no single high-level locus of authority and responsibility” to undertake “vitally needed concerting of interagency resources.” The Task Force recommended that this function should be added to the responsibilities of the NSC 5412 Special Group, whose Chairman was General Taylor. The Special Group should designate areas where subversive violence was already a “major factor” or a “potentially serious threat.” For “critically threatened” countries as designated by the Special Group, the Secretary of State should establish interagency task forces to develop and review action programs.

In a December 12 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Robert Komer stated that he had pressed for designation of the Special Group in the report because “Taylor is already heavily involved in this problem area, and expansion of Special Group functions builds on a going concern. Walt and I touched base with Taylor; he is in full agreement.” To overcome what Komer believed were problems in obtaining interagency concurrence, “the technique we decided on was to have Bissell transmit the report to you so that you could send a chit to the agencies concerned suggesting that we have an NSC meeting on it.” In the margin of his own memorandum, Komer commented: “This is also so it doesn't look like a CIA power play.” Concerning the recommendations, Komer wrote: “I had to do them quick and dirty in order to force everybody's hand and avoid another six weeks of delay.” Komer believed that the Department of State might “not wholly approve giving Taylor such broad terms of reference.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Komer 11/61-12/61) See the Supplement.

In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on December 13, Colonel Ewell stated that Bundy brought up the report and “jumped on the general idea” because he felt it would downgrade the Secretary of State and the Assistant Secretaries. “I sense that some very quick action is necessary to get this thing back on the track.” In his memorandum of the daily staff meeting on December 15, Ewell wrote: “I mentioned the cold war paper. Bundy said that he had your memorandum from the Special Group. He is generally opposed to the Special Group getting into the consideration of organizational policy. He plans to talk to you about your memorandum. I suspect that Bundy has straightforward reservations about the Special Group—cold war idea, and I also feel that he has deep reservations, which are not quite so straightforward, about letting a strong, decisive group get hold of a block of decisions. This tends to inhibit the free-wheelers around here who find that they are unable to tinker around with the approach to a problem if the policy formulation in its final stages is reserved to a small group. My guess would be that the Bundy-Kaysen-Henry Owen axis is initiating a preventive war on this idea and will try to sink it without a trace.” (Both in National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings 9-12/61) Although written for the record, Ewell's memoranda were customarily circulated to Taylor and his staff. The memorandum from the Special Group has not been found. Henry D. Owen was a member of the Policy Planning Council.

Apparently a decision had been taken by January 10, 1962, not to assign the new function to the 5412 Special Group, because on this date Lemnitzer commented in a memorandum to Taylor on a draft NSAM, not found, which established a new Special Group (Counter-Insurgency). Lemnitzer advocated that the work of the new Special Group should in the long run not be confined to “those areas in which the Communists have already taken root” but should also concentrate on areas of the “most strategic significance to the United States such as Brazil, in which a well-coordinated, effective National Plan for progress should now be in implementation.” Lemnitzer added that it was “wishful thinking” to expect potential Special Group members to have much time to devote to their new functions, and suggested “a small, highly-qualified staff” of six to eight people to prepare recommendations and do “necessary spade work to permit monitoring the over-all accomplishments and/or operations.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3360 (18 Jan 62) Sec 1) For NSAM No. 124 as issued, see Document 68.

65. National Security Action Memorandum No. 119 65. National Security Action Memorandum No. 119Source

Washington, December 18, 1961.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

SUBJECT

Civic Action

The President is concerned that we may be missing an opportunity this year to develop methods for supporting whatever contribution military forces can make to economic and social development in less-developed countries. While recognizing that civic action is not universally applicable, he hopes we will take full advantage of its contribution in crisis areas as well as in those where the threat of subversion is more remote.

By civic action we mean using military forces on projects useful to the populace at all levels in such fields as training, public works, agriculture, transportation, communication, health, sanitation, and others helpful to economic development.

In countries fighting active campaigns against internal subversion, we should encourage local forces to undertake civic action projects as indispensable means of strengthening their society's economic base and establishing a link between army and populace. In countries threatened by external aggression, local forces should participate in civic action projects which do not materially impair performance of the primary military mission. In countries where subversion or attack is less imminent, selected military forces can contribute substantially to economic and social development, and we should make such a contribution a major function of these forces.

The President hopes that we can include civic action projects in existing and future military and economic assistance programs wherever practicable and in guidance that will affect future planning. He realizes we will have to develop new procedures for supporting this sort of project but feels that the benefits to be gained in some countries warrant considerable effort on our part. In an emergency, we should also consider using U.S. training teams as catalysts for a more rapid or substantial reorientation.

We must coordinate civic action with other programs directed at the same goals. A number of programs—economic and military assistance, political reform, paramilitary activities, police training, Peace Corps, and others—have common goals, but each can make a unique contribution. The President hopes that you might include civic action in any comprehensive study made in connection with NSAM No. 1141 or in any regional study such as that requested in NSAM No. 118.2

I would appreciate very much your looking into our efforts to implement this policy and giving special attention to any interdepartmental or procedural problems which may be slowing our program. Would you be so kind as to let me know by 31 March what programs we have built into our FY 62 program and by 1 September what projects of this sort the FY 63 program includes.

McGeorge Bundy3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 119. Secret. Copies were sent to Robert Kennedy, David Bell, Allen Dulles, and General Taylor. In a December 13 memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, Harold Saunders of the NSC Staff stated that a draft of this NSAM had been approved by General Taylor, DOD/ISA, the Bureau of the Budget, and the Department of State. In an attached memorandum for the President, Saunders argued that an NSAM was necessary because, although most Defense planners accepted the desirability of individual military civic action projects in underdeveloped countries, they lacked a concept for a broad program that would contribute to long-range development. In a December 18 memorandum to Bundy, Komer “agreed” that the NSAM was “marginal, and that we have too many little bits and pieces, largely overlapping, being issued as NSAMs on whole complex internal security problems,” but “nonetheless, a jog on civic action is desirable in general,” particularly while budget decisions were being made. The memorandum bears Bundy's handwritten approval. (All ibid.)

1 Document 59.

2 Entitled “Participation of U.S. and Latin American Armed Forces in the Attainment of Common Objectives in Latin America,” December 5, 1961. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 114)

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Bundy signed the original.

66. Memorandum for the Record 66. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Palm Beach, Florida, January 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

President's Meeting with JCS on January 3, 1962

At the meeting with the President, besides the Joint Chiefs of Staff (with General Smith in place of General LeMay), were the Vice President, Secretary McNamara, General Taylor, General Harkins, and myself. There follows a summary of the discussion which took place during the meeting:

DOD Budget for FY ‘63

At the suggestion of Mr. McNamara each of the Chiefs commented on the results of the budget review and the budget itself as to be presented to Congress.

General Lemnitzer declared himself generally well satisfied with the military budget with one reservation, namely, the reduction in the proposed appropriation for military assistance from $1.7 to $1.5 billion. At the President's suggestion General Taylor telephoned Budget Director Bell on this point and reported that Mr. Bell had personally reviewed the MAP budget, particularly with reference to uncommitted and unspent funds, anticipated recoupments from changes in programs, and other aspects of the MAP financial situation, and was sure that the reduction of $200 million in NOA for MAP in 1963 could be made without any reductions in planned programs.

In the course of the discussion on MAP the President emphasized the importance of military assistance to Latin American countries and the care that should be taken in selecting Military Attaches and MAAG's in that area.

General Decker stated that the Army had been “done well by” in the proposed budget although he considered the personnel ceiling fairly tight and regretted that the PEMA appropriation would not be larger. He noted the Army's position as favoring the earliest possible go-ahead on Nike-Zeus production. He agreed that the program for reorienting the Reserves had military advantages but pointed out the difficulties that would be encountered in reducing the number of National Guard or Reserve Divisions. In response to the President's inquiry, General Decker discussed the problems related to the early release of the 32d Infantry and 49th Armored National Guard divisions.

General Smith expressed the reservation of the Air Force on the long-range plans for strategic forces which he believes will result in dangerously lowering in the time period after 1965 the present U.S. nuclear superiority in strategic weapons. In particular, he made the point that in FY ‘63 an additional 100 hardened and dispersed Minutemen should be funded1 plus some $95 million new obligational authority for long-lead time construction for sites for missiles that would be ordered in future years, and the further point that at the very least the B-70 development should be permitted to proceed immediately on a full weapon system basis.

In commenting on General Smith's statement the President said that he would be happy to hear General LeMay's presentation on the subject of the strategic force structure, but he pointed out that the Air Force should be prepared to support its position by showing how additional strategic forces would improve the overall military posture of the U.S. vs. the USSR. He and Mr. McNamara made it clear that the decision on strategic force levels was not dictated by availability of funds or other budgetary considerations.

General Smith expressed the gratification of the Air Force that the new budget would provide it with five more fighter wings and significant increases in airlift capacity.

On the subject of overseas dependents both the President and Mr. McNamara stressed the significance of the balance of payments problem and the alternatives which the U.S. faces if military contributions to the current balance of payments deficit were not reduced.

Admiral Anderson said that the new budget will support a “better Navy” and that the Navy can “live with the budget” although maintenance and personnel funds will continue to be tight. He also stated the case for the new carrier proposed in the budget and summarized the reasons for accepting conventional rather than nuclear propulsion for the carrier. Admiral Anderson commented on the shortage of military construction funds and the consequent adverse impact on shore stations. He also discussed the problem presented by the recent expansion of 40 anti-submarine warfare (ASW) ships and 18 ASW squadrons which are not provided for in the 1963 budget.

General Shoup stated that the current budget had been better prepared than any previous military financial program he had witnessed in the last seven years. He expressed his concern which Mr. McNamara and General Lemnitzer shared, over the importance of proof-testing new weapons (including warheads).2

[Here follows discussion of Vietnam; see Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 2.]

Roswell L. Gilpatric4
Deputy Secretary of Defense

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Top Secret. Drafted by Gilpatric on January 9.

1 That is, 100 in addition to the 200 for which the administration had decided to request funding in FY 1963.

2 In a memorandum for record of the White House daily staff meeting on January 5, 1962, Ewell stated that he briefed the group on the Palm Beach conferences. “I deliberately told them about Shoup's comments on not knowing whether missiles would work, and added that this was kicked around the table a bit and there was general agreement that there would be some systems tests in the new testing program.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings Jan-Apr 62)

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Gilpatric signed the original.

67. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of Defense McNamara 67. Memorandum From President Kennedy to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, January 11, 1962.

I am not satisfied that the Department of Defense, and in particular the Army, is according the necessary degree of attention and effort to the threat of Communist-directed subversive insurgency and guerrilla warfare, although it is clear that these constitute a major form of politico-military conflict for which we must carefully prepare. The effort devoted to this challenge should be comparable in importance to preparations for conventional warfare.

I would like you to assure that this new attitude is reflected in the organization, training, equipment and doctrine of the United States Armed Forces, at home and abroad. As I suggested above, at this time I do not see that this degree of effort is being made. The Army has a particularly important role to play, and I would like to find recognition of this importance in Army organization and training. As an immediate step, I should like an Army general officer serving in the immediate area of the Chief of Staff to be designated as the focal point for Army activities directed at this problem. I should like another general officer designated in the Joint Staff to perform a corresponding function there.1 I leave it to your judgment whether similar action is necessary in the Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps.

I am aware of the work being done under NSAM 562 to inventory U.S. paramilitary and counter-guerrilla assets and to determine future requirements. It is my understanding that a final report on this matter will be available about February 1st, at which time I hope to receive your specific recommendations as to how to proceed.3

Even before having the benefit of this report, I am sure that the Department of Defense and the Services should be making a thorough review of the training programs for officers, beginning at the Service academy level and carrying through to the National War College, to determine whether sufficient attention is being paid to instruction in subversive insurgency and related forms of indirect aggression. I have previously directed the Army to send selected officers to South Viet-Nam for short periods of orientation and training in order to expose them to the experience of actual conditions of guerrilla warfare. I would like that program expedited and appropriate officers of the other Services included.

Additionally, I have directed that the Armed Forces consider giving special training and orientation on guerrilla warfare (and the political implications thereof in countries where Communist threats are evident) for those officers being assigned to MAAG's and as attaches to countries where Communist subversive threats are apparent. To accomplish this, it would seem that a period of training at the Army Special Warfare Center, prior to departure for their posts, would be appropriate in many cases.

As you perceive from my foregoing remarks, in preparing to meet “wars of liberation” I should like the Department of Defense to move to a new level of increased activity across the board. I expect to direct similar action in other executive departments which have a part to play in this matter.

* Source: Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, Defense 1/62-3/62. Secret.

1 In a January 24 memorandum to the President on counterinsurgency, McNamara stated that the Army had selected Brigadier General William B. Rosson to serve as Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff for Special Warfare and that a temporary coordinating officer for counterinsurgency had been named to the Joint Staff pending a regular appointment. (Ibid.)

2 Document 33.

3 On February 10, Clifton forwarded to the President an 82-page report on “Cold War Activities of the United States Army, 1 January 1961 to 26 January 1962.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Army, Cold War Activities 2/62) In a February 12 memorandum to Colonel Hoskot, an aide to Secretary of the Army Stahr, Clifton wrote that Kennedy “read it from cover to cover, with appreciation” and raised several questions. Kennedy's questions were answered in a memorandum from Decker to Clifton dated February 26. (All ibid.) On February 19, the Department of Defense circulated a status report on “Guerrilla Warfare and Related Matters.” (Ibid., Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume I, 8/62-12/62)

68. National Security Action Memorandum No. 124 68. National Security Action Memorandum No. 124Source

Washington, January 18, 1962.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

The Director, United States Information Agency

The Military Representative of the President

SUBJECT

Establishment of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency)

To assure unity of effort and the use of all available resources with maximum effectiveness in preventing and resisting subversive insurgency and related forms of indirect aggression in friendly countries, a Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) is established consisting of the following members: Military Representative of the President, Chairman

The Attorney General

Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Deputy Secretary of Defense

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Director of Central Intelligence

Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Administrator, Agency for International Development1

On invitation:

Other department and agency representatives, as deemed necessary

The functions of the Special Group (C.I.) will be as follows: a. To insure proper recognition throughout the U. S. Government that subversive insurgency (“wars of liberation”) is a major form of politico-military conflict equal in importance to conventional warfare.

b. To insure that such recognition is reflected in the organization, training, equipment and doctrine of the U.S. Armed Forces and other U.S. agencies abroad and in the political, economic, intelligence, military aid and informational programs conducted abroad by State, Defense, AID, USIA and CIA. Particular attention will be paid the special training of personnel prior to assignment to MAAG's and to Embassy staffs in countries where counter-insurgency problems exist or may arise.

c. To keep under review the adequacy of U. S. resources to deal with actual or potential situations of insurgency or indirect aggression, making timely recommendation of measures to apply, increase or adjust these resources to meet anticipated requirements.

d. To insure the development of adequate interdepartmental programs aimed at preventing or defeating subversive insurgency and indirect aggression in countries and regions specifically assigned to the Special Group (C. I.) by the President, and to resolve any interdepartmental problems which might impede their implementation.

In performing the above functions, the members of the Special Group (C. I.) will act on behalf of their respective departments and agencies, and will depend for staff support upon their own staffs, and upon such country or regional interdepartmental task forces (normally chaired by a State Department Assistant Secretary) as may be established. The Group will confine itself to establishing broad lines of counter-insurgency policy, subject to my direction and decision as appropriate, insuring a coordinated and unified approach to regional or country programs, and verifying progress in implementation thereof. It will also undertake promptly to make decisions on interdepartmental issues arising out of such programs.

The critical areas initially assigned to the Special Group (C. I.) pursuant to paragraph d of this memorandum are set forth in the attached annex.2

John F. Kennedy

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 124. Secret.

1 Fowler Hamilton.

2 The annex reads as follows: “I hereby assign to the cognizance of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) the following countries: Laos, South Vietnam, Thailand. JFK”

69. Summary of President Kennedy's Remarks to the 496th Meeting of the National Security Council 69. Summary of President Kennedy's Remarks to the 496th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, January 18, 1962.

The President began his general discussion of policy problems by expressing his gratitude to all for their work during 1961. He expressed the hope that all concerned would move ahead in the same spirit of increasing cooperation during 1962.

The President referred to the Council's responsibility for integrating the work of the Departments of State and Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency, with the participation of the Treasury Department and other agencies when matters of interest to them were being considered. He asked the members to cooperate in making the Council meetings useful, and ensuring that decisions arising out of the Council meetings were effectively carried out.

The President remarked that he had stated the objective of the United States in his State of the Union Message as being the encouragement of a world of free and independent countries. The independence of countries sometimes created problems like those of Yugoslavia and Ghana. Our relations to such countries could never be like those of the Soviet Union to its satellites. We would simply have to live with these difficulties.

Moreover, we have an enormous task, in that our responsibilities are world-wide and of great complexity. The British and the French, formerly world powers, are concentrating more and more on problems of Europe, especially as the Common Market develops. This throws increasing weight on us, and it is no wonder that we do not always succeed. When you think only of our problems in Laos, Ghana, the Congo and Latin America, you can recognize the magnitude of the limitations upon what a country with only 6% of the world's population can accomplish.

These problems have a high degree of interrelation, in that the political and military factors tie closely together. Thus, for example, the coming fight on U.S. trade policy involves military interests very directly. If we cannot keep up our export surplus, we shall not have the dollar exchange with which to meet our overseas military commitments. We are spending $3 billion a year abroad to maintain our international security position. We must either do a good job of selling abroad or pull back. Our balance of payments position has put a strain on our gold reserves, and while we are not at a point of danger, we are at a point of concern. If confidence in the dollar is not maintained, those holding dollar and gold obligations against us could easily create grave difficulties for us. Any bank in which confidence is weakened faces great dangers. The over-all importance of the balance of payments position to our military security can be understood still more clearly by noting the British experience. The British pull-back of forces from numerous bases throughout the world in the years since World War II has been very largely a response to balance of payments difficulties. We see further pressure of this sort causing British planners to undertake further military reductions overseas.

Turning to basic military policy the President remarked that we relied on our nuclear deterrent. There are a number of places where our strength on the ground does not match what the Communists can bring to bear, but they hold back because they think we might use the bomb if they pushed us hard enough. As of now, the credibility of our nuclear deterrent is sufficient to hold our present positions throughout the world. Because Soviet nuclear strength is developing, great emphasis must be placed on other kinds of reinforcement of our military position.

In commenting on the nature of the Soviet threat, the President called attention to the January 6, 1961, speech by Khrushchev, which he described as possibly one of the most important speeches of the decade. Khrushchev had made clear the pattern of military and paramilitary infiltration and subversion which could be expected under the guise of “wars of liberation.”1 The President believed that in response we must strengthen our conventional forces and our capability for military leadership in dealing with that kind of war. This was a matter which required imaginative and outstanding new efforts by all forces.

The President specifically praised the discussion of this problem in the January 1962 issue of the Marine Corps Gazette. He felt that all forces—Army, Marine, Air and Navy—must learn how to fight on the edges of the world. The record of the Romans made clear that their success was dependent on their will and ability to fight successfully at the edges of their empire. It was not so clear that we were yet in a position to do the same.

Moreover, there were special unsolved problems. When the Chinese get missiles and bombs and nuclear weapons, for example, what effect will that have on our dispositions in Southeast Asia?

Turning to aid policy, the President emphasized that we wanted to be sure to have military aid programs and military aid officers who would be alert to the real problems faced in the countries to which they were assigned. The basic danger was usually that of seizure from inside by Communist forces supported by military or paramilitary efforts within and without. The President believed that U.S. military personnel should establish the closest possible relations with military men in the countries to which they are assigned so that there could be mutual trust and, above all, understanding of the real dangers with which the military forces in that country must be prepared to cope—the dangers of subversion and Communist insurgency within the country. The President believed in particular that more emphasis was needed on military assistance to Latin America. He cited the example of President Betancourt of Venezuela who needs such assistance to safeguard his position with the military which may hold the balance of power in that country.

The President emphasized that chiefs of U.S. military missions and U.S. Military Attachés occupy extraordinarily important positions. Such U.S. officers should not act as lobbyists against Washington by always seeking increasing amounts of military assistance. The task of U.S. military officers is to influence their opposite numbers. For example, in Iran we would not wish our military men encouraging the Shah of Iran in resisting a decision to reduce their armed forces to 150,000 men. We do not want our military men making the Iranians any more unhappy than they already are.

In concluding this section of his remarks, the President emphasized again the importance of cooperation among all departments and agencies concerned with national security. He thought such cooperation had been very good and he was grateful for it. He cited as an example the interdepartmental efforts to improve the situation in the Dominican Republic. “We are partners,” he said, “by necessity and choice.”

In a brief response, the Secretary of State expressed the gratitude of all present for the chance to serve under the President in working on these great issues. The Secretary noted the surging thrust of nationalism throughout the world and expressed his belief that it was proving a tough and resistant force against Communist imperialism. He noted in particular the President's policy of understanding and support for free and independent nations in all continents, and he said that all would wish to commit themselves afresh to the service of the Administration in these purposes.

The President then spoke about the following specific items:

West Irian. The area is a most unsuitable one for a war in which the United States would be involved. We would not wish to humiliate the Dutch, but on the other hand it would be foolish to have a contest when the Dutch really do want to get out if a dignified method can be found. We should recognize that this territory was likely eventually to go to Indonesia, even though we ourselves might deeply dislike Sukarno as an individual. The real stake here was not West Irian but the fate of Indonesia, the most rich and populous country in the area and one which was the target of energetically pursued Soviet ambitions.

Viet-Nam. A really tough case in which the immediate problem is how to cut off a Communist supply line, and in which he knew there was intense and cooperative effort by the departments concerned.

Laos. A problem on which there might be serious disagreement. After careful weighing of the risks and an examination of the supply problem, where there was no seaport, we have decided to disengage—to move toward a solution in terms of a neutral and independent Laos. We are continuing in this direction, and we hope that Governor Harriman, who is working on this problem, will be able to work out an effective solution.

Cuba. We hope that Castro can be effectively isolated at the coming meeting at Punta del Este,2 but we expect this to continue to be a very large problem on which further action might be necessary. The time has not yet come when we must force a solution to the Cuban problem.

Berlin. There had been no progress in the negotiation up to this point. If that situation persisted, the Soviets could be expected to proceed with a separate peace treaty and there might be a direct test of nerves in the Spring. At such a point the responsibility on the military would be increasingly great. We have to control the developing situation from Washington and a heavy responsibility would rest on the President, the Secretaries of State and Defense, and the military commanders. The President believed that it was important to have prompt and careful study of our contingency plans and to think hard about the ways and means of making decisions that might lead to nuclear war. If there were to be any such war, we must know what it is for, and know what other steps we can take before such war comes.

The President then turned to the subject of relations with the press. He thought there were still too many stories appearing which should not have been given to reporters. We do better than others, and the President referred specifically to Bonn and Paris as the worst offenders. But we should improve our own security. We ought not to circulate important papers and cables in a casual way. We ought to be sure that matters on which there may be differences in the Government are not made public if we can avoid it. The President believed that there had been fewer interagency struggles and squabbles in this Administration than in any of which he was aware in recent times. He hoped that this good record could be maintained and improved.

Finally, in remarks that were actually given at the opening of the second part of the meeting, the President stated that there were still a number of problems on which study, recommendation and decision took too long. He noted in particular the case of policy toward Yugoslavia. Recommendations had been requested at an NSC meeting three months before, and the matter had come to him for decision only this week. Yet it was not that difficult, and the solution was a relatively simple compromise. The President instructed his own staff and the departments concerned to avoid such delays in the future.3

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 496th NSC Meeting. Top Secret; No Distribution. The source text bears no drafting information. The President's remarks partially follow an outline prepared for him by McGeorge Bundy on January 17. (Ibid.) The other item discussed at this meeting was the military aid program.

1 For extracts from the speech, delivered before a meeting of Party organizations of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in Moscow, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 555-558.

2 At their meeting at Punta del Este, Uruguay, held January 22-31, the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of American States voted to exclude Cuba from the Organization.

3 The President's remarks were the subject of NSC Action No. 2446, approved by the President on January 22, which reads: “[The NSC] noted the President's information statement to invited officers of the Government principally concerned with the national security affairs of the United States.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council) No list of persons present has been found.

70. Editorial Note 70. Editorial Note

Upon becoming Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State in November 1961, Walt W. Rostow supervised the preparation of a series of drafts, all entitled “Basic National Security Policy.” A draft of February 7, 1962, was circulated within the Department of State only. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Drafts 1/15/62 and 2/7/62) In a memorandum to Secretary Rusk dated February 14, Rostow described the draft as “more analytical than the somewhat oracular texts of earlier basic national security policy papers” and suggested that it might either be circulated by the President after NSC review as an interim guidance, or that a shorter version might be prepared “in the style of an NSC Record of Action.” Rostow believed, however, “that it would be difficult to eliminate explanatory material without leaving the policy prescription cryptic or open to serious misunderstanding.” (Ibid.)

A version dated February 24 is 193 double-spaced pages long. (Ibid., BNSP Draft 2/24/62) The Secretary and other senior Department officers discussed it during a lengthy meeting at Camp David, Maryland, on March 3. For a partial account of this meeting, see Document 73.

In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on March 6, at which McGeorge Bundy presided, Colonel Ewell wrote in part: “The President has read Mr. Rostow's draft BNSP. He feels it is quite a good paper, and that everyone should study it thoroughly and give Rostow their comments. Mr. Bundy commented that he felt that the arms control and disarmament were treated with rather a thin brush. He also feels that the first 100 pages are rather superfluous, with the last 100 containing the meat.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings Jan-Apr 62)

With a March 26 memorandum to the President, Rostow enclosed a draft BNSP of 285 double-spaced pages, which he described as “semi-final.” Rostow stated that “this phase represents a good time for you informally to leave your personal mark on it, while, of course, reserving your final position on the issues it may raise.” (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 3/26/62) The Department distributed this draft widely throughout the government and to U.S. missions abroad. Many comments received in response are ibid. See also Documents 75-79 and 85.

The March 26 draft, like its two predecessors, opens with an exposition of “Doctrine,” or fundamental objectives, and proceeds to a section on “Strategy,” or means of implementing these objectives. A third section sets forth specific national security planning tasks, while the fourth and last section details a procedure for anticipating crises.

Part One on “Doctrine” sets forth as the major “constructive goal” of U.S. policy an evolving international “free community,” defined as one in which nations effectively cooperate “in their areas of interdependence,” move forward “in their own ways” toward governments based on “consent and individual freedom,” regularly progress in social justice, settle disputes peaceably, increasingly participate in supernational institutions “which transcend and, to some extent, limit the independent powers of the nation-state,” and “move progressively” toward an international legal order. U.S. military power must remain at the center of this community to deal with “the flexible arsenal of Communist techniques of aggression” and to support “diplomatic efforts to curb anarchic nationalist impulses.” Within this framework of U.S. and allied military power, the United States should work for the attainment of the community objectives listed above.

The five major “dimensions” outlined in Part Two on “Strategy” were military policy, policy in the underdeveloped areas, a “framework of organization,” policy toward Communist states, and the “national [U.S.] base.”

Regarding the scale of U.S. strategic retaliatory forces, the paper states that they should be “sufficiently ready and effective so that Sino-Soviet leaders would expect—without question—the Bloc's power position to be worsened drastically as a result of a general nuclear war.” They must be “sufficiently invulnerable” so that their survival would not depend on a first strike and controllable enough so that automatic response to perceived threats would not increase the danger of war by miscalculation. In “general war, nuclear weapons will be used from the outset, as determined in advance by the President and subject to his direction and control.” Concerning the first strike problem, the paper weighs many issues and concludes that while the United States should not “lock” itself “into first strike plans and assumptions,” it should not “so preclude the possibility of launching the first nuclear blow as to deny ourselves the deterrent advantage of Soviet uncertainty on this point.” The paper states also that the United States “should not set an absolute requirement that [its] strategic forces be able substantially to destroy all Soviet delivery systems in a first strike.” The paper advocates sufficient civil defense to prevent “unnecessary casualties from fall-out” but cautions against “generating unwarranted expectations as to what such programs can accomplish.”

General purpose forces were to be of increased mobility and capable of containing “non-nuclear aggression short of all-out Soviet or Chinese Communist attack, without using nuclear” weapons. “If a balance must be struck in the training and equipping of these forces as between non-nuclear and nuclear combat, that balance should be struck in favor of non-nuclear combat.” A major effort in anti-guerrilla forces, both U.S. and allied, was necessary and it would “not be sufficient to make counter-guerrilla policy an ancillary objective to be pursued only insofar as it does not interfere with more conventional objectives.” While U.S. objectives should be attained whenever possible without nuclear weapons, enemy use of them or overwhelming enemy advantage in conventional forces might compel their use. In such cases, “the primary purpose of the use of a small number of nuclear weapons would be political, rather than military—to convey a signal of U.S. intent” to widen the war, if necessary.

The United States had an interest in arms control and disarmament for the following reasons: a second-strike deterrent could be maintained at lower levels of delivery capability if Soviet reductions in arms matched those of the United States; growing Soviet nuclear capacity; the growing possibility of an expensive nuclear stalemate; the “statistically real if, on the whole, unlikely” possibility of war by accident; and the possibility of nuclear proliferation. Current arms control objectives should “complement our military policy through promoting a stable military environment.”

In the underdeveloped world, the United States had a military interest in seeing nations not fall under Communist control, an ideological interest in seeing them “evolve in directions” which would “afford a congenial world environment for our own society,” and an economic interest that “the resources and the markets of these areas are available to us and to the other industrialized nations of the free world.” Toward these ends the draft paper advocated such measures as fine-tuning economic and military aid to the needs of particular countries and encouraging the remaining colonial powers to withdraw gracefully. “In general our basic orientation must be to the modern, progressive, and popularly-based groups within the underdeveloped areas; however, we must recognize that the rise to power of such groups will be a slow and uneven process, and that we may, on occasion, have to accommodate ourselves to less desirable situations.”

The “framework of organization” referred to alliance systems, economic organizations, the United Nations, and all other international organizations that would serve to “weave together the countries of the free community, draw closer those of the Communist Bloc, and pave the way for the stronger international organizations” which were “essential to the evolutionary development of the free community.” The “first and highest priority mission” was to “bind the United States into effective partnership with Europe, Canada, and Japan in the major tasks of defense and modernization within the community of free nations.” The paper terms these nations “the northern hard core.” Goals regarding Europe include European political integration without destroying the Atlantic Community or NATO, a corresponding reduction in the U.S.-U.K. “special relationship,” several of the nuclear sharing schemes then under discussion in NATO, opposition to additional national nuclear programs, and encouragement of the United Kingdom to phase out its independent strategic nuclear program in favor of its participation in a multilateral one.

Even though Japan lacked “the domestic political base” to play as great a defense role as the Federal Republic of Germany, the United States should “engage Japanese energies and resources within the free community” so that “this powerful nation, moving forward at an extraordinary rate” would find “a role of dignified world responsibility.” This engagement should take place “in the whole area from Karachi to Seoul,” in Japan's bilateral relations with the United States, and “in the common enterprises of the north which fall within the work of the OECD.”

Concerning CENTO, SEATO, and ANZUS the paper observes that “the efforts of the United States to pool the military resources of the area and to provide a feeling of security through regional alliances have not worked out too well,” and suggests that the United States, while continuing to support them “for the time being,” should “seek to promote other, more broadly-based, and less defense-oriented regional links,” with military emphasis being on counter-guerrilla operations.

The paper expresses general support for the United Nations but notes that “the UN can and should only play an ancillary role in the major security issues in conflict between East and West.” When necessary, the United States should risk “running against the current moods and habits in the UN Assembly” in support of its commitments.

Regarding Communist regimes, the draft states that there was both a “new assertiveness,” which stemmed from a growing Soviet military power, and “a certain mellowing” of Soviet policy during the post-Stalin period, partly because of realistic Soviet appreciation of the consequences of nuclear war. It was hence necessary to maintain “a constructive as well as a militant track in relations with Communist regimes.” Fragmentation within the Bloc would in time “open increased opportunities to deal with Communist nations constructively in terms of limited areas in which our national interests overlap with theirs.”

In crises, the United States should “try to meet immediate threats in ways which, if possible, reinforce the long-term direction of our policy and minimize the diversionary consequences of our reactions;” for instance, in “the Vietnamese crisis, to increase the degree of mutual involvement and support among non-Communist nations in Asia.” Regarding relaxation of tensions, while the United States should “welcome temporary and partial accommodations or detentes,” it “should not be diverted by them” from its long-term strategy. The long-term purpose of U.S. policy was to “increase the chance of constructive evolution within that society which might eventually move it to participate in the community of free nations.” The “natural forces of fragmentation” in the Bloc made “this long-run hope not wholly illusory.”

With Eastern Europe, the United States should seek to broaden its contacts and therefore “should play ‘liberation’ in low key,” in order to promote “gradual progress” toward an eventual goal of Eastern European countries becoming “members of the free community by a process of peaceful evolution.” Regarding China, the paper called for avoiding provocations, “informal negotiations” on minor subjects, and doing nothing which might have the effect of halting the Sino-Soviet split: “we should not so openly favor Khrushchev's point of view as to make it difficult for him to justify it within the Communist camp.” The United States “should make clear” that Sino-U.S. relations could be normalized if China modified “its aggressive stance and behavior” and recognized “de facto the existence of an independent Taiwan.” Removal of the Nationalist Government from the offshore islands (without diluting otherwise the U.S. military commitment to it) should be “a high priority objective,” and the United States should promote the emergence on Taiwan of a “political process increasingly based on popular consent.”

In the section on “The Domestic Base,” the paper called for high domestic growth, “not because rapid growth itself has inherent virtue” but because “a flow of increasing resources” would raise the standard of living, permit the United States to deal with its military responsibilities, and provide a context of prosperity which would make a liberal trading system acceptable to Congress.

Part Three of the draft paper treats “national security tasks,” which were “major unsolved problems” identified in the course of drafting Parts One and Two. Twenty-five tasks are listed, such as NATO nuclear strategy, the military role in underdeveloped areas, policy toward the Sino-Soviet split, the future of Japan, and U.S. productivity.

Part Four, “The Anticipation of Crises,” lists 52 potential crises for advance study in the hope of swiftly executing policy if the need arose. Suggested topics include succession crises in the Soviet Union, China, Spain, Portugal, and a number of other countries; “anti-regime” outbreaks in the German Democratic Republic; Soviet intervention in Albania; threatened Communist takeover in Cyprus; military action in the Arab-Israeli conflict; assassination of King Hussein of Jordan; Ghanaian aggression against Togo, Portuguese defeat in Angola; resurgent neutralism in Japan; and a Peronist return to power in Argentina.

71. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor) 71. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Washington, February 14, 1962.

SUBJECT

Police Programs

Since I will again be unable to attend the counter-insurgency session Thursday,1 I want to urge that we give a good hard push to police programs. I am satisfied by the arguments that they are an essential element in our counter-insurgency effort, particularly in those areas where we are still in the “preventive medicine” phase.2

This being the case, I am concerned by Fowler Hamilton's remarks, as reflected in the minutes of our last meeting (Item 2).3 These seem to indicate that police programs are being deemphasized by AID instead of stepped-up, e.g. some are being phased out, responsibility within AID is being diffused, lines of responsibility for such programs are “fuzzy”, and there are many differing views as to what kinds of police programs, if any, the US should support.

The Group should press on Fowler that it regards police programs, including equipment where necessary, as needing the same type of renewed emphasis which we are currently giving to Special Forces and other aspects of the overall counter-insurgency effort. Given the checkered history of these programs in the aid agency, we might ask Hamilton to consider whether giving them semi-autonomy within AID, earmarking their funds separately, and re-centralizing the police function under him personally might not be essential to protect them adequately. Indeed I wonder whether a Presidential letter to Hamilton4 similar to that of 11 January to Bob McNamara5 might not be useful. These things do have quite a cathartic effect.

McGeorge Bundy6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 114. Secret. A copy was sent to Robert Komer.

1 February 15.

2 This argument, including use of the term “preventive medicine,” had been put to Bundy by Komer very strongly in memoranda dated January 31 and February 7. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Robert Komer 1- 2/62)

3 Reference is to the memorandum prepared for the record by Thomas A. Parrott of the NSC Staff of the February 8 meeting of the Counter-Insurgency Group. (Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI) 1/1-7/31/62)

4 Document 72.

5 Document 67.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

72. National Security Action Memorandum No. 132 72. National Security Action Memorandum No. 132Source

Washington, February 19, 1962.

TO

The Honorable Fowler Hamilton

The Administrator

Agency for International Development

SUBJECT

Support of Local Police Forces for Internal Security and Counter-Insurgency Purposes

As you know, I desire the appropriate agencies of this Government to give utmost attention and emphasis to programs designed to counter Communist indirect aggression, which I regard as a grave threat during the 1960s. I have already written the Secretary of Defense “to move to a new level of increased activity across the board” in the counter-insurgency field.1

Police assistance programs, including those under the aegis of your agency, are also a crucial element in our response to this challenge. I understand that there has been some tendency toward de-emphasizing them under the new aid criteria developed by your agency. I recognize that such programs may seem marginal in terms of focusing our energies on those key sectors which will contribute most to sustained economic growth. But I regard them as justified on a different though related basis, i.e., that of contributing to internal security and resisting Communist-supported insurgency.

I am further aware that police programs, as a relatively minor facet of the functions of the aid agency, may have tended to receive little emphasis as a result. Therefore, I would like you to consider various ways and means of giving the police program greater autonomy within AID, if this seems necessary in order to protect it from neglect.

I fully recognize that police programs must be looked at on a case-by-case basis and that in some instances they can indeed be cut back or eliminated. I simply wish to insure that before doing so we have taken fully into account the importance of the counter-insurgency objective as I view it.

In sum, I should like AID to review carefully its role in the support of local police forces for internal security and counter-insurgency purposes, and to recommend to me through the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) what new or renewed emphases are desirable.2

John F. Kennedy3

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Interdepartmental Committee on Police. Secret. Copies were sent to Rusk, McNamara, Robert Kennedy, McCone, Bell, General Taylor, and the Director of the Peace Corps. Another copy of this memorandum indicates that it apparently was sent as a letter to Fowler. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 114) Several NSAMs with lower numbers have later dates. A February 19 note from Komer to Bundy states that Komer drafted this text. Komer commented: “Frank Coffin's weak follow-up on police programs last Thursday convinces me that now is the time for a hortatory JFK prod to Hamilton.” Coffin was Deputy Administrator of AID. Parrott's memorandum for the record of the meeting of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) held on Thursday, February 15, is in Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI) 1/1-7/31/62.

1 Document 67.

2 In NSAM No. 146, dated April 20, President Kennedy tasked the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Attorney General, and the Directors of Central Intelligence and the Bureau of the Budget with establishing an interagency committee to recommend means of aiding police forces in “newly emerging countries to assure that they can maintain order without excessive use of violence.” In addition, the committee was to consider “whether the organizational location of technical assistance on police training should remain under AID or be handled in some other manner.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 146) The memorandum accompanying the report of the Interagency Committee on Police Assistance Programs is Document 99.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Kennedy signed the original.

73. Memorandum for the Record 73. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, March 5, 1962.

In the Basic National Security Policy meeting,1 my major contribution was to pick up Bob Good's statement2 and to deliver it along the following lines.

I started off by saying that according to the Saturday Evening Post, INR was supposed to be the Devil's Advocate, so I was about to advocate some deviltry.

I began by saying that the basic concept here reminded me very much of our discussions in the Washington Center of Foreign Policy Research concerning the Free World System, and saying that I had been Paul Nitze's principal collaborator in that but that some reservations ought to be made.

I said that we don't have as great leverage to create a community of values3 as the paper suggests nor does a failure to do this give the Communists as much of an opportunity as the paper suggests.

In the foreseeable future the lesser developed countries are not susceptible to such organization by either side.

In Latin America, the United States has a great opportunity but not so in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East.

In these areas the notion of an order sponsored by the West is either irrelevant or suspect. It is irrelevant because these nations are largely preoccupied with creating a viable national order of their own. It is suspect because one of the goals of these nations is precisely to disentangle themselves from the old colonial order.

The assertion that governments by consent and respect for individual liberty will play a larger role in these countries seems to us to be questionable. In fact, it might be the reverse. The problem in the lesser developed countries is precisely to accumulate power at the center. They must develop a capacity to assemble information and skills at the center; to develop a capacity to reach decisions about a society as a whole at the center; and to develop a capacity to carry out those decisions effectively.

This first priority task of developing power, authority, and skills at the center, is not always consistent with at least the forms of western parliamentary democracy; if all the above is so, then in these parts of the world our goal may be less to assure an environment of sustained progress, higher standards of wealth, social justice and so on, and more so to play the game that the Communists are not permitted to swing the balance in their favor.

We do not suggest that we should repudiate the effort to create a world order based on a community of value. It is a question of appropriate emphasis.

If our prior objective is to create a community of values, we are bound to suffer disillusionment. If we are careless about how we talk about it, we will alienate many on ideological grounds. If we emphasize too much using our resources in helping those who share our values, we will lose flexibility in offsetting Soviet advances.

The Secretary immediately challenged me by saying that he thought I should examine this question empirically, that if I looked at the world country by country, he was sure that I would find that most of the nations did in fact share our basic values. He said that the charter of the United Nations was really an expression of our national goals and of the national goals of all countries. I argued that in a discussion in the Washington Center, I had often taken the position that in countries like Ceylon, for example, it was interesting to see that although the elites there frequently criticized the United States, when it came to a choice, they generally acted for western values. My point was one of emphasis.

To my amazement, my major support came from Harlan Cleveland,4 who said that he thought INR had a good point here and that there were other ways of expressing consent than the forms of parliamentary democracy. This made a little headway with the Secretary who made a distinction between a dictatorship and a monopoly of political power at the top, citing Pakistan where Ayub5 would certainly not be replaced by any democratic process, but that if you walked around the streets of the towns or cities in Pakistan, you do not have the impression of a dictatorship.

George McGhee challenged my point, however, which gave me a good opportunity, because after talking about how dependent he was on coffee plantation worker in Colombia for his coffee and how the plantation worker was dependent upon George for drinking coffee, he cited that he had worked hard to get Nitze's paper into the Draper Report.6

This gave me the opportunity to remind him that I was co-author of that piece that he had worked so hard to get in and that I was not in a position of saying that we should junk it, or, that is, junk the concept, that I was in the same position that Max Millikan and others found themselves in after they wrote the book about “A Proposal”7 and found themselves coming to Washington and making speeches against their own book, because they had thought it had been oversold. My point was not that we should not try to build in the direction of a community of shared values but that we should not be oversold on the possibilities of developing a community of shared values. In the process of this, the Secretary suggested that we in INR might sponsor a study with External Research funds on the “Forms of Consent” in other parts of the world.

There are two actions that should follow from this:

The first is that under Allan Evans' general supervision, we should pull together all the comments by the different offices on the basic national security policy paper into one INR document.8

The second action is that we should at least look into the possibility of an External Research Study on the “Forms of Consent in Other Parts of the World.”

It may be this is merely a part of our political development studies or possibly that we ask the people involved in the political development studies to write a separate paper on this particular subject. In any event, I leave it to my colleagues to explore whether or not we should do something about this, and, if so, what form it should take.

Roger Hilsman9

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, State Department, General, Volume IV. Top Secret. Drafted by Hilsman. Marked for the attention of Thomas L. Hughes, Deputy Director of Intelligence and Research, and Allan Evans, Deputy Director for Research.

1 Held at Camp David on Saturday, March 3.

2 Robert C. Good, Director, Office of Research and Analysis for Africa, Bureau of Intelligence and Research. His statement was not found.

3 The drafts of February 14 and March 26 spoke in similar terms of the importance of the United States encouraging the emergence of a free world community sharing common democratic political values. See Document 70.

4 Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs.

5 Field Marshal Mohammed Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan.

6 On November 24, 1958, President Eisenhower appointed William H. Draper, Jr., to head the President's Committee To Study the U.S. Military Assistance Program. On June 3, 1959, the Committee submitted to the President its Report on the Organization and Administration of the Military Assistance Program (Washington, 1959).

7 Max F. Millikan and Walt W. Rostow, A Proposal: Key to an Effective Foreign Policy (New York: Harper and Row, 1957). The book called for an expanded long-term program of U.S. participation in the economic development of underdeveloped areas.

8 This document took the form of Research Memorandum INR-62 from Hughes to Rostow, March 6. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP, 1961-1962)

9 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

74. Memorandum From Thomas A. Parrott to President Kennedy 74. Memorandum From Thomas A. Parrott to President KennedySource

Washington, March 22, 1962.

In accordance with General Clifton's request, listed below are some of the more important actions taken in recent weeks in the general field of counter-insurgency. There has not been time to coordinate this paper with the members of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency); however, it has been distributed to the Group today, and any significant comments or additions will be forwarded to you.

A. Organization

1. The Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) was established by NSAM 124, 18 January 1962.1 The regular members are: General Taylor, Chairman

The Attorney General

Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Deputy Secretary of Defense

Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Director of Central Intelligence

Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Administrator, Agency for International Development.

Other key officials are invited to meetings as appropriate. Meetings are held weekly2 and last a minimum of two hours, usually considerably longer.

2. The Group has brought Laos, Vietnam and Thailand under its direct cognizance. Cambodia was considered carefully and it was decided that that country was not appropriate for the specific attention of the Group. At the request of the State Department, the Ambassador has written a comprehensive survey of conditions in the country. Colombia is currently being examined, and the Group will meet with the Ambassador. The Yarborough Report on Colombia3 has been reviewed.

B. Specific Subjects Considered by the Special Group (CI)

1. Training

a. General Taylor visited the following schools, to stimulate reorientation of their curricula toward counter-insurgency: National War College; Special Warfare Center, Fort Bragg; Strategic Intelligence School; Military Assistance Institute; Foreign Service Institute; CIA Training Center.

b. NSAM 131, “Training Objectives for Counter-Insurgency,” was issued on 13 March 1962.4 Appropriate departments and agencies were directed to establish adequate training for their officers of junior, middle and senior grades, with provision for cross-training.

c. Preliminary plans for a “Modernization Institute” have been discussed with you. Details, and alternatives, are being developed by the Bureau of the Budget. Interim summer courses have been approved. Emphasis is being placed on the development of “political sophistication” in military officers, in connection with the approach to counter-insurgency training.

2. Vietnam

a. Weekly reports of the inter-agency Task Force5 are reviewed by the Special Group at each meeting. Corrective action along counter-insurgency lines is directed by the Group on a continuing basis. Special attention has been focused on: improvement of the military command structure; prisoner of war interrogation; provincial surveys; and Border Ranger Forces. The economic programs in South Vietnam have been under review to assure that they are properly oriented toward counter-insurgency.

b. The Hilsman Report6 was reviewed and a copy sent to General Harkins.

3. Thailand

All programs have been reviewed with the Ambassador. Special attention has been given to: reorientation of the Thai military forces; strengthening and re-equipping of the Border Police; new roads and irrigation projects; political communications programs; telecommunications networks. Projects in all of these fields are under way.

4. Police Programs

a. AID was directed by a Presidential letter of 19 February 19627 to examine all these programs and to strengthen them as required.

b. A schedule has been established for the opening of the Inter-American Police Academy, in Panama (1 July 1962).

c. The Department of State has submitted an interim report on the United States policy toward internal defense in foreign countries, as required by NSAM 114.8 A report of an interdepartmental assessment team which made a survey of the internal security situation in ten South American countries was forwarded to the White House on 20 February 1962. Africa is now under review.

5. Miscellaneous

a. The Group has recommended approval of the policy principles outlined by the Department of State, with reference to NSAM 118, “Participation of U.S. and Latin American Armed Forces in the Attainment of Common Objectives in Latin America.”9

b. A committee is at work defining various terms relating to counter-insurgency, and assuring that understanding of them is uniform throughout the government.

c. The South America Assessment Team's report was considered by the Special Group (CI). It was believed to be outside of the terms of reference of the Group, and was referred to the Department of State for coordination of departmental responses.

d. An Army report on Cold War Programs in Latin America10 has been noted by the Group.

e. In response to NSAM 119, on Civic Action,11 special assessment teams are now returning to Washington after surveys in Korea, Burma and seven Latin American countries. A report is to be made to you before the end of March on the additional projects which can be implemented by AID and DOD during the remainder of FY 1962.

f. The Special Group (CI) has agreed that counter-insurgency matters relating to Latin America should be the responsibility of the projected Latin America Policy Committee, except for individual countries may be assigned to the Group for special consideration.

C. Other Activities

The Special Group (CI) has monitored the following activities in the counter-insurgency field. These were initiated, at your direction, before the establishment of the Group.

1. A military command has been set up in South Vietnam, under the direction of General Harkins.

2. The Special Warfare School at Fort Bragg has been enlarged, and more foreign students are being provided for.

3. The Special Forces have acquired a distinctive article of uniform (green beret).

4. The scope of guerrilla warfare training in the armed services has been expanded.

5. South Vietnam is being used as a training command for selected senior colonels and some brigadier generals.

6. Senior officers are being educated in counter-insurgency, and steps are under way to assure that such training and aptitudes are taken into account in future promotions to general officer and flag rank.

7. Officers selected for MAAG and attaché assignments are receiving counter-insurgency training.

8. The rank of the Commander of the Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg has been raised to Brigadier General.

9. Specially qualified general and flag officers have been appointed in each of the services and in the Joint Staff, to coordinate counter-insurgency matters.

10. Senior staff officers are being sent to three geographical areas which have counter-insurgency problems, for the purpose of acquiring direct area knowledge which can be of use in carrying out their duties in Washington.

11. An inventory of U.S. and indigenous paramilitary assets (NSAM 56)12 is almost complete.

12. Test centers have been established in South Vietnam and in Thailand to field test Research and Development items applicable to counter-guerrilla warfare. DOD has initiated a review of counter-insurgency materiel requirements. A preliminary report will be ready within a week.

TA Parrott
Assistant to General Taylor

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Special Warfare II 1962-1963. Secret.

1 Document 68.

2 Meetings were normally held on Thursdays. A chronological set of memoranda of these meetings is in Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI).

3 Not further identified.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 131)

5 Copies of some of these reports are ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 66 D 193, and in Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Countries Series, Vietnam.

6 “A Strategic Concept for Vietnam,” dated February 2. (Ibid., Reports and Memos, 1/62-2/62) It is printed in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. II, Document 42.

7 Document 72.

8 Document 59.

9 See footnote 3, Document 65.

10 Not further identified.

11 Document 65.

12 Document 33.

75. Letter from the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 75. Letter from the Representative to the United Nations (Stevenson) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

New York, April 9, 1962.

Dear Walt: I have gone over with interest your paper on Basic National Security Policy1 and take the liberty of submitting a few comments.

The paper obviously covers a great deal of ground and with much of what is said I am in entire agreement. What troubles me about it is primarily a matter of emphasis and balance, not so much what is said as what is not said.

It seems to me (1) that the paper concentrates almost entirely on the contest with Communism and how to win it, and (2) that, even within that restricted framework, disproportionate emphasis is laid on the military factor. Certainly no one would deny that the successful conduct of the struggle with Communism is central to the maintenance of our national security and national purposes, or that a very strong military deterrent together with other military, including counterguerilla, capabilities are vital components of a successful national strategy.2 My concern is that certain other equally important elements are passed over very cursorily, leaving the impression that their place in our national strategy is relatively inconsequential.

I have felt, long before taking on my present job, that the multilateral framework existing in the United Nations and its related agencies created for the United States both opportunities and duties which can contribute substantially to the achievement of our national purposes. Even if one narrows his interest to the struggle against Communism, certainly the eventual orientation of the Afro-Asians and Latin-Americans is a factor which in a hot war could be most significant, in a prolonged cold war competition could be decisive.

Our two chief instruments for influencing these nations are (1) economic and military aid and (2) our policies and tactics in the UN and its subsidiaries. Of course there are many other of our national purposes and national interests which are closely involved in the UN and which have little or nothing to do with our struggle against Communism. Yet the original draft of the Security Policy paper3 touched on the UN only in the most sketchy fashion and, while the re-draft is an improvement, it still falls decidedly short of what I would consider adequate to balance other elements in the paper. I therefore strongly urge that this section be again reviewed with IO and substantially more of the material supplied to S/P by IO be incorporated. We have submitted detailed comments to IO for this purpose.

Another most significant area in which it seems to me the paper is seriously out of balance is in the relative emphasis it places, on the one hand, on the development of military and political means of combating the Communist threat and, on the other, the development of equally essential means of controlling nuclear weapons systems which, as they are refined, magnified and proliferated, tend to become an even more critical threat to our national security and our national purposes. True, the latter subject is dealt with in the paper but it seems to be largely subordinated to the other aim in a fashion which makes me doubt whether, if the directives of the paper were scrupulously followed, we should ever escape from the self-defeating, even though temporarily necessary, escalation in which we are now engaged.

To be more specific, in the basic section entitled “The Setting”, pp 3-5, there is only the most tangential and cloudy reference to the fact that an essential element of the setting is that at present our national security could be largely nullified and most of our national purposes frustrated in a matter of days or hours, simply by accident or miscalculation. (In this connection I would contest most strenuously the assertion (p. 78) that “The possibilities of a nuclear war coming about by accident or miscalculation are statistically real if, on the whole, unlikely.”)

Proceeding from this incomplete account of the setting, the paper immediately moves on to “The Clash” and “The Threat” which concentrate almost exclusively on dealing with the Communist threat. The paper then proceeds to an “Outline of Strategy” in which Military Policy is given a probably unavoidable priority but in which that policy is described in terms of “a stable military environment”, than which no imaginable conception could under present circumstances be in my opinion more unrealistic or more dangerously misleading. Is it in fact possible to recall any time in history when the military environment has been less stable or more perilous to humanity and to civilization?

Later in this 285 page document “Arms Control” is briefly treated pp. 76-84. In the section on “Relations with Communist Nations” there are three paragraphs pp. 176-178 on “The possibility of a detente” and “Negotiation”, but these two subjects are treated very gingerly as though both detente and negotiation were instruments more likely to profit totalitarian than democratic states, an assumption for which I see no justification.

Let me reiterate in conclusion that with much of the paper I am in enthusiastic agreement. The extensive attention given throughout to “building a community of free nations”, which involves both strengthening our ties with Western Europe, and contributing to the economic and political development of Latin America, Asia and Africa, is certainly admirable. So are many of the proposals, military and non-military, for dealing more effectively with the Communist threat.

But I remain deeply troubled by what seems to me the dangerous underemphasis on the threat of uncontrolled nuclear weapons systems to our national security, and on the failure to recognize and utilize adequately multilateral instrumentalities for the pursuit of our national goals.

Sincerely yours,

Adlai E. Stevenson

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

1 Reference is to the March 26 draft of “Basic National Security Policy;” see Document 70.

2 Next to this sentence Rostow wrote the following marginal note: “I don't, but I can see how he would.”

3 Apparent reference to the February 24 draft, the first of the Rostow drafts to be widely circulated.

76. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 76. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, April 12, 1962.

JCSM-277-62

SUBJECT

Basic National Security Policy (U)

1. The Department of State draft Basic National Security Policy1 referred to in the memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of Defense (ISA) dated 31 March 19622 has been reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the Department of State draft will meet their requirements for national guidance in discharge of their statutory responsibilities if the substance of the modifications accompanying this memorandum is incorporated therein. These modifications conform with the earlier views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the Basic National Security Policy submitted to you in July 1961,3 which are hereby reaffirmed.

3. The following general comments are submitted. Specific comments are attached hereto.4

a. Over-all: The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider it essential that security policy which results from the current considerations specifically recognizes that effective deterrence to any sort of military threat, or to an expansion of any conflict, has as its basis the evident military capability to defeat the forces being deterred. While many other variable factors contribute to effective deterrence, this requirement to defeat the enemy is constant and must be satisfied.

b. Over-all: The Joint Chiefs of Staff also consider it essential that the policy provide for control of sea areas and sea lanes vital to the survival of the United States, to the protection of our maritime commerce, and to the support of US and Allied forces overseas.

c. In Part I: Doctrine. There appears to be undue emphasis throughout the section that divisive factors in the Communist Bloc such as nationalism, desire for improved standards of living, and impulses for human freedom move toward “a reduction in thrust toward the external world…” While these forces tend in this direction, insufficient emphasis is placed upon the still existing strong Police State apparatuses—police, party, military—immediately available to check these tendencies before any threat to the regime can occur, or the probable use of these instruments should the men in power require them.

d. In Part II: A Strategy. The NATO strategy now included in Chapter III, The Framework of Organizations, paragraphs 13-17, pages 129-135, would be more appropriate for inclusion in Chapter I Military Policy.5

e. In Part III: National Security Council Planning Tasks. The list includes many of the significant unresolved problems affecting Basic National Security Policy. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the terms of reference and specific tasks outlined are not appropriate for NSC action and Presidential decision. As you will note, many of the military studies are currently being conducted under more specific terms of reference as developed within the Department of Defense. It is suggested that Part III be forwarded only for information and approval of the statement of the problem and that the Department responsible for conducting the studies develop specific tasks with consideration for the draft terms of reference.

f. Part IV: The Anticipation of Crises

(1) This concept has been addressed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and their recommendations forwarded in JCSM-562-61, dated 30 November 1961, subject, “National Cold War Procedures”.6

(2) It is noted in reviewing Part IV that no consideration has been given to the desirability of the United States creating crises to our own advantage. The Joint Chiefs of Staff suggest that it would be desirable to have the organization capability in-being for this eventuality.

g. The security classification of Secret is considered inadequate for control of this document. A Top Secret classification coupled with an injunction to authorize dissemination only on a “need to know” basis is considered appropriate for the Part II: A Strategy, with other sections classified according to content.

h. The general theme that there has been a shift in the communist threat from direct to indirect aggression does not acknowledge that this situation has been created, to a great extent, by US and Allied capabilities to deter overt communist aggression. The US goal must be to maintain forces which, at a minimum, confine the communist activities to indirect aggression while at the same time, provide the capabilities to cope effectively with that situation.

i. As the economy of the European nations improves, they should provide a greater proportion of the forces in Europe.

j. It is noted that the document—by stressing stability, peace and the theme of co-existence—does not give the true thrust of the new BNSP which is much more forcefully stated in paragraph 6, The Projection Abroad of US Purposes, page 214. It is suggested that this paragraph be inserted at the end of paragraph 1, Introduction.7

k. The utility of the document would be improved if condensed as much as practicable without sacrificing continuity or completeness. It should also be rearranged to provide a concise statement of basic principles, long-range objectives and short-range objectives.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the draft volume of BNSP is currently under review by the several departments of the Government. Therefore, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider it essential that they be afforded an opportunity to review this document again when the changes have been incorporated, and prior to its submission to the National Security Council. In this regard, it would appear most appropriate, and advantageous to later review, if the Joint Chiefs of Staff, or their representatives, could be invited to participate actively in the collection of comments and the preparation of this redraft—particularly those areas concerning the military aspects of national security policy.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:L.L. Lemnitzer8
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Folder 40A22. Secret. Forwarded to Taylor with a covering note from Vice Admiral Herbert D. Riley, Director of the Joint Staff. Another copy is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/52.

1 Reference is to the March 26 draft; see Document 70.

2 Not found.

3 See Document 39.

4 A 20-page Appendix is attached to the Department of State copy cited in the source note above. One change requested is that language in the March 26 draft calling for conventional forces “sufficiently substantial so that they could, in conjunction with available allied troops, contain non-nuclear aggression short of all out Soviet or Chinese Communist attack without using nuclear weapons” be changed to a specification for forces able to contain the attack “long enough to demonstrate our determination to resist even at the risk of expansion of the conflict to nuclear war.”

5 The equivalent section of the May 7 draft remains in the section on “Framework of Organization.” See Document 83.

6 Not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1735/598, JMF 3310 (12 Jun 61))

7 This paragraph reads: “It is also essential to project abroad a more clear and vivid concept of our aims and of the measures we are taking to move towards them. The understandable difficulties within a pluralistic society of developing and presenting such a concept make it all the more important that the government act consistently and with vigor to project a positive image of U.S. intentions, as developed in this paper, and to dissipate the corrosive conception that our policy is defensive, negative, and reactive.” The paragraph is expanded in the May 7 draft (see Document 83), but remains in the section on “The Domestic Base.”

8 Printed from a copy that indicates Lemnitzer signed the original.

77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 13, 1962.

I have been unconscionably slow in responding to your great draft of BNSP.1 Even now I am still pulling together my detailed thoughts, but I want to send you a few comments in connection with the preparation of the agenda for Tuesday.2

I myself question whether, when we come to action, we shall want to approve as national policy a document anything like as long or as fully argued as this one. I doubt very much if we can achieve consensus or clear Presidential approval on anything as comprehensive as this, and I also think that, to secure effective attention to the things we really do care about, we need to put them more sharply and briefly. This pudding has most of the plums, but I think they should be pulled out and made more feasible.

I have a grave reservation about the notions implied by the words “doctrine” and “strategy” in connection with basic policy. They imply that our attitudes are “doctrinaire” and our activities all bound by some single “strategic” concept. I think neither proposition is correct, and I much prefer the simple and traditional word “policy.” I do not think this is just a terminological difference.

The paper seems to me to imply a kind of equal and adequate effort everywhere, and I think both abroad and at home we have to have a clear sense of limits, and of priorities.

Having said all this, I regard the paper as much the most important forward move that has taken place in the area of framing basic policy positions since we came in, and for its military passages alone it seems to me to justify its existence.

These are brief and sweeping comments, and I will try to be ready to justify them specifically on Tuesday.

McG. B.3

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 3/26/62. No classification marking.

1 Reference is to the March 26 draft; see Document 70.

2 April 17. Apparent reference to a meeting of the Planning Group, no record of which has been found. In a 10-page memorandum to Rostow dated April 23, Bundy reiterated the points he made in this memorandum and then made a detailed critique of the paper. At many points he objected to terms such as “national strategy,” “hard core,” and “ideology.” He called for separation of Parts Three and Four from the draft paper and a drastic reduction in the number of planning tasks. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 3/26/62)

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

78. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 78. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Rowen) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, April 14, 1962.

SUBJECT

Draft Basic National Security Policy (BNSP)

The Tuesday luncheon meeting of the Planning Group is scheduled to discuss the draft BNSP (Tab A)1 on 17 April 1962.2

The draft BNSP is a commendable effort to describe a coherent national security policy. It goes far toward meeting the frequently expressed need for a “grand design” to which diverse activities and day-to-day designs of government can be related. The key concepts in this design appear to be four: (1) Free World defense

(2) Free World construction

(3) Communication with the Communist world

(4) As a result of the first three concepts, containment and ultimate alteration of the Communist world in a direction more favorable to our national interests.

On the whole, the coverage of (1) and (2) is quite good. It is in (3) and (4) where the BNSP seems to require some clarification. ISA comments on selected portions only of the draft BNSP are attached and are summarized herewith:3

Defense of the Free World (Inclosure 1)

That more explicit observations as expressed in the inclosure be included in the BNSP.

Political Decisions in Nuclear War (Inclosure 2)

Revise to: indicate broadly the level and nature of nuclear warfare decisions held centralized by the President; and include reference to the inviolability of the legal chain of military command in executing such Presidential decisions.

European Community Compared with an Atlantic Community (Inclosure 3)

Revise to reflect: Before settling finally on a policy of supporting full European unity and a relationship of partnership between a united Europe and the U.S., the U.S. should carefully study the feasibility and the relative desirability of selective moves in the direction of strengthening Atlantic political as well as economic and military ties.

Policy Toward Satellites (Inclosure 4)

Revise to reflect that the threat of instability in Satellite countries imposes some restraint on Soviet aggressiveness and that we should therefore find ways to remind the Soviet leadership of this vulnerability.

Policy Toward the Far East (Inclosure 5)

Revise to reflect: a. That military policy toward the Far East, covering nations which are (a) allied or friendly, (b) neutral, and (c) hostile, should be covered more fully and in greater detail, in order to provide greater guidance to those responsible for its execution.

b. That the status, present and projected, of the GRC and its relationship to Communist China, as visualized in U.S. strategy, be clarified.

c. That any policy leading toward abandoning the offshore islands be carefully examined in all its ramifications, especially with respect to its timing, before adoption.

d. That existing treaties covering the Far East be re-examined with a view to increasing their effectiveness, prior to creating substitute pacts.

Potential or Limitations of Conventional Forces (Inclosure 6)

Revise to reflect: a. The desirability as an objective of general purpose forces which along with Allied forces are sufficiently strong and mobile to cope with major Soviet or Chinese Communist non-nuclear attacks, without resorting to nuclear weapons, simultaneously on two distant fronts. However, a distinction should be made between the importance of various areas and the feasibility of defending them without the use of nuclear weapons.

b. That efforts to develop adequate counter-insurgency capabilities in our own as well as Allied forces and to put more emphasis on economic as distinct from military assistance programs not be carried to the point that conventional capabilities are seriously degraded in countries exposed to overt aggression and such aggression therefore made more tempting.

JCS Comments:

The comments of the JCS are attached and are summarized herewith:4

JCS Comments Recommended OSD Position

a. Effective deterrence must have as its basis the evident military capability to defeat the forces being deterred. a. Concur, with some elaboration of the word “defeat” in the general war context in the light of the consequences of nuclear war.

b. Provide for control of vital sea areas and sea lanes. b. Concur.

c. Undue emphasis on divisive factors in the Communist Bloc. c. Broadly concur.

d. Move NATO strategy from Chapter III to Chapter I. d. Concur.

e. Terms of reference and specific tasks of National Security Policy planning tasks are not appropriate for NSC action and Presidential decision. Forward Part III formally for information and approval of the statement of the problem. e. Concur.

f. It would be desirable to have the organizational capability in-being to create crises to our own advantage. f. OSD recommends that the point be further developed before a position is taken.

g. Upgrade the classification to Top Secret coupled with dissemination of Part II on a “need-to-know” basis. g. OSD believes that document should be screened for minimum feasible classification.

h. U.S. maintain forces which, at a minimum, confine the Communist activities to indirect aggression, while at the same time, provide the capabilities to cope effectively with that situation. h. Concur.

i. European nations should provide greater proportion of the forces in Europe. i. Concur.

j. Insert Para. 6, page 214, at end of para. 1, Introduction. j. Concur.

k. Condense and rearrange the BNSP as much as practicable. k. Concur.

l. JCS review BNSP again prior to its submission to the NSC. Representatives of JCS participate in the preparation of the redraft. l. Concur.

An advance copy of this memorandum with inclosures and the comments of the JCS have been provided to Mr. Rostow. This was necessary in order to meet the deadline for State's reproduction requirements. State understands that this copy is subject to your review.

It is recommended that the Secretary of Defense:

a. Authorize use of this memorandum and that from the JCS (Tabbed) as a basis for discussion by the OSD representative with Mr. Rostow at the Planning Group meeting, 17 April 1962.5

b. Sign the attached memorandum to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff.6

Henry S. Rowen

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 2101/469, JMF 3001 (26 Mar 62). Secret. Enclosed with a note from the Secretaries of the Joint Staff to the JCS dated April 20.

1 Reference is to the March 26 draft; see Document 70.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

3 None of the enclosures is printed.

4 Not found attached; reference is to Document 76.

5 A note by Gilpatric in the margin beside this paragraph reads: “4/16/62 approved. RG” In a memorandum for the record of a conversation held with McNamara on April 18, Taylor wrote: “The Secretary likes this document [the March 26 draft] as a form of general guidance, but recognizes that considerable work has to be done upon the language. He appreciates the fact that to make it a text for strict guidance to the departments would require extensive and time-consuming editing, an exercise which he does not consider remunerative.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, #11 Miscellaneous (H))

6 This memorandum transmitted Rowen's memorandum to the JCS.

79. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 79. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

Comments on March 26 Draft BNSP

1. The world as viewed in this document divides neatly into two parts—a free world and a Communist world. Although the ambiguous position of a nation like Yugoslavia is recognized in detail, such details are not reflected in the grand scheme. The free world is defined by exclusion as simply the whole world minus the Communist bloc, and is referred to either as the free community or as the evolving free community of nations. In this context our security policy rests on two simple propositions. First, we should guard the boundaries of the free world, i.e., prevent any movement of nations from the free world to the Bloc (pp 8-11, 14-16). Second, this is a feasible task. We can always succeed in preventing any undesirable change by the proper combination of the threat of military force, the application of military force, including counter-subversive and counter-guerrilla force, and the provision of economic aid. The use of other instruments of diplomacy is also recognized, but given a lesser place (pp 22-31).

2. These axioms imply two further propositions. First, Communism is an aberration on the path of political-economic development. No nation becomes Communist mainly because the Communist forces within it form the best organized, most aggressive, most able political group whose appeal to rising political elites—university students, army officers, would-be prophets of national development—is strong enough to carry the day. Not only did Marx not proclaim the universal truth; he proclaimed the universal myth, false in all instances. It is Communist subversion and indirect aggressions, Soviet or Chinese led, not social revolution internally generated, that is the cause.

That the present balance of membership between the free community of nations and the Communist bloc is the optimum balance is the second major corollary of the two fundamental propositions. Indeed if the world does divide neatly into two parts and the smaller part is trying to expand at the expense of the larger, there is something obvious about the proposition that it is in the interests of the larger part to resist such a shift. Even at this level of analysis, however, obvious does not equal correct. If, for example, we were to observe that the costs of our resisting expansion are related to the strength of the expansive impulse on the other side and, further, if we suspected that the strength of the expansive impulses might obey the familiar dynamic law of proportionality to the difference between the present situation and the pre-set goal (e.g., world domination), then we can see a simple counter-example to the truth of the obvious proposition.

3. There is an alternative view of the world which appears more useful for the purposes of defining national policy. From our own perspective, the world is divided into at least three, rather than two, parts, the boundary lines of which are by no means well-defined or firm. One part consists of the U.S. and the nations most closely associated with it in terms of fundamental security interests: the NATO Alliance. Another group consists of the Sino-Soviet bloc. Other nations have attachments to these two groups of different degrees of permanence and strength. The essential problem of our security policy is at the minimum to prevent a significant shift in the balance of power between the two polar groups and, to the extent consistent with other constraints on our policy, to increase the unity, power and influence of our own group at the expense of the Bloc. The constraints which operate to limit the means available and appropriate to this purpose fall broadly into two classes: those arising from our nature as an individualistic, voluntaristic, democratic society and those arising from the limitations of our own power and that of the group of nations with whom we are most intimately bound. An important part of the limitations of our own power arises from the fact that, while the other NATO nations have goals closely similar to ours, they are not in fact identical, and we deal with them by consensus rather than direction. Although, logically, it falls into the first category of constraints on our policy, the awful character of thermonuclear war deserves mention as a separate constraint. Its consequences for the character and possibly the survival of our civil society are such that it becomes an instrument of policy whose uses are sharply limited.

From the polar Soviet perspective the world looks much the same, and our problem is to some extent the converse of theirs. We say “to some extent” because the role of an ideological doctrine in the Soviet world perspective has no parallel in our own world view. The doctrine of freedom in individual and national choice is not one that readily fills a parallel role to the doctrine of universal class struggle ending in the ultimate triumph of communism.

The draft BNSP cogently states the significance of the revolution of modernization which is sweeping the under-developed two-thirds of the world as the environment in which the contest between ourselves and the Bloc is taking place. It also properly states our hopes in respect to this struggle. However, we must interpose a calculus of cost between our hopes and our goals, and it is in this calculus of cost that the draft is deficient.

4. It is clear that an entirely different order of priority attaches to maintaining the integrity and unity of the inner group of nations with which we are closely allied. This high priority is reflected both in the major significance that NATO has in our military policy and in the framework of organizational arrangements for economic and political cooperation within the North Atlantic community. Our military commitments to defend at least these areas is on a par with our military commitment to the defense of the United States itself. This commitment is central to the intimacy of political and economic relations within the area. It is an important question as to how far we extend this framework to include Australia, New Zealand and Japan. One question that arises in this connection, is the extent to which China will grow to possess military power that threatens these nations to the same extent that Soviet military power threatens Western Europe.

5. For the other parts of the world, our commitments are hard to state in general a priori terms. In general, we do, as the draft states, wish to help nations on the path to modernization and self-realization, with a political orientation at least neutral as between ourselves and the Bloc, other things being equal. And by the same token, other things being equal, we wish to prevent, if we can, any nation from joining the Bloc, or orienting itself strongly to it. But it is difficult to say something less general and abstract. In a given situation, we must evaluate all factors to decide what kind of extension of Bloc influence or power raises what kind of questions for us of countering it on the one hand; and on the other, what means to attempt to counter it are available at what costs and with what prospects of success. In general, it would appear safe to say that in most cases we would resist direct expansion of Bloc power by overt military means, but even here it is difficult to make strong over-all commitments. If the Chinese Communists infiltrate Burma, and follow this infiltration by an overt march across the borders of Burma, which the Burmese do not resist, are we prepared in fact to respond? If not, can we successfully communicate to the Chinese Communists the sense that we are? If after five more years of growth of Soviet influence in the Afghan Army, that Army revolts, overthrows the present regime and invites the assistance of the Soviets in their revolt, how should we be prepared to respond?

At all those lesser levels of violence covered by the phrase “indirect aggression and subversion,” the difficulty of stating any general policy line is even greater. A primary instrument—perhaps even in fact a necessary condition—in successful resistance to indirect aggression is local leadership with a will to resist and significant popular support (though not necessarily majority support in any conventional sense). There is a serious problem of how far we in fact are able to go, as well as how far we are ready to go in creating such governments where they do not exist. If Nkrumah1 allows himself to be influenced more and more by Moscow-trained and Moscow-oriented members of his government, can we in fact do much about it and even if we can, should we try?

6. The conclusion to be drawn with respect to our policy in the large part of the world outside our own central group and the Soviet Bloc is that we proceed here on a case-by-case method. To be sure we start with some sense of relevant priorities, some calculus of costs and returns. It is obviously of far greater importance to our own policy goals to keep India on its present somewhat western-oriented neutral path than it is to keep Burma from being infiltrated by Chinese Communists, and we should behave accordingly. In Latin America, it is far more important to try to keep Argentina and Brazil economically progressing and politically stable than it is to prevent Georgetown from becoming a quasi-Communist capital.

7. The perspective here sketched has obvious implications for both aid policy and military policy. While it remains true that there are reasons for giving aid not intimately connected with the orientation of a nation in the contest between ourselves and the Bloc, it also remains true that we cannot ignore this contest in determining aid priorities. The whole argument for giving Latin America a special priority is a political one, not one based on development criteria.

What we are prepared to defend by military means, and what we state or suggest we are prepared to defend, is still the key element in the application of our power. Ultimately it is these commitments, explicit and implicit, which form the framework of our foreign policy, since they give substantive content to the term “vital interest” used in a literal sense. Therefore, the difference in perspective suggested here makes an important difference in the way we view our military responsibilities and accordingly in the way we determine our military needs.

8. If these criticisms and comments are well taken, one appropriate way to meet them is by changing the organization in the draft so that it reflects priorities in our security policy to a greater extent than it now does. In particular, it would appear appropriate immediately after discussion of the nature of the threat and the world environment in which it operates to discuss our relations with NATO; to follow this by discussion of other areas of strong interest, e.g., Latin America and Japan; and then to discuss other parts of the world in general terms along the lines of the present draft.

CK

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

1 Kwame Nkrumah, President of Ghana.

80. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 80. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

Washington, April 23, 1962.

Dear Walt:

The Easter week end allowed me to re-read the text of your Basic National Security Policy,1 and to develop several additional thoughts beyond those previously submitted to you.

a. Dual Capability Military Forces

I feel that the BNSP should contain a clear statement of policy with regard to the dual capability desired in our Armed Forces. This refers, of course, to their ability for sustained combat, either with or without the use of atomic weapons. Several years ago the Army made this dual capability its objective and has developed its forces with reasonable consistency to this principle. The Air Force, and to a lesser degree the Navy, went the other way, assuming that atomic weapons would henceforth be used with little limitation. For them to change completely now would be a very expensive operation, and with respect to strategic weapons, undesirable—all the more reason for giving specific guidance.

b. The Role of Tactical Atomic Weapons

To my knowledge there has never been a comprehensive statement of national policy on the role of tactical atomic weapons in the Armed Forces. Such statements as have been made on this subject have been confused by failure to define what are tactical atomic weapons. In the course of time, this term has come to mean those weapons employed by the Army or delivered by tactical aircraft. Thus, they vary in yield from the very small Army Davy Crockett to the megaton weapons transportable in tactical aircraft.

Obviously, there is little in common either as to use or effects of weapons of such differing characteristics. In my view, we should divide this category into two parts: One, those for short-range battlefield employment varying in yield from a few tons of TNT to a few KT; the second, the interdiction weapons which would include the higher yields among the present tactical weapons. The interdiction weapons would be used to keep hostile ground forces from the battlefield. The small atomic weapons would be used to destroy the enemy at relatively close range with discrimination and without significant fallout hazard to our own troops or friendly populations. Something like this needs to be said in the BNSP.

c. Modernization of NATO Forces

I do not believe that the present text of the BNSP recognizes specifically the need to modernize NATO atomic weapons. I was impressed during my recent visit to Europe with the interest, particularly of the Germans, in our modernization policy. They will never be content to be told that the weapons on the continent will gradually disappear to be replaced by better ones over the horizon, perhaps, in the United States. It is perfectly clear that the so-called external nuclear forces have no application to the battlefield requirements which can be met only by the small atomic weapons mentioned in the preceding paragraph. To Germans concerned with the safety of Hamburg and Munich, it is no reassurance to know that SAC or, for that matter, a NATO MRBM force at sea is looking after their interests.

d. Resistance to Aggression Without Using Atomic Weapons

Is it impossible for the BNSP to give some guidance as to the size of an aggression which we should be able to meet without resort to atomic weapons? I understand the difficulty of expressing dimensions, but am often impressed with the difference in time apparently present in the minds of people discussing the “pause” to be imposed by conventional weapons. To some in General Norstad's headquarters, this seems to mean a very short time, or perhaps no time at all after contact with the enemy has been made. Elsewhere one talks in term of days, or perhaps weeks. Between these extremes, there is a very wide range of requirements in friendly forces to impose the pause. It would be interesting to war game a NATO-Warsaw Pact conflict to determine the difference in forces required to hold one day against a full onslaught versus the forces needed to hold for eight days.

e. A Multilateral NATO MRBM Force

With completely smooth sailing, it will take five or six years to produce the weapons and organization necessary for the multilateral NATO MRBM force as presently conceived. If this force has any utility—and its utility can be argued—it is to satisfy the Germans who, reportedly, have a deep feeling on this subject. If the latter is true, will they be willing to wait five or six years to get it? I would think that if we are sincere in supporting this later force, we would be scrounging about to get an interim solution in a much shorter time based on the employment of existing weapons. I find nothing in the BNSP on this subject.

A final general comment would be to suggest the inclusion of more unresolved points in your Part Three. I am sure that the comments which you have received from those reading the BNSP reveal disagreement on a good many points which are now in the foreword part of the text. Where a solution to the disagreements is not possible in the relatively short time available, you might want to move the issues back into your Part Three. Here we would find our unfinished business and our homework for a number of months to come.

Hoping that I am not too late for the foregoing observations,

Sincerely,

Maxwell D. Taylor2

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T-138-69. Secret.

1 Reference is to the March 26 draft; see Document 70.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

81. Editorial Note 81. Editorial Note

On April 25, 1962, the U.S. Intelligence Board circulated NIE 13-2-62, “Chinese Communist Advanced Weapons Capabilities.” The Estimate acknowledged important gaps in available information and therefore did not attempt to predict the year in which deployment of a complete weapons system would probably begin. Regarding a Chinese nuclear test, the Estimate concluded: “Assuming an accelerated and highly successful program for the production of plutonium since 1960, the Chinese Communists could detonate an all-plutonium device in early 1963. However, in the light of all the evidence, it is unlikely that the Chinese will meet such a schedule. We believe that the first Chinese test would probably be delayed beyond 1963, perhaps by as much as several years.” The Air Force dissented, believing that a plutonium explosion was “likely” by 1963 and that if this occurred, it would be within Chinese capabilities to test a thermonuclear device “by the end of the decade.” The Navy, on the other hand, believed there was insufficient evidence to make any “reliable estimate of the Chinese Communist program in the development of nuclear weapons.”

The Estimate also concluded that a nuclear weapons program had been underway in China since the early 1950s, and a guided missile program since the late 1950s; that the Chinese program had received substantial Soviet assistance until about mid-1960; that any attempt to mass-produce advanced weapons would be difficult for China; that China would need 2 or more years after its first nuclear test to develop fission weapons for nuclear warheads, and that it would probably not undertake to develop surface-to-air missiles until at least the mid-1960s; that “within the next few years, the Chinese could begin to deploy short-range (up to 350 n.m.) surface-to-surface missiles with nonnuclear warheads”; and that “in more advanced fields—submarine missile systems, IRBMs, ICBMs, antimissile systems, and thermonuclear weapons—China [was] not likely to achieve independent capabilities during the 1960s.” (Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry) For complete text, see the Supplement.

82. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council 82. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic CouncilSource

Athens, May 5, 1962.

[Here follows an introductory section.]

I. General Nuclear War and Its Deterrence

Nuclear technology has revolutionized warfare over the past seventeen years. The unprecedented destructiveness of these arms has radically changed ways of thinking about conflict among nations. It has properly focused great attention and efforts by the Alliance on the prevention of conflict. Nevertheless, the U.S. has come to the conclusion that to the extent feasible basic military strategy in general nuclear war should be approached in much the same way that more conventional military operations have been regarded in the past. That is to say, our principal military objectives, in the event of a nuclear war stemming from a major attack on the Alliance, should be the destruction of the enemy's military forces while attempting to preserve the fabric as well as the integrity of allied society. Specifically, our studies indicate that a strategy which targets nuclear forces only against cities or a mixture of civil and military targets has serious limitations for the purpose of deterrence and for the conduct of general nuclear war.

In our best judgment, destroying enemy forces while preserving our own societies is—within the limits inherent in the great power of nuclear weapons—a not wholly unattainable military objective. Even if very substantial exchanges of nuclear weapons were to occur, the damage suffered by the belligerents would vary over wide ranges, depending upon the targets that are hit. If both sides were to confine their attacks to important military targets, damage, while high, would nevertheless be significantly lower than if urban-industrial areas were also attacked. As an example, our studies of a hypothetical general nuclear war occurring in 1966 show that, with the conflict starting under one particular set of circumstances, and with the Soviets confining their attacks to military targets, the United States under present civil defense plans might suffer 25 million deaths and Europe might suffer somewhat fewer. On the other hand, were the Soviets to attack urban-industrial as well as military targets, the United States might incur 75 million deaths and Europe would have to face the prospect of losing 115 million people. While both sets of figures make grim reading, the first set is preferable to the second. There are others like them.

In the light of these findings the United States has developed its plans in order to permit a variety of strategic choices. We have also instituted a number of programs which will enable the Alliance to engage in a controlled and flexible nuclear response in the event that deterrence should fail. Whether the Soviet Union will do likewise must remain uncertain. All we can say is that the Kremlin has very strong incentives—in large part provided by the nuclear strength of the Alliance—to adopt similar strategies and programs. Thus, we calculate that in 1966, if the Alliance were to limit its retaliatory attack to miltary targets in the Soviet Union, while holding superior forces in reserve, the Soviets might suffer around 25 million deaths, whereas if we attack urban-industrial targets in the wake of a Soviet strike against European and American cities, the Soviets would suffer at least 100 million deaths.

Other factors besides target strategies of the belligerents would determine the damage in a thermo-nuclear war. The yields of the warheads used in a nuclear exchange would make a significant difference in the amount of blast, thermal, and fallout damage; and it is possible to match the yields to the particular targets under attack and so reduce damage to civilians. Furthermore, as the accuracy of missiles improves, the belligerents could attack targets with greater assurance of destroying them; they could also reduce the yields with which they strike. If they so choose, they could regulate the height at which they burst their weapons and thereby affect the amount of fallout that is distributed. The existence of civil defenses also could have a significant impact on the number of deaths, especially if only military targets are attacked so that the principal danger to most civilians is from fallout. Depending on these and other factors, the number of deaths could vary over a wide range—by four times or more. The more discriminating the attacks, the less the damage.

I have raised these points because we think they are relevant to allied defense policies now and in the future. In particular, we believe that they have important implications for the general war posture of the Alliance and the role that NATO should assign to nuclear forces in its grand strategy.

II. The General War Posture of the Alliance

Perhaps the most important implication of these observations is that nuclear superiority has important meanings. I want to stress that for the most relevant planning period—through the mid 1960's—there can be little question about the ability of the Alliance to maintain nuclear superiority over the Sino-Soviet Bloc. During the coming fiscal year the United States plans to spend close to $15 billion on its nuclear weapons to assure such superiority.

[Here follows a description of the U.S. strategic retaliatory arsenal, target coverage of the threat to Europe, survivability and control, and indivisibility of control.]

III. The Role of General War Strength in Alliance Strategy

What does the Alliance accomplish by creating this complex machinery to maintain nuclear superiority over the Sino-Soviet Bloc? And what is the impact on NATO's policies of both the grave damage that would result from nuclear war and the great variations in that damage under different strategies?

My Government feels that the strategic capabilities I have described have important political consequences. The Alliance continues to possess much of the diplomatic freedom that it has enjoyed in the past. We can confidently reject the missile threats that Mr. Krushchev so imprudently brandishes. If the Soviets or their satellites impinge on our interests we can resist with considerable confidence that our antagonists will not wish to escalate the conflict. The question at issue now is the point at which NATO, not the Soviets, would wish to escalate a non-nuclear conflict.

As the President has indicated on a number of occasions, the United States is prepared to respond immediately with nuclear weapons to the use of nuclear weapons against one or more members of the Alliance. The United States is also prepared to counter with nuclear weapons any Soviet conventional attack so strong that it cannot be dealt with by conventional means. But let us be quite clear what we are saying and what we have to face. Owing to our non-nuclear deficiencies, there is, first, a high probability that in an ambiguous situation the West, not the East, would have to make the decision to initiate the use of nuclear weapons. Secondly, there is the almost certain prospect that, despite our nuclear superiority and our ability to destroy the Soviet target system, all of us will suffer deeply in the event of major nuclear war.

The Berlin crisis exemplifies a type of threat that we should expect to face elsewhere in the NATO area. In such a crisis the provocation, while severe, does not immediately require or justify our most violent reaction. Also as such a crisis develops, as military force is threatened or becomes engaged—even in limited quantities—the increasingly alert nuclear posture of the belligerents makes the prospective outcome of a nuclear attack for both sides even less attractive.

In short, faced with the more likely contingencies, NATO, not the Soviets, would have to make the momentous decision to use nuclear weapons, and we would do so in the knowledge that the consequences might be catastrophic for all of us.

We in the United States are prepared to accept our share of this responsibility. And we believe that the combination of our nuclear superiority and a strategy of controlled response gives us some hope of minimizing damage in the event that we have to fulfill our pledge. But I would be less than candid if I pretended to you that the United States regards this as a desirable prospect or believes that the Alliance should depend solely on our nuclear power to deter the Soviet Union from actions not involving a massive commitment of Soviet force. Surely an Alliance with the wealth, talent, and expression that we possess can find a better way than this to meet our common threat.

We shall continue to maintain powerful nuclear forces for the Alliance as a whole. They will continue to provide the Alliance a strong sanction against Soviet first use of nuclear weapons. Under some circumstances they may be the only instrument with which we can counter Soviet non-nuclear aggression, in which case we should use them. But, in our view, the threat of general war should constitute only one of the several weapons in our arsenal and one to be used with prudence. On this question I can see no valid reason for a fundamental difference of view on the two sides of the Atlantic.

IV. Tactical Use of Nuclear Weapons

Our great nuclear superiority for general war does not solve all our problems of deterring and dealing with less than all-out direct assault. What, then, is the prospect that NATO can fall back on the local or tactical use of nuclear weapons? Battlefield nuclear weapons were introduced in NATO at a time when our Shield forces were weak and the Soviet atomic stockpile was small. In these circumstances it was reasonable to hope that NATO might very quickly halt a Soviet advance into Western Europe by unilateral application of nuclear weapons on or near the battlefield. Using nuclear weapons tactically might still accomplish a desired end in the early 1960's. Consequently, we continue to maintain substantial nuclear forces within the European theater and we now have over [omission in the source text] nuclear weapons of various yields stockpiled in Europe.

But how much dependence should NATO place on these capabilities? We should succeed in deterring the Soviets from initiating the use of nuclear weapons, and the presence of these weapons in Europe helps to prevent Soviet use locally. But NATO can no longer expect to avoid nuclear retaliation in the event that it initiates their use. Even a local nuclear exchange could have consequences for Europe that are most painful to contemplate. Further, such an exchange would be unlikely to give us any marked military advantage. It could rapidly lead to general nuclear war.

To be sure, a very limited use of nuclear weapons, primarily for purposes of demonstrating our will and intent to employ such weapons, might bring Soviet aggression to a halt without substantial retaliation, and without escalation. This is a next-to-last option we cannot dismiss. But prospects for success are not high, and I hesitate to predict what the political consequences would be of taking such action. It is also conceivable that the limited tactical use of nuclear weapons on the battlefield would not broaden a conventional engagement or radically transform it. But we do not rate these prospects very highly.

Highly dispersed nuclear weapons in the hands of troops would be difficult to control centrally. Accidents and unauthorized acts could well occur on both sides. Furthermore, the pressures on the Soviets to respond in kind, the great flexibility of nuclear systems, the enormous firepower contained in a single weapon, the ease and accuracy with which that firepower can be called in from unattacked and hence undamaged distant bases, the crucial importance of air superiority in nuclear operations—all these considerations suggest to us that local nuclear war would be a transient but highly destructive phenomenon.

I realize there is a school of thought which believes that the United States and the Soviet Union might seek to use Europe as a nuclear battleground and thus avoid attacks on one another's homelands. Not only does my government emphatically reject such a view; we also regard it as unrealistic. It ignores the basic facts of nuclear warfare I have described; it contemplates geographical limits unrelated to the actualities of target locations, and of the varied sources from which attacks would come. Any substantial nuclear operation in Europe inevitably would involve both forces and targets in the U.S. and USSR. It is possible, as I have mentioned, that a small, demonstrative use of nuclear weapons could be contained locally, and possibly, distant nuclear operations in less vital locations outside the NATO area, or at sea, may be limitable. But there is likely to be no effective operational boundary, or set of mutual restraints, which could restrict large-scale nuclear war to NATO Europe and the satellites. As we understand the dynamics of nuclear warfare, we believe that a local nuclear engagement would do grave damage to Europe, be militarily ineffective, and would probably expand very rapidly into general nuclear war.

V. Non-Nuclear Forces and Deterrence

With the Alliance possessing the strength and the strategy I have described, it is most unlikely that the Soviet Union will launch a nuclear attack on NATO. But there are other forms of aggression, and in December I mentioned our concern that the threat of general war might be adequate against many lesser Soviet actions, political as well as military. Some such hostile actions we could thwart now; others we might not. To deal with these others, how can we convincingly show that aggression, if continued, would lead to a situation where the danger of nuclear war was very great indeed? Let us assume two situations:

In the first, the NATO front is lightly covered by our forces. In the event of deep penetration by Soviet non-nuclear forces which our forces cannot prevent, the only military options open to Alliance forces are immediate nuclear response or defeat. This might be true even for a minor Soviet challenge.

In the second, we assume the NATO front firmly held under a concept of forward strategy. Ready and able to deal with any Soviet non-nuclear attack less that all-out, NATO forces guard positively from the frontier against any quick strike or ambiguous aggression. The NATO front can be broken only by massive application of Soviet power. In such a major fight, if Western forces were thrown back, Alliance nuclear action would follow.

If you were on the other side, which situation would you consider more laden with a real risk of nuclear war with all its consequences? Which would make you more inclined to refrain from a series of actions designed, step by step, to erode NATO's interests? To us the answer is clear.

In the first situation, it simply is not credible that NATO, or anyone else, would respond to a given small step—the first slice of salami—with immediate use of nuclear weapons. Nor is it credible that a chain of small actions, no one of which is catastrophic, would evoke a response of general nuclear war. We regard it as much more evident that NATO would find it politically possible to act in effective defense of its interests from the second posture than from the first.

The development of recent events concerning Berlin may provide relevant evidence of the utility of limited but decisive action. Although it would be premature to announce the end of this crisis, and in any case we cannot be certain of the influences that most affect Kremlin policy, it is not unlikely that the NATO non-nuclear buildup conveyed to the Soviets the right message about Berlin. When the Soviets began menacing Berlin, they may have entertained doubts about Western determination; clearly they were not deterred from their initial steps by our previous nuclear threats. But the creation of greater new non-nuclear strength has reinforced our overall deterrent, and the aggression has not occurred. It was not simply the substantial increase in NATO manpower and the addition of the equivalent of four combat-ready divisions, 88 more ships and 19 more air squadrons, but the meaning which their addition conveyed of our determination that may have given the Soviets second thoughts.

For the kinds of conflicts we think most likely to arise in the NATO area, non-nuclear capabilities appear to be clearly the sort the Alliance would wish to use at the outset. The purpose of our common effort is the defense of the populations and territories of NATO. To achieve this, at least initially, with non-nuclear means requires that our non-nuclear defense begin where the populations and territories begin. A truly forward deployment, along the lines General Norstad has advocated, we consider an urgent need of the Alliance.

Let me make clear however that we do not believe that a forward defense must be able to defeat in non-nuclear action every conceivable element of Soviet strength that might be thrown against it. Our nuclear forces would rapidly come into play if an all-out attack developed. We believe the Soviets can hardly doubt that; hence, we think it quite improbable that a major attack would develop out of a crisis.

[Here follows a description of NATO force dispositions and then-current U.S. views on Alliance decisions.]

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, Europe. Top Secret. Attached to Instruction No. CW-9106, May 15. The Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council was held in Athens May 4-6. Secretary McNamara delivered a similar address in unclassified form in Ann Arbor, Michigan, on June 16. For text, see Department of State Bulletin, July 9, 1962, p. 64.

83. Editorial Note 83. Editorial Note

On May 7, 1962, the Policy Planning Council circulated a revised draft of the paper, “Basic National Security Policy.” On May 9, the Council circulated a “short form” of the document, 66 pages long. In a covering memorandum to the May 7 draft, Walt W. Rostow stated his intention, after taking into account suggested changes, to prepare a draft to be circulated by Secretary Rusk to the President and NSC members. “The President will then give instructions for the further consideration of the document.” (All in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Drafts 5/7/62 etc.)

The revision of May 7, 166 pages in length, drops the two concluding sections on national security planning tasks and the anticipation of crises which had been included in the March 26 draft (see Document 70). The remainder of the paper retains the same basic structure while incorporating many changes.

Part One, formerly titled “Doctrine,” is renamed “Principles and Purposes.” In numerous places in the text, “principles” is substituted for “doctrine.” In an early section on the “Nature of the Communist Threat,” a statement retained from the March 26 draft that nuclear war itself “is one threat to the American interest” is followed by new language stating that “the safety of the nation and the possibility of deterring Communist aggression require that we be prepared to face nuclear war in defense of our vital interests, and that this fact be universally understood.” Introductory material retains emphasis on the creation of a “free world community,” but cautions that its creation is “a task which will remain unfinished for a long time.”

In Part Two, “Strategy,” a new discussion of tactical nuclear weapons identifies roles for them, such as deterring enemy initiation of tactical nuclear warfare, enhancement of the overall deterrent, selective use in situations in which escalation would be unlikely to result (“notably” at sea and in the air). In use of tactical nuclears, account should be taken of the danger of escalation, ability to “frustrate aggression” without their use, and the political and physical effects of a “local nuclear exchange.” The draft continues the emphasis on buildup of non-nuclear general purpose force capability, but introduces the term “dual capability” to describe the capacities of general purpose forces. It states that if “a conflict or priority arises in the training and equipping of general purpose forces as between non-nuclear and nuclear combat, the balance should be struck in such a way as to ensure that the entire requirements of non-nuclear combat are met.”

The section on arms control and disarmament states that “the possibility that a nuclear war might result from accident or, more likely, miscalculation or failure of communication is large enough to be an important reason for seeking remedial measures.”

In the section on the “Framework of Organization,” the term “Northern ‘Hard Core'” is retained. The draft continues the call, in connection with overall strengthening of the European community, for reduction in the special relationship with the United Kingdom, but states that the change should be “carefully developed and evolutionary, and should avoid the appearance of an abrupt turnaround.” The revision retains the remarks regarding the ineffectiveness of SEATO, CENTO, and ANZUS and the need for encouragement of their members to engage in wider regional relationships on non-defense matters, but speaks also of “maintaining fully the Manila Pact [SEATO]as the foundation for the U.S. commitment to Southeast Asia.” The section on the United Nations places somewhat greater emphasis on its utility for the achievement of U.S. objectives.

Under “Relations With Communist Regimes,” the draft omits in the section on Eastern Europe the former language on playing “‘liberation' in a low key” but is otherwise substantively similar to the March 26 draft. In the paragraphs on China, the language from the March 26 draft on PRC “de facto recognition of the independent existence of Taiwan” as a condition for normalization of Sino-U.S. relations is dropped: “The specific kinds of modification that we would require as the price of more normal relations should be the subject of continuing planning study.” Regarding Quemoy and Matsu, the draft states: “The removal of GRC forces and/or the disengagement of U.S. prestige from the offshore islands remains an objective of U.S. policy.”

In the last section, “The Domestic Base,” the revision gives increased prominence to a proposal for solving the balance-of-payments problem through encouragement of gains in U.S. productivity.

84. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 84. Letter From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

Washington, May 14, 1962.

Dear Walt:

I have studied your latest revision of the Basic National Security Policy1 and am concerned over some aspects of the military policy which it proposes for reasons set forth in my earlier comments and my letter to you of April 23.2 I will not repeat them in detail here but would, however, like to emphasize several of the points I tried to make.

For some years I have advocated larger conventional forces which would give us some choice other than all-out retaliation or retreat when faced with Communist aggression. Consequently, I am much pleased to note the added emphasis accorded these forces in your paper. But what concerns me now is that this emphasis may have gone too far.

My basic reason in the past for pressing for larger conventional forces has been to give us flexibility of response to hostile acts of aggression. It has always seemed to me that the aim of our military policy should be to increase the available alternatives in the possible uses of military force and thereby achieve a graduated series of possible responses. The development and use of very low yield atomic weapons for battlefield use has always seemed to me to offer the possibility of a very valuable intermediate stage in any escalating series of responses. If I understand the language of the BNSP, it would reduce this possibility to the point of eliminating it.

It is true that some people in government doubt that we have a rational program for the development and employment of tactical nuclear weapons. Indeed, I am one of them. In the past the emphasis has been too heavily on high yield weapons that are tactical only in the sense that they are delivered by tactical aircraft or Army-type missiles. That is why I have suggested that we should talk not of “tactical” nuclear weapons, but of battlefield nuclear weapons—very small in yield—and of interdiction nuclear weapons. The ambiguity of the present situation has been called to the attention of the President who has directed a thorough study of the question by the Department of Defense.3 Until that study is complete, we should not adopt language in the BNSP which, in effect, would anticipate, possibly incorrectly, the results of the study. In dealing with this question, we must not forget that the Soviet forces have these weapons—at least the big “tactical” weapons and propose to use them when needed. I doubt that any responsible official in our government would want to take a position on this subject which would, in effect, put U.S. forces on the battlefield with weapons inferior to those of the enemy.

Another point in your latest revision is the implication that since our problems of actively defending the United States against direct attack by sophisticated weapons are becoming increasingly difficult, we should carefully evaluate new programs to avoid putting too many of our resources in weapons that add little or nothing to the defense of our country.4 Such guidance does not seem to me to be one that will encourage development of an effective active defense and probably should be modified. I am often impressed with how important Soviet air defense measures are to our war-planners while we seem to attribute little importance to our own.

Finally, I would like to mention that I believe the paragraph in your previous draft on the conduct of general war, as modified by the Joint Chiefs, should be included in the final version of this paper.5 Given the total resources we now have invested in our ability to meet this dreaded but, hopefully, unlikely contingency, it would seem essential to provide the military planners some fairly specific guidance on their operations during any such event. Otherwise, planning may take place that does not support national objectives as fully as could otherwise be the case were guidelines provided, and our ability to exercise control over the course of events may diminish drastically.

I would be pleased to talk over any of the above comments with you. Also, I would appreciate being kept abreast of the course of this next revision and any change in the method of handling it from those outlined in your May 7 memorandum.6

Maxwell D. Taylor7

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, #11 Miscellaneous H. Secret.

1 Reference is to the long draft of May 7; see Document 83.

2 Document 80. In a May 12 memorandum to Taylor, Smith commented that “most of the points you raised in your letter to Mr. Rostow were not met.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, BNSP Memos and Comments)

3 see Document 86.

4 Both drafts contain language stating that attainment of active defense objectives “will present increasing difficulty as the USSR develops more sophisticated weapons systems; hence, the actual level of resources to be devoted to this mission should be reconsidered frequently and thoroughly.” In the March 26 draft, however, an additional sentence reads: “The political and psychological consequences of Soviet acquisition of a real or reputed AICBM system—prior to the U.S.—should be the subject of study and forehanded offsetting action.”

5 In the March 26 draft, a paragraph on general war states that because of the difficulty of fixing in advance detailed plans for conducting military operations, the targeting plans and command and control system must be designed to enable Presidential or Presidentially-designated civilian control during an attack. Pre-attack planning should aim at identifying ways to reduce the strategic offensive capabilities of the enemy, particularly counter-city attacks, and “facilitating the conduct of negotiations designed” to end the war on terms consistent with U.S. interests. This paragraph does not appear in the May 7 draft. In the Appendix to Document 76, the JCS expanded and redefined the tasks in general war.

6 see Document 83.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

85. Letter From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) 85. Letter From the Ambassador to Yugoslavia (Kennan) to the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow)Source

Belgrade, May 15, 1962.

Dear Walt:

I am sorry to have been so long in acknowledging your letter of March 301 and in responding to your suggestion that I comment on the draft of the S/P paper on “Basic National Security Policy.”2 The present security regulations, which make it impossible to take work home in the evenings and difficult to get at materials for use in the office after hours, have complicated the performance of this sort of work.

Let me say first that from the technical standpoint, and speaking as one who once held your present responsibilities, I am full of admiration for this paper. I know what the preparation of such a document involves. I cannot recall seeing in the files of our Government a document of such scope remotely so well prepared: so lucid, so comprehensive, so well-written, and so well knitted together. I think you and your associates deserve warmest congratulations.

On the other hand, I find it difficult to advance the sort of comment you invite. When, a year ago last winter, I decided to accept the President's invitation to return to Government, I did so in the awareness that my views on many problems of our relationship to the outside world were hopelessly remote from the concepts prevailing both in our public opinion and within Government. I also recognized that I had been largely unsuccessful in making my own positions understood or in winning support for them both in and out of Government in the years since World War II. The decision to return to Government in the capacity of Ambassador to Yugoslavia marked a deeper decision to abandon this struggle and to try to be useful in a practical way by working loyally within a framework of concept I could not personally share. In this I was guided by admiration and solicitude for the new president and by the recognition that, finding myself in so tiny a minority, I was quite apt to be wrong even where I could not myself perceive the error.

In my daily work here, it has not been hard to perform this act of detachment. Your inquiry now challenges me, however, on a plane so personal that there can be no escape into the official personality, and so broad that there can be no avoiding the underlying issues of public philosophy. The fact is that to take issue properly with your paper, I should have to write one equally long; and this, in the circumstances, is out of the question.

Let me therefore content myself with reminding you, first of some of the broader elements of my disagreement with outlooks and policies reflected in your paper. I shall try just to identify the issues, without arguing them. Here are a few:

1.View of Soviet intentions.

I have never been able to share the wide-spread view of Soviet intentions—a view which made the Stalin and the Khrushchev of the postwar era almost indistinguishable not only from each other but also from the Hitler of the Thirties. I have never believed that there was serious danger of an outright Soviet military attack on western Europe in the recent postwar period—of an attack, that is, that would not be associated with an advanced state of social and political disintegration in the area and could not be portrayed as auxiliary to a major internal social upheaval. I have thought it unlikely that such an attack entered into Soviet aspirations and plans. This being the case, I have never been able to agree with the almost universally held belief (first authoritatively enunciated, I think, by Churchill at Fulton) that only our atomic deterrent had restrained the Russians from launching such an attack.3 I have always placed more weight on internal economic and social stability in this and other areas than on military defense. This difference of interpretation has affected my attitude towards western policy on a host of occasions, and continues to do so.

Your paper, to be sure, does not wholly embrace the purely military view of Soviet intentions that prevailed in former years. It gives far greater recognition to prospects for infiltration, guerrilla warfare, use of disaffected local minorities, etc. In this respect, I welcome it as an important advance over earlier thinking. But the old concept shines through in a number of places, as for example on pp. 141-143.4

2. Military policy toward Europe.

It has been my belief that we should not settle for the indefinite communist control of Eastern Europe but should seek to create conditions in Europe which not only give maximum incentive for a gradual detachment of the Eastern European countries from their present exclusive tie to Moscow, but facilitate that detachment to maximum degree. For this reason I have disfavored putting major emphasis on NATO at the cost of the prospects for disengagement, and have felt that we should devise our undertakings in Europe, as was done in the case of the Marshall Plan, in such a way that they could attract and invite participation by the European countries without raising clear-cut issues with respect to their military and political ties with Moscow. With this in mind, I have questioned the soundness of the concepts on which NATO has developed. I would have preferred to see in effect a unilateral guarantee by the United States of the present NATO territory in Europe, rather than the present network of mutual obligation—a guarantee reinforced by a special relationship of military support by the United States for the Brussels Pact. Above all, I have never favored the admission of Germany to NATO, and the development of West Germany's resources and territory as a major component of NATO strength. This, it seemed to me, was clearly in conflict with the goal of German unification, and was bound to make impossible for an indefinite period to come any withdrawal or even any real slackening of the Russian hold on the satellite area. The intensive rearmament of Western Germany meant, in other words, the affirmation and perpetuation of the division of the continent. This error, as I see it, has been and continues to be compounded by the rejection of the Rapacki concepts and by the development of West German and other continental territory as a base for nuclear striking power.5

3. Relation of Britain, U.S., and Canada to the Continent.

Your paper embraces the concept, arrived at in the late ‘40s and early ‘50s under the direction of Mr. Acheson, that European integration is to be pursued in an area that includes the United Kingdom, and that the closer association of the Western-Continental powers is to proceed in closest association with the Atlantic community as a whole. To this concept, our prestige has now been committed to a most unusual degree.

If you will glance at a Policy Planning Staff paper prepared, I believe, just at the end of 1949 and probably bearing a date in the first weeks of 1950, on the subject of European integration,6 you will see that this concept is diametrically opposed to the one I then favored, and still favor. The view I put forward at that time opposed pressing Britain into an association with the Continent. It favored the pursuit of integration—i.e., the bridging of sovereignties—in two groupings: the U.S., U.K., and Canada, on the one hand; the major continental countries, on the other. It recognized that Britain could be made a part of a continental grouping only at the cost of watering down the significance of the latter and preventing it from assuming a form sufficiently advanced to meet the requirements of the German problem. It has taken us a further twelve years of trouble to demonstrate something of the correctness of that prognostication; and we have not yet come to the end of that road.

The same PPS paper also warned, as I recall it, against any forms of economic association in Western Europe which would not be open, and attractive, for adherence by the Eastern European countries, and in such a way that adherence would not involve questions of Soviet military and political prestige. Today we have, in the example of the Common Market, precisely the situation against which I attempted to warn. It is an arrangement closely connected with the political and military institutions which have been evolved in Western Europe; and we ourselves are the first to insist that the privilege of association with it be denied to anyone not prepared to acknowlege this association as extending into the political field. Meanwhile, as was also predicted in the PPS paper under reference, we have provoked a major crisis in the relations between Britain and the Commonwealth, with the dreadful possibility that Canada itself will lose its internal and external stability, and that one of the deepest sources of our security in North America will thus be jeopardized.

Here again, as you see, we have very fundamental differences, and ones which involve the entire philosophy underlying your paper.

4. The weapons of long-range mass destruction.

For many years, I have advocated a policy designed to free us from all dependence on atomic weapons, as on other weapons of indiscriminate mass destruction, with a view to putting us in a position to seek, at the earliest possible moment and if necessary at the cost of some apparent risk, an agreement with the Russians for the total abandonment of the cultivation, maintenance, and use of this sort of weaponry. To this end, I have urged that we free ourselves as soon as possible from the invidious principle of “first-use” of atomic weapons, which I believe must lead inexorably to a nuclear catastrophe.

Your paper, while again marking a great progress over the concepts of earlier years, retains the principle of “first-use” and contemplates a continued U.S. dependence on atomic weaponry.

In addition to this, your paper reflects at many points (pp. 35 and 46, for example) the view that there could be a war fought with atomic weapons which would be less than wholly disastrous for us—that there could, in other words, be some pieces worth picking up for those who survived, and that this prospect ought to enter into our thinking and planning. I wholly disagree. As a historian, I confidently submit that if the western world is subjected for the third time in a century to a military holocaust even comparable in severity to those of 1914-1918 and 1939-1945, we have had it. If it is a war with atomic weapons, I do not wish to see the result; and I would rather see my children dead than to have them experience it.

5. Political philosophy, and its relation to policy toward the underdeveloped countries.

Your paper is deeply imbued with a relatively optimistic view of the sources of human behavior. This permits you to see such things as national independence, individual freedom, industrialization, high living standards, social justice, and restraint in foreign policy as all fusing into one harmonious whole. This view, I suspect, is drawn from the example of our own society; and one could argue that such inference was not wholly unwarranted, though here, too, I should have doubts. It is, in any case, a view which, when applied to the great mass of humanity, I cannot share. The ability to harmonize these various elements into the political life of a state is something which, if it exists at all, seems to me to be peculiar to peoples who have had their origins on or near the shores of the North Sea; and here I must attribute it not to any inherent superiority but to the favorable effects of climate and to a fortunate discipline of experience running back over the centuries. This being the case, I cannot expect this example to be readily or generally imitated elsewhere. The various features of civilization to which I referred seem to me to be as a rule in conflict, rather than in harmony, in the affairs of men. Such conflicts exist even in the highly advanced nations, where they are only successfully contained, not resolved. There is often, for example, a conflict between social justice and individual freedom, between egalitarianism and true liberty, between freedom for the nation and freedom for the individual, between democracy and national restraint.

You look on the various forms of authoritarianism and despotism, oligarchical and autocratic, as abnormalities—as something to be overcome by better living standards and enlightenment. I, on the contrary, see such forms of government as a part of the natural state of mankind; our system, rather, is the exception and the abnormality. I reflect, furthermore, that some of the most hideous manifestations of modern totalitarianism have come in some of the most highly industrialized and best educated countries. I am therefore skeptical of your whole thesis. I suspect rapid social change itself to be the deepest cause of the political instability and violence. For this reason, I expect no good to come of the sort of precipitate development which you so warmly embrace, particularly in an environment where population growth is to be permitted to run rampant, with all that that implies. Whether absence of encouragement on our part would steady these people down and temper the demand for earlier industrialization, I doubt; but I still think it irresponsible of us to encourage them along this path. By advancing along it ourselves, we have only landed ourselves—as I shall have occasion to say presently—in problems to which we see no answers. How can we, in good conscience, impel others in the same direction?

You have a vision, in particular, of a humane Africa, divided into God knows how many independent states, all with neat borders, U.N. membership, and all the other trappings of sovereignty on the western pattern, and all thrusting happily ahead into the nirvana of an industrial civilization. I see ahead in this area, no matter what we do: primarily childishness, bewilderment, inexperience, violence, racial hatred, and internecine strife of every sort, the repetition (but in an era of devastating weaponry and population explosion) of the long ordeal of political experience out of which the public order of Europe has been bred. I cannot agree that it will always be compatible with the safety of our country to increase the industrial strength of these peoples, to put weapons into their hands, to discourage violence among them, to encourage their proliferation. Divided and weak, they are no menace to us. Given strength, God knows what they will do. I wish them no harm. I would not see us move to injure them. But I regard our American people of this mid-century, with all their faults, as almost the only truly good-humored, well-meaning, and enlightened people of this age in their attitude towards others. The peoples of the southern continents, in particular, have, as I see it, no real belief in world brotherhood, and no spontaneous sense of restraint in world affairs. Aside from what they think they may get out of us at the moment in the way of immediate one-sided aid, they would witness without a quiver of pity or regret the greatest catastrophe of our civilization that the mind could conceive; and most of them would be happy to be in at the kill.

In such circumstances, we should have a policy towards these people, as I see it, devoid of illusions about their probable future, devoid in particular of any fond belief that they are going to grow in our image, based rather on the recognition that their advance to literacy and national consciousness is going to release the most explosive and dangerous forces conceivable, and on a determination to keep ourselves out of the way of these forces and in a position where they cannot damage us.

All this may, of course, involve aid, given for tactical reasons, at one point or another; but then, please, aid without illusions, without false hopes, with clear eyes and the coldest sort of calculation. Perhaps this view is conditioned by a failure to share the great concern so many people feel over the expansion of Russian or Chinese influence into Africa in the absence of major American counter-effort. It is true that this gives me little concern. I think this cauldron of Africa can accept and consume all the manpower and resources the Russians and the Chinese want to ship into it, and that they will have no more profit than we would have by their effort to remake it in their own image. Their ideas of civilization will be just as irrelevant to the approaching chaos of that continent, it seems to me, as will be ours.

6. Multilateral diplomacy.

The view put forward in your paper of what we should seek in the way of a role of the UN in international life is, in general, far closer to my views than that which was entertained in Washington in earlier years. I still have certain fundamental differences, however, with the general tendency of your paper (or do I mistake it?) to seek multilateral channels of diplomacy wherever possible in preference to bilateral ones. Insofar as problems of security are concerned, in the face of the bloc, I am skeptical of the utility of collective and multilateral arrangements, in many instances. I suspect that we lose more, by such arrangements, in the way of promptness and flexibility of action and privacy of decision than we gain in the way of added military and political resources.

My main divergence, however, from the concept put forward in your paper, relates to what can be done in the field of universal international action. Here, I see possibilities which do not seem to me to be recognized in your paper. The target of action ought to be, I think, those aspects of human activity by which the integrity and hopefulness of our national environment is being, or might be, adversely affected—such as, for example, contamination of the atmosphere and of international waters in one way or another, use of outer space, development of Antarctica, manipulation of weather conditions, etc. Here, it seems to me, there is not only an opportunity but a need for an actual narrowing of the concept of international sovereignty, a concept which has been so grievously distorted in this century, and so unwisely and lavishly bestowed on immature political entities.

I have little confidence in multilateral associations based on the principal of unanimity, or even of majority decisions, among a large number of nations which retain, in relation to the matters under discussion, the full prerogatives of absolute sovereignty. In the first case, that of unanimity, the necessary decisions will not be taken; in the second case, they will not be enforced. I am impressed with the advantages, illustrated by the European Iron and Steel Community, of the transfer of sovereignty in the sense of the resigning of actual power of decision within a limited area to an international body. Governments, by and large, are timid and fearful of responsibility. They will happily submit to dicta by an international body having genuine authority, even in instances where, if they had been asked to share responsibility for the decision, they would have been unwilling to do so. I would like, accordingly, to see the establishment of international authorities with real power to do such things as to control all use of outer space, to lay down and to enforce rules for the preservation of the cleanliness and resources of the oceans, to say what can and what cannot be done in the way of pollution of the atmosphere, to administer the Antarctic, etc.

7. The domestic base.

Underlying my misgivings about policy toward the underdeveloped areas are certain fundamental doubts which I have about the trend of our society, and particularly about the concepts which are outlined on pages 208-216 of your paper. These doubts go very deep. I can do no more than to touch on them here. They are the ones that cut to the heart of the whole question of the desirability of a high degree of industrialization, urbanization, and complexity in a society. I can only say that I have come, over the years, to question the absolute application of the principle that the best way to have things done is the way that is mechanically most efficient and involves the least use of human labor. I do not think this is necessarily true, and I have come to feel that the goal of economic and technological policy within a society should not be just to discover the most efficient way of doing things, in terms of human labor output, but rather to discover the ways of doing things which are most beneficial to people themselves, which may be a quite different thing. For this reason, I think that arbitrary decisions ought to be made, of a type that we have never as yet contemplated: decisions as to where to pause on the path of higher industrial efficiency, and what sort of mechanical devices, affecting the patterns of human life, to select among a choice that is now overwhelming in variety. I think, in other words, that what our society now has to ask itself is: What is the good life? How is it led? How is it best encouraged? And I think that we may find that the answers to these questions are wholly different from those which are being automatically produced by a policy of giving free rein to the compulsions of technological efficiency.

In strongest contrast to the authors of your paper, I fail to see any conclusive advantage in the principle of economic growth; on the contrary, I see great dangers in it. I am unable to perceive that a society which is able to discover its deepest values only in a process of constant quantitative multiplication—in a state of instability, that is—is the best society. I would admire more a society that can achieve a state of equilibrium in material and quantitative terms and can seek its development in terms of the improvement and enrichment of the individual human experience.

I am particularly concerned about the principle of unlimited economic “growth,” because it involves precisely those features of our contemporary American civilization which give me greatest concern: the progressive over-crowding and urbanization of our territory, the reckless plundering of its resources, and the increasing contamination of its natural elements. All these things are connected with population growth and industrialization. There can be no question but that our form of society is immensely wasteful in terms of natural resources, and essentially unstable just from this standpoint alone. As for population growth, this is not just, or even primarily, a question of feeding people: it is a question of how such things as privacy and access to nature are to be preserved in a crowded and heavily urbanized society. I should have been inclined to regard 150 million as a maximum desirable size for our population. When it gets beyond 200 million, the effects—I am sure—will be appalling. I view this prospect with dismay, not just from the standpoint of what will happen to the land and the water and the air and the minerals, but also from the standpoint of what will happen to the human soul and to the capacity for citizenship; for I regard a certain connection with the land, with growing things, and even with animals, as essential to spiritual health in the case of the great majority of people.

As for the specific reasons which the paper states for maintaining a high growth rate, I would only say the following: A. Other countries expect to get along, and to maintain their security somehow, with a far smaller flow of resources than that which we are contemplating. I see no great virtue involved in being the world's strongest country in a material and military sense, if this goal is to be pursued at the expense of the deeper human values.

B. I do not see a flow of endlessly increasing resources as related to an improvement in the standard of living. To look at things this way is to accept the most vulgar and wasteful concept of what compromises the good life, and to insist that people lead lives of appalling complexity and artificiality.

C. I see no reason why a country must be in a state of explosive and unnatural expansion in order to play a decent role in world trade. Again, countries far smaller than ours make perfectly respectable contributions in this field. If the developing countries over-produce, I fail to see that it is our responsibility to assure that they can unload this over-production on us. So far as unemployment is concerned, the paper rests on assumptions which I simply cannot accept. I think the real problem of chronic unemployment in our country is very small indeed and could be easily solved. What we call “unemployment” is simply a condition we have created by definition; and what it refers to is primarily people who, in the face of the fact that the government is willing to pay them for doing nothing, prefer not to work at all rather than to accept the opportunities for employment open in our society. We do ourselves the deepest damage by the semantic confusion we produce when we speak of having several million “unemployed”, because the condition of these people is wholly different from that which most of the world's people picture when they hear that word.

The above observations are simply suggestive of the extent to which my own thinking has departed from that which is not only reflected in your paper but is already accepted by a large portion of our intellectual community. Having had your position in previous years, I am well aware that every paper of this nature has to constitute, to a large extent, a compromise between the private thinking of the individuals who draft it and that which will find useful acceptance in wider circles. I do not mean, therefore, to criticize or to assign blame when I point out these differences. To be useful and to find acceptance, any paper would have to bow to the spirit of the time and embrace many of the elements which yours does. It is I who am out of step; and it is a good thing that it is you, not I, who occupy the chair in which you now sit. If I am to make my peace with my fellow-countrymen, intellectually, it will have to be in a different way, and in a different forum. I say these things merely to point out why it is difficult for me to comment as you have asked me to do.

[Here follow Kennan's comments on individual passages of the paper.]

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62. Secret.

1 Not found.

2 Reference is to the March 26 draft; see Document 70.

3 Reference is to Winston Churchill's address delivered in March 1946 at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri.

4 These pages deal with alliances, including CENTO, SEATO, and ANZUS.

5 In a separate letter to Rostow, also dated May 15, Kennan enclosed an expansion of his views on Germany, NATO, and disengagement. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 3/26/62)

6 Reference is uncertain. Kennan was Director of the Policy Planning Staff, March 1948- January 1950, and Counselor, August 1949-July 1951.

86. Memorandum From Secretary Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer) 86. Memorandum From Secretary Defense McNamara to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Lemnitzer)Source

Washington, May 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

A Study of Requirements for Tactical Nuclear Weapons and Continuation of the Study of Requirements for General Purpose Forces

As I indicated in my memo dated 17 February 1962, subject: A Requirements Study for General Purpose Forces,1 I would like you to organize a study of requirements for tactical nuclear weapons. I visualize this as a continuation of the General Purpose Forces Study,2 carried on by a nucleus of about ten officers from the group conducting that study, beginning no later than July 1. Planning for the study should begin now with selection of leaders and preparation of terms of reference in collaboration with my staff.

I suggest that the first phase of the study be directed by Lt. General Hamilton H. Howze, USA, with Major General Paul S. Emrick, USAF, acting as his deputy. General Howze should continue to direct the Army aviation study,3 but both he and General Emrick should be relieved of other assignments until the first phase of the tactical nuclear weapons study is completed. That should be accomplished by 1 October.

I would like the first phase of the study to concentrate on the use of tactical nuclear weapons in ground and supporting air-to-ground combat in Europe. I believe that our posture, doctrine, and understanding of objectives for use of tactical nuclear weapons in ground combat in Europe is in a very unsatisfactory state.

I am particularly concerned about the basis for requirements for the family of nuclear weapons for Army ground forces from Davy Crockett and artillery rounds to Pershing. What is the purpose of these weapons? In what contingencies would they be used? And to achieve what objectives?

The case for having at least a relatively small number of tactical nuclear weapons in the theatres (for example, a posture composed of nuclear weapons for alert tactical aircraft, based in the theatre primarily for non-nuclear combat anyway, and perhaps several battalions of Pershings to do nuclear interdiction) appears to be based on such political and psychological factors as the following: First, “the psychological position of our allies without United States nuclear weapons in the theatres would be intolerable.” Second, “the presence of U.S. nuclear weapons in the theatre can help to deter the Soviets from escalating a non-nuclear conflict to a nuclear conflict, by threatening to transform a one-sided nuclear war into a two-sided nuclear war.” Third, “having such weapons in the theatre may be useful for purposes of detonating one or few on key military targets in time of crisis as a way of showing our resolve or showing the Soviets the risks inherent in the course of aggression in which they are engaged.” But the objectives to be served by a larger posture of tactical atomic weapons and the specific numbers and types of weapons required to meet those objectives are quite unclear.

Are we buying Davy Crockett, Corporal, Sergeant, Lacrosse, Honest John, Pershing, ADM's, etc., to defend Europe in a general nuclear war? If so, is not the return of the investment dubious; does not all the evidence suggest that the long-range strategic forces would be decisive in such a conflict? Moreover, if that were not the case for the planned posture, should we acquire enough strategic weapons to make it so?

Alternatively, is the purpose of these weapons to defend Europe in a nuclear war that is confined to the theatre? If so, a number of questions should be considered. Is such a conflict at all likely? Would we meet a Soviet nuclear attack in Europe without going to general war ourselves? Do we want to devote resources to that contingency? Perhaps it would make more sense for us to contract out of that possibility. On the other hand, would it be to our advantage to go to nuclear war in the theatre in response to a Soviet conventional attack? What evidence supports the notion that the use of nuclear weapons is advantageous to the side with less manpower and superior technology? Is it not at least as plausible that the bilateral use of tactical atomic weapons in Europe would be to our military disadvantage? In any case, is it feasible to defend Europe with nuclear weapons without destroying it? Moreover, are we buying complete capabilities for such a war? Are we buying complete weapons systems in the broad sense, i.e., complete military capabilities able to live and fight in the nuclear environment, or are we buying merely the weapons? Our lines of communication are vulnerable to atomic attack and we seem to be doing nothing to remedy that. How do our men survive fallout? How do we preserve command and control in the tactical atomic environment? These problems do not appear to have been thought out. Rather, it appears that the tactical atomic posture we have bought for our forces in Europe may be preparation for World War II all over again, with nuclear weapons overlaid. If we are not going to buy a complete posture for the fighting of nuclear war in the theatres, but settle for a sort of nuclear facade instead (as we appear to be doing today), then such a facade can probably be procured at substantially less cost and risk than is associated with our program.

In order to clarify and resolve these problems, I believe the study should consider the following questions:

A. Examine the feasibility and outcome (in terms of military position and civil damage) of a tactical-atomic war in Europe limited to the battle zone and growing out of: 1. A Soviet assault using tactical nuclears; and

2. U.S. escalation of a non-nuclear war we are losing.

Would such a war be feasible in the sense that stable limits could be found that would keep it from escalating to an intercontinental nuclear war involving major attacks on the U.S., Allied and Soviet homelands? Would such a war be feasible in the sense that it would be possible to sustain organized military operations despite nuclear attacks on command and control airfields and LOC? Would escalation of a non-nuclear conflict to the tactical nuclear level enable us to defend Europe in circumstances in which we could not do so without the use of nuclear weapons? Which side gains militarily from the bilateral use of nuclear weapons (as opposed to limitation to non-nuclear weapons)?

B. Examine the role of tactical nuclear weapons in a general war initiated by the Soviets. Evaluate the contribution to our success that would be made by the various types of tactical nuclear weapons beyond the results that would be achieved by the use of strategic nuclear weapons. Consider quantitatively the implications for our ground forces of the Soviet use of strategic nuclear weapons against them.

In situations A and B, above, consider the problem of: 1. Vulnerability of NATO military posture to nuclear attack.

2. Collateral damage to European population and industry.

3. Operational effectiveness of each category of tactical nuclear weapon system.

C. What are the minimum essential numbers and types of tactical nuclear weapons required in the theatre for: 1. The psychological effect of reassuring the Europeans that nuclear weapons are committed to their defense.

2. Deterring the Soviets from escalating a non-nuclear conflict to a tactical-atomic conflict limited to the battle zone.

3. Deterring the Soviets from massing their troops for a conventional assault to the extent that they would be vulnerable to nuclear attack.

4. A capability to demonstrate our resolve and to indicate to the Soviets the dangers inherent in the course of aggression in which they are engaged by detonating a few nuclears in Central Europe.

D. Examine the problems of designing genuinely dual-capable ground forces. How do the requirements for conventional and nuclear combat conflict? Compare the effectiveness of dual-capable forces with (1) conventional forces in conventional combat, (2) nuclear forces in nuclear combat. Consider the problems of safety and stability raised by the proximity of field-army tactical nuclear weapons to conventional combat.4

A transcript of a State-Defense Policy Conference, held on October 10 and devoted largely to NATO topics, quotes McNamara as saying with reference to tactical nuclear weapons: “Our own studies, not being definitive, don't persuade.” (Attachment to memorandum from J. Robert Schaetzel, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, to George Ball, November 10; Department of Statement, Central Files, 740.5/10-1062)

Eventually (after the October 1 deadline), I would like the group doing this study to study the requirements for tactical nuclear weapons for fleet air defense, ASW, and theatre air defense. In each case, the advantages to ourselves of escalating a non-nuclear conflict to a bilateral nuclear conflict should be analyzed.

I would also like you to make plans to continue indefinitely the work on the Requirements Study for General Purpose Forces in the area of non-nuclear combat. This work should be carried on by a small group (perhaps 12) of highly qualified and carefully selected officers. This group should continue to develop, refine, and improve upon the work now underway. I think that the development of systematic quantitative methods is especially needed in this area. I am sure that after the current study is completed on July 1, my staff and I will have questions, comments and suggestions For continuation.

In general, this group should consider the following questions about the General Purpose Forces Study: (a) Given the contingencies and situations defined for the study, are the answers correct and reliable?

(b) Are there unexplored possibilities for substitution of other weapon systems and forces that would make it possible to do the same job at a lower cost?

(c) Do the analyses suggest that other situations and objectives should be considered?

I have asked Mr. Hitch to represent me in providing guidance on the development of the studies to both groups.

Would you please present to me, no later than June 15, your plans for carrying out these requests.5

Robert S. McNamara6

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tactical Nuclear Weapons Study. Top Secret.

1 Not found.

2 see Document 115.

3 See footnote 3, Document 115.

4 In a memorandum to Taylor dated October 13, Major William Y. Smith summarized the resulting study, stating that it called for NATO firepower twice as great as that of the Soviets, for 32,000 weapons to counter a possible 5,000 Soviet weapons, and for 4 to 5 different yields ranging from [text not declassified]. He quoted its conclusion that “‘in the areas of doctrine of deployment, organizational structure, command and control, and logistics requirements,' the requirements for nuclear and conventional combat conflict.” He concluded that the study should be a basis for follow-on ones. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tactical Nuclear Weapons Study) A draft of the summary and conclusions of the study, entitled “Requirements for Tactical Nuclear Weapons,” is ibid.

5 A “Further Study of Requirements for Tactical Nuclear Weapons,” prepared by the CJCS Special Studies Group (Tactical Nuclear Branch) and dated April 1963, is in the National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 4610 (20 Dec 62) Sec 2A. Another copy is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Kaysen Series 4/63. For a partial summary of both the October 1962 and April 1963 JCS studies, as well as a statement of McNamara's views regarding them, see Document 153.

6 Printed from a copy that indicates McNamara signed the original.

87. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 87. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, May 25, 1962.

SUBJECT

Study of Requirements for Tactical Atomic Weapons

As a continuation of his General Purpose Forces Study1 which is nearing completion, Secretary McNamara has directed a comprehensive study of requirements for tactical nuclear weapons to begin no later than July 1.2 The first phase which concentrates on the use of tactical nuclear weapons in ground and supporting air-to-ground combat in Europe will be completed by October 1. This is a much needed effort to clarify doctrine and objectives in an area where much cloudiness has existed up to now.

In connection with this matter, I recently took a fresh look at what we know about Soviet tactical atomic weapons. Thanks to the intelligence source with which you are familiar, we have quite a bit of comparatively new data. We are reasonably sure, for example, that the Soviets have developed tactical weapons for large caliber mortars, artillery pieces, certain free rockets and short-range guided missiles, all of which are now in the hands of the ground forces. Ranges vary from 11 to 300 nautical miles and yields from 5 KT to several megatons.

Current Soviet military literature indicates a clear intention to use these atomic weapons from the outset of any major operation in general war. We have recently acquired the account of a Soviet army group exercise in the Carpathians held in July 1961. The exercise consisted of an army group attack against NATO forces on a 250-mile front, using some 25 divisions. The plan of attack corroborated known Soviet military doctrine which calls for the allocation to an army group of 250 to 300 nuclear weapons with a total yield of from 120 to 150 megatons. In the exercise, 60 to 75 of these weapons were used in a surprise first strike against the opposing nuclear-equipped forces and against troop concentration targets down to company size. About 70 warheads were physically moved about in the area of the exercise. The foregoing figures were exclusive of airplane-delivered weapons.

The conduct of the maneuver suggested the U.S. thinking on tactical weapons which was current about 1955. The Soviets show a similar lack of appreciation of weapons effects which would result in this maneuver from the high megaton dosage of the battlefield. They appear to ignore the obstacles (craters, contamination, forest fires, and blown-down trees) which their own weapons would create. They are also at a loss to know how to find appropriate targets for the overwhelming fire power in the hands of their troops.

The Soviets are showing parallel concern to ours over the command and control of atomic weapons. Soviet control procedures governing the tactical employment of nuclear weapons appear to be highly centralized and designed to prevent use except at the direction of the High Command. Evidence indicates certain basic procedural steps, including (1) a specific decision by Khrushchev and the Party leaders authorizing the use of nuclear weapons; (2) a determination by the High Command Minister of Defense that a military requirement for nuclear weapons exists on a given army group front and the specific notification to the major field commanders that nuclear weapons may be released for use, as well as a simultaneous notification to stockpile commanders that weapons have been released; and (3) specific authorization by commanders of the rank of an army commander or above for nuclear weapons to be released for designated tactical use.

In connection with the review of our own policy on tactical atomic weapons, it will be important to take a hard look at what the Soviets are doing or may do.3 I detect an emotional resistance in some quarters to the expansion of the tactical nuclear weapon systems in spite of the obvious need to have them if the enemy does.4 In my judgment, the issue is not whether to have tactical atomic weapons but rather how to improve them down to the fractional kiloton yields which offer the possibility of a separate stage in escalation short of the use of weapons of mass destruction.5

Maxwell D. Taylor

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Maxwell D. Taylor 5/62. Top Secret.

1 see Document 115.

2 see Document 86.

3 In a May 24 memorandum to McNamara, Taylor requested that the “Study Group should include in its research a review of USSR posture, doctrine and tactics in the field of tactical nuclear weapons.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Maxwell D. Taylor 5/62)

4 In a May 3 memorandum to Taylor, Legere wrote: “Flushed with anticipation over Norstad's and JCS's military requirement for modernization [of NATO forces]through MRBMs, the technipols roll up their light artillery for the opening phase of the next battle in the campaign to denuclearize Europe: down with tactical nuclear weapons. We (Ewell-Smith-Legere) called this one cold, if I may say so.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Tactical Nuclear Weapons Study) General Lauris C. Norstad was Supreme Allied Commander, Europe. In an April 16 memorandum to Taylor, Ewell described Kaysen, Wiesner, Owen, Rowen, and Alain Enthoven as “what one might term the anti-nuclear wrecking crew.” (Ibid., T-129-69)

5 The President's handwritten marginal note next to this sentence reads: “Can this be done?”

88. Memorandum From Major William Y. Smith to the President's Military Representative (Taylor) 88. Memorandum From Major William Y. Smith to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Washington, May 31, 1962.

SUBJECT

NIE on Soviet Nuclear Weapons Stockpile 1962-641

1. The “billboard” effect of this NIE is that the Soviets, in the US estimate, are about 4-5 years behind us in their thinking on a suitable nuclear strategy, but their planning may not evolve along the same lines that ours has.

2. The major divergency in US and USSR thinking concerns tactical nuclear weapons. The Soviets apparently will not have, by 1964, incorporated low yield (fractional kiloton) nuclear weapons into their inventory; the lowest yield we credit them with is 3 KT. (Chart, p 32). Since 1958 the Soviets nevertheless have emphasized more the use of nuclear weapons in support of field forces (p 13). Furthermore, the indications are that this emphasis will increase in the future (p 27). Thus at a time in which US planning calls for a decreased emphasis on tactical nuclear weapons, Soviet thinking is calling for an increased one. The implications of these divergent trends have not yet been fully explored. They should be; hopefully the study on tactical nuclear weapons2 will do so. Also, if the Soviets find they cannot fight using large yield tactical weapons because of fear of self-inflicted damage on USSR troops, our possession of low yield weapons could possibly give us a step in escalation not open to the Soviets. This also should be looked at.

3. Other points of interest in the NIE are: a. Soviet military policy places a high priority on preparedness for general war, which the USSR planners assume would commence in most cases with massive nuclear attacks on the homelands of the opponents. They do not conclude that this exchange would necessarily decide the outcome of the war (p 6).

b. By mid 1962 it is estimated the Soviets will have 800-1200 aircraft delivered nuclear weapons; 35-50 operational ICBM launchers (100 ICBMs); 350 MRBM and IRBM launchers (1000 IRBMs and MRBMs); and 35 missile launching submarines (100 SLBMs) (p 11).

c. Considering all factors, the Soviets will have between 2000 and 3000 nuclear weapons to support theater forces, with a total yield between 70 and 130 MT (p 17).

d. The general trend in yields of weapons for Soviet offensive delivery systems will be upwards (p 22).

e. By mid 1964 the Soviets are estimated to have 150-275 operational ICBM launchers; 450 IRBM/MRBM launchers; 35 SLBM submarines. About 700 missiles for long range attack thus will be added to the Soviet forces (p 25). (Note: This means evidently that the Soviets will have some 1900-2000 ICBMs, IRBM/MRBMs, and SLBMs by mid 1964 plus 800-1200 aircraft delivered weapons.)

f. Soviet nuclear testing indicates continued interest in the development of nuclear weapons for air defense purposes. It is estimated that the Soviets could deploy an AICBM for defense against missiles of 50-500 n.m. in 1963-64, and against ICBMs 1963-66. Both systems will almost certainly employ nuclear warheads (p 28).

g. The NIE makes one reference to the Soviet planned use of CW weapons (p 13).

4. Soviet use of nuclear weapons for defense against missiles and aircraft—as well as our own—raises the real possibility that the first use of nuclear weapons in any limited conflict may be in an air defense role. Would the US be willing to have its conventional missile and aircraft offensive capabilities rendered ineffective by nuclear weapons without using such weapons in return? Would the Soviets? The effects of these possible developments on possible escalation of the conflict is another area worthy of exploration.

W.Y.S.3

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chronological File April-June 1962. Top Secret.

1 Reference is to NIE 11-2A-62, “The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” dated May 16. (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates, 11-62)

2 see Document 86.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 89. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, June 5, 1962.

In your review of the draft of Basic National Security Policy you deleted the bracketed portion of the following passage on page 35, Section D:1

“D. Strategic Forces

9. Scale and Character of Strategic Forces. Attainment of a stable military environment requires strategic forces sufficiently effective so that Sino-Soviet leaders would expect—without question—the Bloc's present power position [relative to the US] to be worsened drastically as a result of a general nuclear war. In assessing the appropriate scale of a US effort designed to meet this requirement it should be borne in mind that the Soviet calculus must take into account not merely relative [US]-Soviet strength after a nuclear exchange but also its consequences for the Communist position in Eastern Europe, for the relative power of Communist China, and for the possibilities of maintaining Communist control over the Russian base.”2

It seems to me that the resulting position is too weak. To say that our strategic forces should only be able to worsen the Bloc's power position in a general nuclear war is to set too modest an objective. The ability to worsen the Bloc's power position as the result of a general nuclear war would be easily satisfied in an absolute sense with a much less effective strategic retaliatory force than we provide for in our present 5-year plan. The concept of the relative strength of the U.S. to that of the Soviet Union seems to me important to state clearly. Below are two formulations for you to consider as alternatives to the first sentence in the quoted passage: 1. Attainment of a stable international military and political environment requires strategic forces sufficiently effective that Sino-Soviet leaders would expect the Bloc's military position relative to the U.S. and its allies to be worsened as the result of a general nuclear war.

2. Attainment of a stable international military and political environment requires strategic forces sufficiently effective that Sino-Soviet leaders would expect the Bloc's military position relative to the U.S. and its allies to be inferior after a general nuclear war.3

Paul H. Nitze

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3543, 381 (Relo) BNSP (31 Mar 62). Secret. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Dep Sec has seen.”

1 Reference is to the May 7 draft; see Document 83.

2 All brackets are in the source text.

3 McNamara wrote in the margin: “Paul, I prefer the original less the bracketed portions. The concept of a ‘worsened relative military position after a general nuclear war' is not a meaningful one to me when each side has the capacity to destroy the other's civilization. RMcN”

90. Editorial Note 90. Editorial Note

On June 6, 1962, the Policy Planning Council circulated a revised, 182-page draft of the paper “Basic National Security Policy.” Once again, the paper's fundamental structure remained unchanged, while numerous passages were rewritten or amended. Among the changes are the following:

In Part One, “Principles and Purposes,” new language calls for accelerating “constructive changes in the character and policies of the Communist regimes, to erode the grip of Communism on peoples under its rule and to facilitate their absorption into the community of free nations.” In a brief segment concerning U.S. regional objectives, there is renewed emphasis on the special importance of Iran and language on the need to make resolution of South Asian issues such as the Kashmir and Pushtu questions “a major objective of our diplomacy.”

In Part Two, “A Strategy,” under “Military Policy,” a new sentence states that a major mission of U.S. forces is, in the event of war, “to bring about a conclusion of hostilities on terms acceptable to the U.S. and its allies.” A section on general war notes that while precise plans for the conduct of operations in such a conflict cannot be drawn up in advance, preparations against that possibility should aim at: reducing enemy strategic offensive capabilities, particularly ability to “mount repetitive attacks against U.S. population centers;” retaining forces for use against enemy population centers and other “major elements of enemy strength;” and “facilitating the conduct of negotiations designed to bring the war to an end on terms which are consistent with U.S. interests, as set forth in this paper.” A very similar paragraph appears in the March 26 draft but is missing from the May 7 draft.

A section on covert operations contains the added language, with respect to such actions, that the United States “cannot accept an asymmetry which allows Communist probes into the free community without possibility of riposte.”

In a paragraph on current policy, also under “Military Policy,” a new sentence is added to the paragraph (see Document 70) stating that the United States should not set an absolute requirement that its strategic forces be able to destroy substantially all Soviet nuclear delivery systems in a first strike. “Such an objective does not appear practical.” New introductory material appears in the section on tactical nuclear weapons. It is unchanged in the portion of the June 22 draft printed as Document 93.

The paper states, still under “Military Policy,” that U.S. arms control planning should be integrated with military planning. New language in the June 6 draft expands this idea: “On the one hand, in proposing an arms control measure, we must take into account its effect on relative military capabilities and support of national strategy. At the same time, military contingency plans, research and development, and programming of armed forces and armaments should reflect an awareness of the extent to which they affect stability in the military environment, the evolution of weapons and doctrine, and the likelihood of unauthorized use of weapons.” (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 6/6/62)

91. National Security Action Memorandum No. 162 91. National Security Action Memorandum No. 162Source

Washington, June 19, 1962.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Director, United States Information Agency

SUBJECT

Development of U.S. and Indigenous Police, Paramilitary and Military Resources

The President has approved the following statement and proposed assignments of responsibilities to various agencies as recommended by the Special Group (Counterinsurgency):

The study of U.S. and indigenous paramilitary resources pursuant to NSAM 561 reflects gratifying progress in the development of an adequate U.S. capability to support both the training and active operations in indigenous paramilitary forces. Certain deficiencies, however, were clearly revealed. The deficiencies, to which all efforts and shortcomings to date are related, should be the basis upon which internal defense requirements are established for each country to be assisted.

1. Country Internal Defense Plans

With one or two exceptions, there exist no outline plans to unify and orchestrate U.S. internal defense programs and activities in friendly countries facing a threat of subversive insurgency, or which provide strategic guidance for assisting such countries to maintain internal security. The Department of State has prepared a list identifying the countries facing a threat of subversive insurgency and will direct the formulation of outline plans for internal defense (Country Internal Defense Plans) by the Country Team in each such country which encompass the total U.S.-supported internal defense field. These plans will include the military, police, intelligence and psychological measures comprising a well rounded internal defense plan and will be consistent with the military, economic, political and social measures constituting the overall country plan. Such plans should be completed and in the hands of the Department of State by September 1, 1962, available for review by the Special Group (Counterinsurgency). From that time on, in accordance with the provisions of NSAM 124,2 the Special Group will keep these country internal defense plans under periodic review, and insure prompt resolution of interdepartmental problems arising in connection with their implementation.

2. Improvement of Personnel Programs of Agencies Concerned with Unconventional Warfare

A study will be made by the Armed Forces and appropriate civil agencies concerned with unconventional warfare activities of how to improve their personnel programs. Particular attention will be directed to the following: (a) Personnel programming for officers and men, including establishment of career programs which protect the special skills and professional qualifications of personnel assigned to unconventional warfare duties.

(b) Ability to perform efficiently in foreign areas in conditions of stress and danger for prolonged periods.

(c) Morale factors such as family housing, tours of duty, hardship allowances, hazardous duty pay, special recognition such as rewards.

3. Orientation of Personnel

As part of the current effort to train more personnel in the problems confronting underdeveloped societies, both civil and military agencies of the Government will assign, where feasible and subject to the availability of funds and personnel, middle-grade and senior officers to temporary duty for orientation purposes in selected countries experiencing internal security problems.

4. Deployment of Counterinsurgency Personnel

In order to insure a timely deployment of qualified counterinsurgency specialists to impending crisis areas, CIA and AID will take action to insure that adequate qualified personnel with paramilitary skills are available. Periodic reports of progress to achieve this objective will be submitted to the Special Group (Counterinsurgency) by CIA and AID.

[Heading and 3 paragraphs (22 lines of source text) not declassified]

6. Increased Use of Third Country Personnel

The Department of Defense, in collaboration with the Department of State and the Central Intelligence Agency, will undertake a study to determine on a selective basis the feasibility of the concept of the increased use of third-country personnel in paramilitary operations. Particular attention will be given to the following:

[1 paragraph (6 lines of source text) not declassified]

b. The feasibility of using third-country military or paramilitary forces to operate under their own or other national auspices in crisis areas.

7. Exploitation of Minorities

In view of the success which has resulted from CIA/US Army Special Forces efforts with tribal groups in Southeast Asia, continuing efforts will be made to determine the most feasible method of achieving similar results in other critical areas. On a selective basis, CIA and the Department of Defense will make studies of specific groups where there is reason to believe there exists an exploitable minority paramilitary capability.

8. Improvement of Indigenous Intelligence Organizations

Recent experience shows that most underdeveloped countries need more efficient intelligence coordination and dissemination systems to counter subversive insurgency. Therefore, the CIA will expand its present training and support efforts to achieve needed improvements in indigenous intelligence organizations and that other U.S. agencies contribute to this CIA coordinated program.

9. Research and Development for Counterinsurgency

The Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency will carry in their research and development programs a special section devoted to the requirements of counterinsurgency. The Special Group (Counterinsurgency) will follow up on this action and receive reports from time to time with regard to progress in developing modern equipment suitable to meet the requirements of counterinsurgency.3

McGeorge Bundy

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 162. Secret.

1 Document 33.

2 Document 68.

3 By NSAM No. 165, dated June 16, the President added to the Group's purview eight countries “sufficiently threatened by Communist-inspired insurgency to warrant the specific interest of the Group.” They were Burma, Cambodia, Cameroon, Iran, Ecuador, Colombia, Guatemala, and Venezuela. (NSAM No. 165, signed by Bundy; Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, NSAMs 1962) A July 6 memorandum from Lemnitzer to the Special Group summarizes the development of U.S. and indigenous police, paramilitary, and military resources in implementation of NSAMs No. 124 and 162. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 162)

92. Editorial Note 92. Editorial Note

On June 20, 1962, Secretary of Defense McNamara was briefed on SIOP-63 at the Strategic Air Command Headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha, Nebraska. Materials from this briefing have not been found. In a memorandum dated June 19 to McNamara, Fred A. Payne, Deputy Director of Defense Engineering for Strategic and Defensive Systems, and Alain Enthoven, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Analysis, stated that “since the SIOP-63 guidance had been responsively followed, there will be no need for disapproval.” Desired directions of change could be included “in the periodic updatings which have to be made anyway to take account of changes in our force structure and in the target system.” Potential problem areas were: [text not declassified]. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 684 SIOP 63)

In a July 13 memorandum to Lemnitzer, McNamara confirmed oral requests made of General Power during the Offutt briefing. They included tables showing for each option the weapons and megatonnage programmed, the damage expectancy, the survivability of Soviet delivery forces, and the casualty rates. McNamara called for wargaming to develop these estimates by October 1 and stated that Enthoven would “represent me in the development of this data.” (Ibid.)

In telegram JCS 5481, sent to SAC and theater commanders on July 28, the JCS relayed some of McNamara's instructions and stated that “SIOP-63 with its flexible features will be effective 1 August 1962.” (Office of the Secretary of Defense, Historical Office, Secretary of Defense Cable Files)

A memorandum from Captain Tazewell Shepard, Jr., Naval Aide to the President, August 1, states that Lemnitzer told the President “at the SIOP briefing last spring that the President could not implement the SIOP without consultation with Defense” and that therefore his emergency briefcase or “satchel” contained no information [text not declassified]. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chron File Jul-Sep 62 (4)) No other record has been found of a SIOP briefing given the President in the spring of 1962. Concerning the briefing given the President on September 13, 1961, see Document 42.

On September 14, a team from the Joint Staff briefed the President on SIOP-63. In a September 22 memorandum to the President, Lemnitzer enclosed the briefing materials, stating that due “to the changeable nature of this current operational plan and the extreme sensitivity of the concepts and information contained therein, it is suggested that it be retained, when not in use by you, in the Joint Chiefs of Staff Joint War Room. Utilizing this procedure the data can be revised and kept current as required. The book can be made available for your use at any time since only a few minutes are required to deliver it to the White House.” The attachment to Lemnitzer's memorandum has not been found. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3105 (8 Mar 61) (3) Sec 4) A proposed outline for the briefing is attached to the memorandum from Vice Admiral Herbert D. Riley, Director of the Joint Staff, to Lemnitzer. (Ibid.)

The guidance for SIOP-64 forms the appendix to a November 14 memorandum signed for the JCS by Major General John A. Heintges, Deputy Director of the JCS, to McNamara. In the memorandum, the JCS stated that the changes in the guidance were “minor in nature,” that they did “not represent a departure from the basic philosophy expressed in the guidance for SIOP-63,” and that significant departure from SIOP-63 was “neither necessary nor desirable for the development of SIOP-64.” (Ibid. JMF 3105 (22 Jun 62) Sec 1)

93. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Council 93. Draft Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning CouncilSource

Washington, June 22, 1962.

BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

[Here follow a table of contents and Part One, “Principles and Purposes.”]

PART TWO: A STRATEGY

I. Military Policy

A. The Role of U.S. Force

1. Force and policy. The positive and constructive objectives of national policy depend intimately and in a variety of ways on the existence of appropriate U.S. forces and the evident will to use them to protect vital interests of the free community. Now and for the foreseeable future U.S. military policy is a crucial determinant of the fate of the free community because our military strength is proportionately great in relation to our population and command over resources, and because the security of our allies is intimately dependent on our strength and will to exercise it. There is hardly a diplomatic relationship we conduct that is not colored by an assessment of U.S. military power and of the circumstances in which we are likely to bring it into play. In generating this power the motivation of men in the expert employment of weapons of war continues as a responsibility of the population at large. It is brought to and maintained at a fine edge of effectiveness by the nation's military services, which provide a basic source of leadership for present and future generations of military men.

2. Major Missions. To sustain the free community, U.S. forces have four major missions: a. To deter or deal with a direct nuclear assault against the U.S. or other vital areas.

b. To supplement allied and friendly forces in deterring or countering Communist non-nuclear attacks on the free community or in sea areas or on lines of communication vital to its survival.

c. To support friendly peoples against Communist and Communist-inspired efforts to undermine their governments and fragment their societies through subversive, paramilitary and guerrilla operations.

d. In the event of war to conduct hostilities so as to minimize damage to the U.S. and its allies, preserve their interests, frustrate opposing military forces, and bring about a conclusion of hostilities on terms acceptable to the U.S. and its allies. It is in the interest of the United States to achieve its wartime objectives while limiting the destructiveness of warfare, whether it be non-nuclear or nuclear, local or global; in this sense, it is a goal of U.S. policy that any war be a limited war.

For all these missions it should be recognized that effective deterrence has as its basis the evident military capability to prevent a potential enemy from achieving greater gain than loss by using force. While many other factors contribute to deterrence, this requirement for such a capability is constant and must be satisfied.

3. Supplementary Tasks. U.S. forces have three other important missions: a. To provide within the free community a sense of security against Communist incursions and Communist political and psychological pressures, including threats of nuclear or non-nuclear attack against the U.S. or its allies.

b. To support American diplomatic and other efforts to minimize conflicts within the free community, to work toward peaceful adjustment of disputes and differences, and otherwise to promote U.S. and free world objectives.

c. To contribute, both directly and through military assistance and training programs, to the constructive modernization of underdeveloped nations.

4. The Special Imperatives of a Nuclear-Missile Age. The nature and consequences of nuclear war conducted with present and foreseeable delivery vehicles call for a military policy which can accomplish the purposes indicated above with a minimum likelihood that we would have to initiate the use of nuclear weapons in order to defend vital interests and, more generally, with a minimum risk of escalation toward general nuclear war.

The number of U.S. casualties and the scale of U.S. civil damage consequent on a major nuclear exchange is already great. It will increase with the passage of time.

The population of our European Allies is even more exposed.

These facts heighten the requirement for a policy aimed at limiting civil damage in the event of a major nuclear war; for generating, so far as possible, adequate non-nuclear defense alternatives; for maintaining—both to deter attack, to influence enemy targeting and to conduct operations—strong flexible, survivable and controlled strategic nuclear forces; and for seeking effectively inspected measures of arms control which would limit mutual powers of destruction while not reducing the free community's relative capacity to deter or to deal with Communist attack.

B. The Objective: A Stable International Military Environment

5. Objectives of U.S. Military Policy. The fundamental objective of U.S. military policy which flows from these considerations is to create a military environment which will permit us to: a. achieve maximum deterrence of deliberate aggression, and especially aggression with nuclear weapons.

b. minimize the likelihood of uncalculated, unpremeditated or unintended nuclear conflicts; to reduce the likelihood of accidents, misinterpretations of incidents and intentions, false alarms or unauthorized actions within any nation (including the U.S. or its allies); and to reduce the possibility that such actions might trigger major nuclear war.

c. deal successfully with aggression in ways which will not readily escalate and, especially, which will not deteriorate into general war under the pressure of crises and limited conflicts.

6. The Prospects for Stability. With care and prudence we may thus hope to create an environment which will reduce both the incentives of others to use force in international affairs and the instabilities inherent in an age of nuclear and missile armaments. The rest of this chapter examines the implications of this objective for the design and employment of major elements of U.S. military power: strategic forces; defense forces; general purpose forces; and anti-guerrilla forces. It also examines arms control and disarmament policy as an integral part of national security policy.

C. The Threat

7. Communist Strategy. A persistent characteristic of Communist military strategy has been its searching attention to specific gaps—regional and technical—in the defense of the free community. It has been, thus far, an evident purpose of Communist strategy to avoid a direct confrontation not only with U.S. main strength, but with positions of relative strength within the free community of other nations as well. Soviet policy appears to be based on pressure against particular areas of vulnerability (e.g., Northern Azerbaijan, Greece, Berlin, Indochina, South Korea, etc.) and particular types of vulnerability (e.g., the geographical position of Berlin, the inadequate defenses against subversion and guerrilla warfare in Laos and South Viet-Nam, etc.)

8. Future Threats. Given foreseeable U.S. nuclear capabilities, including, in particular, our powerful ability to strike second, it is estimated that the USSR will not deliberately take actions which would bring about general nuclear war. There is, nevertheless, always a possibility that the Soviets may miscalculate U.S. capabilities or misjudge U.S. intentions. They may calculate that their growing nuclear strength makes non-nuclear aggression, especially against areas believed to be not vital to U.S. interests, a feasible course of action. They may also under-estimate the importance attached by the U.S. to particular interests or areas, and initiate action in the belief that the U.S. will not respond. Accordingly, it is a first charge on U.S. military policy to make grossly unattractive and unprofitable a direct Soviet assault on the U.S. or on other vital areas, notably Western Europe. But a major lesson of postwar history is that U.S. and allied policy must also achieve, to the maximum degree possible, a closing off of all areas of vulnerability, if we wish to minimize the number and effectiveness of Communist probes. It is this lesson which calls for the U.S. and its allies to develop a fuller range of military capabilities, capable of covering as much as feasible of the free community, if they are to create a stable overall military environment.

The major gap in the U.S. and allied spectrum of capabilities lies at the non-nuclear end—both with respect to conventional forces and those whose mission is counterinsurgency. Although the military stance of the free community is basically defensive, the U.S. and its allies also require capabilities for limited overt and covert action in areas under Communist control. Such action must be carefully weighed in the light of particular circumstances, costs, and risks; but the U.S. cannot accept an asymmetry which allows Communist probes into the free community without possibility of riposte.

D. Strategic Forces

9. Scale and Character of Strategic Nuclear Forces. Attainment of a stable military environment requires strategic nuclear forces sufficiently effective so that Sino-Soviet leaders would expect—without question—the Bloc's present power position to be worsened drastically as a result of a general nuclear war. In assessing the appropriate scale of a U.S. effort designed to meet this requirement it should be borne in mind that the Soviet calculus must take into account not merely relative Soviet strength after a nuclear exchange but also its consequences for the Communist position in Eastern Europe, for the relative power of Communist China, and for the possibilities of maintaining Communist control over the Russian base.

To meet the objectives indicated above the U.S. should, for the relevant planning period through the mid-1960's, maintain a sophisticated mix of delivery vehicles so dispersed, hardened, mobile and controlled that: a. the USSR could not count with confidence, despite any technological break-through it might reasonably expect to score, upon neutralizing or blunting a large proportion of U.S. retaliatory power;

b. the U.S. could, even under unfavorable circumstances (e.g., an initial Soviet surprise attack), substantially reduce the military capabilities of the enemy.

To achieve not only the objectives indicated above, but also greater stability in the international military environment, our U.S. strategic forces and plans for their use should be designed so that they will continue an element of stability in grave international crises. Thus, our strategic nuclear forces should be sufficiently invulnerable so that their survival and effectiveness need not rest (i) on the U.S. striking first; (ii) on the U.S. taking in a crisis such “crash measures” to reduce these forces' vulnerability as the Soviets might consider evidence of impending attack or as would materially reduce the forces' operational effectiveness; (iii) on an instant U.S. response to ambiguous evidence of impending enemy attack.

10. Presidential Control. The planning and design of U.S. strategic forces should offer an increasingly wide range of options, at alternative levels of violence and against alternative target systems, which the President or authorities pre-designated by him could review in advance and choose among in the event. Our strategic forces must increasingly be susceptible of discriminating and controlled use, under centralized military command, in accordance with such high level decisions. Highly survivable command, control, and communication systems should be developed and maintained (i) which provide for authorization by the President, or authorities pre-designated by him in case he is unable to function, of initial use of nuclear weapons under all circumstances, especially including periods of great tension or hostilities; (ii) which ensure, insofar as feasible, that conduct and termination of operations are also continuously and sensitively responsive to political decisions by the President or authorities pre-designated by him. The expectations of individuals about the occasions on which nuclear weapons would be used, and the methods of using them, should not be allowed to narrow to the point that flexibility in execution is in any way reduced.

11. General war may come about in a variety of ways (through pre-meditated attack, preemption, escalation, or inadvertence) and may take different forms, dependent upon the time when it occurs, the accuracy of U.S. intelligence estimates, the kinds of targets the enemy chooses to attack, and the capabilities of the U.S. to prevent repetitive or follow-up strikes. To fix in advance a specific pattern for the conduct of operations is virtually impossible, and our targeting plans and command-control system must, as has been indicated, be designed so as to enable the direction of operations by the President and authorities designated by him before or during the conflict. Within these limitations, pre-attack strategic nuclear planning and preparations will be aimed at: a. reducing the strategic nuclear offensive capabilities of the enemy, and particularly his ability to mount repetitive attacks against U.S. and Allied population centers.

b. retaining ready, survivable strategic nuclear forces under centralized control for possible selective use against his urban-industrial centers; against other major elements of enemy strength; and for use in other ways which will contribute to c. below.

c. facilitating the conduct of negotiations designed to bring the war to an end on terms which are consistent with U.S. interests, as set forth in this paper.

The prospect of confronting reserve U.S. nuclear forces after any attack may give a potential enemy powerful incentive to refrain from planning or executing unrestricted attacks on U.S. or Allied civil society. Such ready forces, held in reserve and threatening—by their very exist-ence—surviving enemy targets, may also conceivably extend deterrence into the wartime period, and thus destroy the will of surviving enemy leaders to pursue unrestricted attacks or to continue the war. Moreover, the goal of ending hostilities on acceptable terms requires that plans and operational decisions preclude the prospect of an unarmed U.S. confronting armed opponents. For all these reasons, it is essential—whatever the size, composition and effectiveness of U.S. strategic forces—that the U.S. not disarm itself, by expending all ready strategic nuclear forces in initial attacks.

12. Optimum Use of Strategic Nuclear Weapons. A major problem in connection with the design and use of these strategic forces relates to the optimum use of nuclear weapons if we must initiate such use.

On the one hand, since 1945 American policy has ruled out the initiation of nuclear attack on the Soviet Union as a means of bringing the cold war to an end and providing a definite victory for the Free World. Aside from its violation of our moral and political tradition a policy of initiating nuclear war was always shadowed by its consequences for Western Europe; and its rationality on strictly military grounds has been gradually reduced with the Soviet acquisition of medium and long-range nuclear delivery capabilities.

On the other hand, we are committed explicitly to defend the populations and territory of Western Europe, and we have similar though implicit commitments to use nuclear weapons rather than accept major defeat in Asia and the Middle East.

This situation immediately raises the question of whether, if we initiated use of nuclear weapons, a limited use of nuclear weapons with a concomitant risk of escalation of nuclear engagement by the other side would be the sensible course to follow, or whether an initial strike against Soviet strategic nuclear delivery systems would be the optimum course.

At the present time this question—involving complex problems of intelligence assessment and projection as well as evolving military technology—is subject to legitimate debate. The answer may well vary according to circumstances which cannot be foreseen in advance.

13. Current Policy. In order not to foreclose this issue of optimum initial U.S. use of nuclear weapons, it is important to preserve utmost flexibility in our plans and posture. Three propositions warrant special comment in this connection.

a. We should try to convey to the Soviets: (i) That we do not intend to mount an initial strategic strike if their forces do not transgress the frontiers of the free community; (ii) that if they do we would strike first under certain circumstances if this was necessary in order to protect our vital interests; (iii) that we are not so prone to mount an initial strategic strike in the event of grave crises or limited conflict as to maximize the incentive for the Soviets to take a pre-emptive action in these contingencies. This is, in effect, the manifold message we have conveyed with respect to West Berlin.

b. We must not lock ourselves into plans and assumptions regarding an initial U.S. strategic strike against Soviet nuclear delivery systems, which could play somewhat the same role in a major international crisis that the great powers' mobilization and war plans played in 1914, e.g., create such pressures for early military moves, in order to destroy enemy nuclear forces, as to deny diplomacy the time it needs to resolve the crisis peacefully.

c. We have not and should not set an absolute requirement that our strategic forces be able substantially to destroy all Soviet nuclear delivery systems in a first strike. For one thing, such an objective does not appear practical.

E. Active and Passive Defense

14. Active Defense. The prime objectives of active defense systems are to improve stability by: a. helping to protect U.S. retaliatory forces;

b. preventing the enemy from cheaply and easily wreaking devastation on U.S. population and industrial center;

c. accomplishing maximum attrition of the attacking force and complicating enemy planning.

Attainment of the second of these objectives will present increasing difficulty as the USSR develops more sophisticated weapons systems; hence, the actual level of resources to be devoted to this mission should be reconsidered frequently and thoroughly.

15. Passive Defense. Passive defense measures will not preclude the USSR from inflicting heavy damage on the U.S. should it wish to do so. If it were the primary enemy purpose to overcome passive defense measures, there are numerous weapons options available to him. A more reasonable assumption, however, is that the allocation of resources to long-term and costly development of inter-continental weapons systems would not be significantly affected by U.S. measures of passive defense designed to reduce loss of life from nuclear attack. In the light of the various circumstances under which hostilities might be conducted, passive defense has three main purposes: a. To prevent or limit avoidable fatalities or casualties from nuclear conflict not involving massive attack directly upon U.S. population centers. This purpose can be separated into two parts: the first, limitation of casualties and fatalities from blast, heat and other immediate effects of nuclear detonations; the second, limitation of casualties and fatalities from fallout, spreading fires and other indirect effects of nuclear detonations. The first can be accomplished only through a combination of active and passive defense measures; systems to accomplish this on a nation-wide basis are not yet sufficiently efficient to warrant their adoption. The second can be attained by a system of fallout shelters, together with local organization, planning and training to use the system.

b. To maintain continuity at all feasible levels of government. This will require particular attention to such tasks as establishing and promulgating lines of succession to official positions; providing for the safekeeping of essential records; establishing control centers and alternative sites for government emergency operations; and providing for the protection and maximum use of essential government personnel, resources and facilities.

c. To strengthen, mobilize and plan for the management of the nation's resources in the interest of current and future national security. In this connection, continuing attention must be given to planning, training, stockpiling, research and development, and other preparations necessary to: (i) the stabilization and organized direction of the civilian economy in times of national emergency; (ii) the prompt initiation of post-attack industrial rehabilitation programs necessary to national survival, rehabilitation and recovery; and (iii) the proper organization of remaining human and material resources.

These passive defense steps are essential, lest the U.S. socio-economic system collapse or be distorted into an unacceptable form even following an attack of limited scale not directed primarily against our civil society. Sustained effort and public education by the Federal Government will be required for their execution. Care should be taken, however, not to generate unwarranted expectations as to what such programs can accomplish, not to allow these measures to divert public attention and energies from other needed national security tasks.

F. General Purpose Forces

16. Scale and Nature. A third major element in our effort to achieve a balanced and stable international military environment should be the maintenance of U.S. and allied general purpose forces adequate, not only to accomplish prescribed general war tasks but also, in situations less than general war, to use force within certain limits to defend allied and friendly peoples and areas without taking actions involving a high probability of nuclear war.

In determining the scale of U.S. non-nuclear forces needed to meet this requirement, three conceivable types of Sino-Soviet ground-air non-nuclear attack should be considered: (i) major assault, based on full use of forces in being which are deployed or readily deployable to the area under attack; (ii) lesser forms of aggression, at any level up to major assault; (iii) all-out assault, based on full mobilization and use of all manpower and material reserves.

U.S. general purposes forces should be strong enough in combination with available allied forces: (i) to frustrate, without using nuclear weapons, major non-nuclear assault by Sino-Soviet forces against areas where vital U.S. interests are involved, long enough—at a minimum1 —to give the Communists a full opportunity to appreciate the risks of the course on which they are embarked and then to afford diplomacy an adequate opportunity to end the conflict;

(ii) to frustrate in sustained combat, without using nuclear weapons and without any time limits, non-nuclear aggression at any level less than major assault by Soviet or Chinese Communist ground and air forces;

(iii) to contribute to general war missions in the event of all-out Sino-Soviet attack, so long as this does not significantly interfere with or detract from the general purpose forces' primary missions, which are to deter and deal with conflicts less than general war.

In addition, general purpose forces should be able to maintain, without using nuclear weapons, control of required sea bases and sea-areas in the face of non-nuclear naval and air attack against such sea lanes and sea areas.

General purpose forces should be increased in quantity and improve in quality (e.g., through modernization of materiel stocks) as necessary to attain the above objectives. In so doing, account should be taken of the fact that, although the reserve call-up of 1961 was under the then existing circumstances as essential military and political act, we cannot assume the threats we will face will be so infrequent, dramatic and unambiguous as to make recurring reserve call-ups (except as indicated in paragraph 23) a politically feasible or technically desirable means of meeting the objectives outlined above.

U.S. general purpose forces should also be: a. Sufficiently mobile so that they could respond promptly and simultaneously in needed numbers to two substantial threats in areas where such threats can reasonably be expected and where they would directly threaten vital U.S. interests—notably in Europe and Southeast Asia.

b. So trained, organized, and equipped as not in any way to be dependent on nuclear weapons in such sustained combat as may be necessary fully to discharge the missions prescribed under (i) and (ii), above, in regard to major Communist assault and lesser aggressions.

c. Afforded sufficient logistic support (including advance construction and pre-stocking, where feasible, of needed facilities in or near possible overseas combat areas) to permit discharge of the missions indicated above.

A longer term, but clearly desirable, objective of U.S. policy would be to create U.S. general purpose forces sufficiently substantial so that they could frustrate, in conjunction with available allied forces and by non-nuclear means, major Sino-Soviet non-nuclear assault against a maximum number of those areas involving vital U.S. interests, without any time limit. Prompt consideration should be given to the question of whether steps additional to those called for in the preceding paragraphs should eventually be taken to achieve this objective, in respect to both U.S. and allied forces. The resources available to the U.S. and its allies in manpower, financial and production terms place this objective within our capabilities. Action to achieve the objective, however, would require difficult political decisions for the people of both the U.S. and its allies. New approaches to this problem should be studied intensively.

The possibility should be examined that, even with an increase in free world non-nuclear strength within likely limits, U.S. and allied forces might not be able to frustrate major non-nuclear assault in some regions without (or, in the event the opponent were to respond in kind, even with) local use of nuclear weapons, so that the threat of U.S. initial use of strategic nuclear weapons would remain essential to deterring attack on these areas. The political and military implications of any such conclusion should be the subject of urgent study.

17. Contingency Planning. Within the limits of capabilities which exist or are to be firmly planned in accordance with the policy set forth in paragraph 16, contingency plans should exist for a non-nuclear response by general purpose forces to each likely form of Communist non-nuclear aggression short of all-out attack. Preparations should be such as to permit immediate execution of these plans.

18. Conduct of Local War. In conducting local war the U.S. should:

a. seek to bring the war to a conclusion on terms satisfactory to the U.S., and make clear to the enemy the specific political objectives for which the U.S. is fighting where this will contribute to doing so;

b. be prepared to fight locally in direct conflict with Sino-Soviet forces;

c. protect the interests of the friendly people involved;

d. seek to control the scope of intensity of the conflict to minimize the risk of escalation to general war, recognizing that this may sometimes require controlled and deliberate intensification of the conflict;

e. conduct military operations so as to limit damage in the area of conflict and enhance allied solidarity and effectiveness.

19. Deployment and Use of Tactical Nuclear Weapons. We can no longer expect to avoid nuclear retaliation if we initiate the use of nuclear weapons, tactically or otherwise. Even a local nuclear exchange could have consequences, for example, for Europe that are most painful to contemplate. Such an exchange would be unlikely to give us any marked military advantage. It could rapidly lead to general nuclear war.

A very limited use of nuclear weapons, primarily for purposes of demonstrating our will and intent to use such weapons, might bring Soviet aggression to a halt without substantial retaliation, and without escalation. This is a next-to-last option we cannot dismiss. But prospects for success are not high, and there might be acutely undesirable political consequences from taking such action.

It is also conceivable that the limited tactical use of nuclear weapons on the battlefield would not broaden a conventional engagement or radically transform it. But these prospects are not rated very highly.

Highly dispersed nuclear weapons in the hands of troops would be difficult to control centrally. Accidents and unauthorized acts could well occur on both sides. Furthermore, the pressures on the Soviets to respond in kind, the great flexibility of nuclear systems, the enormous firepower contained in a single weapon, the ease and accuracy with which that firepower can be called in from unattacked and hence undamaged distant bases, the crucial importance of air superiority in nuclear operations—all these considerations suggest that local nuclear war would be a transient but highly destructive phenomenon.

Studies of the use of nuclear weapons, either for battlefield or interdiction purposes, are under way and should be urgently prosecuted. Pending the completion of these studies, tentative guidelines are:

a. Scale and Nature: U.S. forces should have sufficient tactical nuclear capabilities (i) to deter enemy initiation of tactical nuclear warfare; (ii) to enhance (in conjunction with a manifest U.S. intent to use nuclear weapons, if necessary) the primary deterrent, which is and will continue to be, posed by U.S. non-nuclear and strategic nuclear capabilities, to major or all-out Communist non-nuclear assault; (iii) to be able to use tactical nuclear weapons selectively for military advantage, if circumstances should arise (e.g., at sea or in the air) where we would gain militarily from a local nuclear exchange and where such an exchange would be unlikely to cause escalation; (iv) to permit a very limited use against valid military targets in other circumstances, primarily in order to demonstrate our will to resist aggression.

b. Organization and Deployment: U.S. and allied tactical nuclear capabilities should be so deployed, and their command and control should be so organized as: (i) to preserve carefully the distinction between nuclear and non-nuclear weapons; (ii) to ensure that initial use of tactical nuclear weapons—even after non-nuclear hostilities have begun—will take place only on the President's decision; (iii) to ensure that continuing control will be exercised over use of tactical nuclear weapons, within limitations established by the President at as high a level of authority as is consistent with the character of the conflict and the likely grave consequences of a nuclear mistake. In order to accomplish the purposes indicated above and ensure that nuclear weapons are as immune to accidental or deliberate unauthorized use as is consistent with their operational effectiveness: (i) High priority should be given to incorporating, as a matter of urgency, all needed and operationally feasible technical safeguards in nuclear weapons specified by the President in allied and in U.S. hands; (ii) U.S. custodians of warheads in allied hands should be given the training, equipment, [2-½ lines of underscored source text not declassified]; (iii) Periodic review of these arrangements and safeguards and of the state, command and control, organization, and deployment of U.S. and allied nuclear weapons and of their nuclear components should be undertaken to ensure that they are the optimum from the standpoints indicated above.

c. Use: Tactical nuclear weapons should be used in local war only when it is clear that the objectives stated in paragraph 18 would be furthered by, and could not be attained without, use of nuclear weapons. In determining whether this condition exists and, if so, how nuclear weapons should be used, account should be taken of: (i) our ability or inability to frustrate the aggression without using nuclear weapons; (ii) the likely military effects of a local two-way nuclear exchange; (iii) the political effects of such a local nuclear exchange—both locally and worldwide; (iv) the physical effects of the exchange for the country being fought over; (v) the chances of exchange escalating into general nuclear war.

G. Counter-Guerrilla Forces

20. The Task. A fourth major element in a stable military environment must be the generation of allied and U.S. forces and policies capable of making the imposition of guerrilla war on nations of the free community unprofitable to the Communists. Given the preponderant role of local forces in deterring guerrilla war and conducting counter-guerrilla operations it follows that: a. Preventive Action: Special steps should be taken to make vulnerable nations more aware of Communist tactics in this field and of the civil and military conditions in the free community which make such tactics feasible and attractive. Recognizing the importance and non-military factors in this connection, emphasis should be placed on devising and implementing economic and political—as well as military—programs aimed at preventing situations that could lead to guerrilla warfare. We must identify such areas of potential or current vulnerability in advance; focus the attention of foreign governments and our own instruments of policy on preventive action; and generate the local and U.S. forces, civil and military, capable of dealing with them in the most forehanded way possible.

b. Crisis Situations: When guerrilla conflict erupts we should seek to mobilize effective local defense, supported by necessary political and economic programs, at the earliest possible stage of the conflict. Our objectives, where appropriate and feasible, should be to: (i) maintain the independent and territorial integrity of the nation attacked; (ii) minimize the scope of direct U.S. involvement, so far as consistent with this objective and our commitments; (iii) minimize the risk of escalation to local conventional or to nuclear war.

c. U.S. Programs: The development of hardware, techniques, and tactics appropriate to guerrilla warfare should receive high priority in U.S. training and production programs, as necessary to achieve the purposes set forth under (a) and (b) above.

21. The Border Problem in Guerrilla Warfare. Although main reliance is placed on local dissidents or converts to Communism by guerrilla forces, the conduct by the Communists of guerrilla war sometimes involves the infiltration from outside of key personnel and material, as well as external inspiration and stimulation of the operation. Since it may, therefore, be difficult to conduct successful counter-guerrilla operations where an open frontier with a Communist country exists: a. The U.S. should heighten the free community's awareness of the element of international aggression involved in outside support for guerrilla operations, so as to deter border crossings and other forces of support, and to provide a basis for possible sanctions.

b. The U.S. should seek to close off open frontiers or to control the flow of supplies from outside the country—a move in which an international presence may sometimes be helpful, although experience to date is not encouraging on this point.

c. The U.S. should consider the application of selected, measured sanctions against the aggressor, if necessary to prevent the defeat of the free community nation under attack, in ways which would minimize—but nevertheless confront—the possibility of escalation.

22. The Role of Allies. With respect to allied participation in the deterrence and conduct of guerrilla war, it is U.S. policy: a. To generate local forces—through formal alliance arrangements or otherwise—which will deter guerrilla warfare, if possible, and provide time for the mobilization of effective countermeasures, should deterrence fail.

b. To rally diplomatic, civic and military support for the nation under attack from the maximum number of nations of the free community, taking into account, with respect to civic and military contributions, the relative political acceptability, in particular regions, of the presence of various of our allies.

H. Other Missions of U.S. Forces

23. Subsidiary Tasks. The subsidiary missions assigned the armed forces (see paragraph A, 3 above) impose only minor additional specialized military requirements, but these must be given particular attention lest they be lost to sight. The accomplishment of these missions depends on a mutual awareness among civilian and military officials of the particular contributions the armed forces can make, and a willingness to offer and to accept those contributions. This in turn implies an even better reciprocal flow of information, closer liaison, and more cross-education than has sometimes been achieved in the past. U.S. military forces at home and abroad, because of their size, geographical distribution, and versatile nonmilitary capabilities continue to have great impact in various countries and exert strong influence on all our political, economic, and psychological policies. This influence should be used to our advantage.

I. Supporting Programs

The following programs provide support for all the types of U.S. forces and missions described in this chapter.

24. Reserve Forces. With due regard for political and psychological difficulties, the training, equipment, and orientation of reserve forces should be altered to fit them better for: a. Manning active defense systems.

b. Augmenting active forces in contingencies which require rapid but limited mobilization.

c. Providing reinforcements in the event of protracted local conflicts.

d. Fulfilling a significant supporting role as a secondary mission in civil defense, when civil defense plans and concepts have developed to the point where specific useful missions can be assigned to reserve units.

e. Providing additional forces and expanded base for large scale mobilization in major emergencies.

f. Provision of units to augment or replenish the strategic reserve in the CONUS.

While selected high priority units should be readied to augment or replenish the strategic reserve in the continental U.S. reserve call-ups should so far as practicable be limited to organized units and individuals with the least prior service.

25. Overseas Bases and Facilities. Although the development of ballistic missile technology has reduced the need for strategic air and missile bases overseas, the possibility of U.S. engagement in local wars or in anti-guerrilla operations creates a new need for tactical bases, overflight rights, and contingency arrangements. Moreover, requirements for peace-time storage, communications, tracking, and intelligence facilities are increasing.

To meet vital needs the U.S. should maintain an adequate system of overseas facilities for local war, military counter-insurgency operations, general war, and peacetime missions, together with the arrangements necessary for their support.

This base structure must be clearly and fully capable of supporting U.S. and allied forces in their preparation for, and conduct of, local war, wherever such war may occur throughout the world. Where local logistic limitations exist which would not prevent optimum deployment of U.S. and allied forces to a country which we would propose to defend in local war, prompt and vigorous remedial action should be taken, e.g., building more transport and other facilities in the host country or pre-stocking existing facilities in or near their country.

We should seek to limit dependence on a single base, or a group of bases, and should examine with urgency, in view of the growing nationalist and neutralist pressure on existing U.S. bases, the possibilities of maintaining services essential to U.S. security by acquiring new bases, and by developing new or applying existing technologies, which would reduce our dependence on overseas bases in general. Given the increasing diplomatic and political cost of maintaining base and facility rights overseas, and the pressure that maintenance of such bases and facilities exerts on our balance of payments position, we should make every effort to dispose in whole or in part of outmoded or unnecessary facilities, to hold new requirements to a minimum and, where needed, to secure additional rights to use existing foreign military and civil facilities.

26. Military Aid. This is dealt with in Chapter Two, following.

27. Research and Development. To maintain effective deterrence over the full spectrum of force, the free community must prosecute research and development efforts over a broad front. The U.S. should pursue research and development to maintain a selective superiority in military technology that is increasingly responsive to our political and military objectives. New emphasis should be given to research and development in two fields which have enjoyed less attention than their importance warrants: a. We should give high priority to weapons and equipment designed to improve our capabilities in sustained non-nuclear combat. We should support mutually with certain allies selected non-nuclear research and development for military application in improving such non-nuclear capabilities.

b. We should give new emphasis to weapons which will help less developed countries cope with guerrilla and local external threats.

To these ends, continuing efforts should be devoted to promoting basic scientific research (both within the military and the civilian agencies of government), to uncovering and applying technological discoveries and innovations (using both governmental and private research and development facilities), and to expediting their translation into military equipment. However, the wide range of possible improvements, the cost of changing models and making adaptations, and the nation's over-all requirement for scarce research and development resources, indicate a need for focusing more sharply on developments of significant import and for eschewing marginal improvements or those which do not remedy basic defects of existing weapons systems.

We should also seek, through research and development, to devise new capabilities for limited countermeasures against Communist pressures short of the overt use of substantial force.

28. Chemical and Biological Warfare. United States military forces should have a capability to use and defend against chemical and biological weapons. Chemical and biological weapons should only be used in case of direct decision by the President that such use is warranted by the political military situation, except for the use of: (i) existing smoke, incendiary, and riot control agents in appropriate military operations, and (2) riot control agents in suppressing civil disturbances.

J. Arms Control and Disarmament

29. The U.S. Interest in Arms Control and Disarmament. The fifth and final element in the effort to maintain a stable military environment is our policy toward arms control and disarmament. The U.S. security interest in arms control and disarmament derives directly from the following characteristics of U.S. military policy and of the present and foreseeable military environment: a. Continuation of existing trends is likely to yield an increasing number of powers which command nuclear capabilities and means of delivery—on the whole a destabilizing factor, contrary to the U.S. interest.

b. The possibility that a nuclear war might result from accident or—more likely—from miscalculation, misinterpretation of incidents, false alarms or unauthorized actions, or failure of communication—is large enough to be an important reason for seeking remedial measures.

c. The prospect over the coming years, in the absence of arms limitation, is for (i) continuing U.S. ability to inflict a high level of damage on the USSR; (ii) substantial increase in the Soviet capacity to inflict civil damage on the U.S. in all-out nuclear exchange; (iii) continuing substantial expenditures of resources and scarce talent in efforts to maintain a stable military environment.

d. Since the U.S. does not intend to initiate nuclear attack on nations ruled by Communist regimes except in riposte to prior Communist aggression, the U.S. cannot exploit the technical advantages of unprovoked, secretly planned, and surprise nuclear assault.

e. A persuasive second-strike deterrent can be maintained at lower levels of U.S. nuclear delivery capabilities than at present, without necessarily jeopardizing U.S. objectives, if we are assured that our own reductions in capabilities are matched appropriately by the USSR.

30. Objectives of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Policy. In the light of these considerations, U.S. arms control and disarmament policy should form a major element of our national policy and, as such, should seek to complement our military policy in enhancing U.S. security by promoting a stable military environment and developing the means of limiting damage should war occur. To this end the following objectives (which are not necessarily listed in order of priority) should be sought: a. The U.S. should seek to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons capabilities to nations not now controlling such capabilities.

b. It should seek to reduce the likelihood of hostilities occurring through accident, miscalculation or failure of communication.

c. It should seek to limit the capabilities of enemy states to undertake aggression against the U.S. and its allies, to reduce the risk of war, and to decrease the destructiveness of war should it occur, through substantial safeguarded reductions in armaments and other measures by the major powers, short of general and complete disarmament.

d. It should, as a long-term goal, seek to promote the political and military conditions under which the use or threat of force as an instrument of national policy would be reduced and finally eliminated, through an agreed total program of general and complete disarmament under effective international controls in a world effectively organized for peace.

Each of these four categories of measures is discussed below.

31. Steps to Prevent Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons Capabilities. In order to reduce the risk of nuclear proliferation, emphasis should be placed on seeking not only a safeguarded cessation of nuclear testing but also a safeguarded cessation of production of fissionable materials for weapons purposes and an agreement under which nuclear powers would commit themselves not to relinquish control over nuclear weapons to non-nuclear states. An agreement not to disseminate nuclear weapons should be couched in terms that would not call into question either existing NATO custodial arrangements or any contemplated allied multi-lateral arrangement.

32. Initial Measures to Reduce the Likelihood of Accident, Miscalculation or Failure of Communication. Even if the Soviets do not share the U.S. image of the future of the world in the degree necessary to negotiate major arms reductions programs, they may come to recognize the serious dangers of accident, miscalculation and failure of communication and thus be willing to join the U.S. in limited measures to reduce those dangers. Such measures might include advance notification of military movements, creation of some facility for direct, secure, and instantaneous communication between national military command centers of the two sides, establishment of observation posts and arrangements to reduce the risk of surprise attack, and establishment of an International Commission to Reduce the Risk of War in which the U.S. and the USSR would consider further steps to promote stability, reduce tensions, dampen military crises, and minimize the need for hasty military responses. The U.S. should, even before such a Commission is established, urgently seek out opportunities informally to discuss such measures with the USSR to try to alert it to the importance and nature of the problem.

33. Limited Disarmament Measures.

Limited disarmament measures, though short of general and complete disarmament, might still be substantial and comprehensive. They might include reducing and limiting strategic nuclear delivery capabilities; reducing and limiting conventional armaments and armed forces; and insuring the peaceful uses of outer space. In negotiating limited measures, the U.S. should seek to the maximum possible extent to redress the imbalance in conventional land armaments existing between NATO and the Bloc. Such measures might reduce the risk of war, limit the cost of military programs, and reduce the destructiveness of war, if it occurs.

34. General and Complete Disarmament in a Peaceful World.

The U.S. should continue to evidence its willingness to negotiate a program and a treaty for general and complete disarmament in a peaceful world.

Such a program would involve the reduction and eventual elimination of national military capabilities except those required for maintaining internal order and for an international peace force—to be carried out by balanced, equitable, and safeguarded steps for the concurrent regulation and reduction of both nuclear and non-nuclear armed forces and armaments where appropriate, under effective verification procedures which would be reciprocal or international and would be responsive to the required amount of security dependent on the extent and kind of retained armaments. Parallel to the curtailment of national military power, such a program would promote the growth of more effective means for keeping the peace, including: renunciation of subversion and indirect aggression as instruments of policy, development of the rule of international law, improvement of procedures for settling international disputes, and development of an international peace force capable of effectively protecting all nations against breaches of the peace.

Given Soviet attitudes and policies, general and complete disarmament is unlikely of attainment in the near future. The U.S. should: (a) continue to favor such a policy, while underlining candidly its radical implications for international law and effective peace-keeping machinery; and (b) at the same time seek the more limited and feasible arms control measures set forth above.

35. Evaluation.

In evaluating arms control and disarmament measures primary consideration should, of course, be given to the degree of military risk or military advantage involved. In addition, the following factors should be weighed: the dangers inherent in the continuation of uncontrolled increases in the proliferation of armaments, the possible effect of a proposed measure on the ability of the U.S. to carry out its foreign policy, and its probable effect on over-all Communist policy and on the evolution of the Bloc.

36. Inspection and Verification.

Adequate verification must accompany arms control and disarmament. There should be effective verification of: (i) destruction of armaments or their conversion to peaceful uses; (ii) cessation or limitation of production, testing, or other specified activities; (iii) the fact that agreed levels of armaments and armed forces are not exceeded. A continuing attempt should be made to devise inspection techniques which would fully exploit technological progress, and the degree of inspection should be related to the technical need and the degree of risk to the national security involved. Some arms control measures conceivably may be assured without formal inspection machinery or may be subject to verification through national intelligence collection capabilities.

37. Arms Control and Military Planning.

It is essential that U.S. arms control planning and research be integrated with U.S. military planning. Both are directed toward improving U.S. military security, and they will only achieve this objective if they are carried forward in close concert. On the one hand, in proposing an arms control measure, we must take into account its effect on relative military capabilities and support of national strategy. At the same time, military contingency plans, research and development, and programming of armed forces and armaments should reflect an awareness of the extent to which they affect stability in the military environment, the evolution of weapons and doctrine, and the likelihood of unauthorized use of weapons.

38. Dissemination of Arms Control Knowledge.

The increasing U.S. knowledge and understanding of arms control matters should be disseminated not only to other Western powers but also to the neutrals and to the Soviet Bloc. Informal conferences, consultations, and meetings should be encouraged both within the West and on an East-West basis where we can be assured that U.S. participation will be competent, responsible, and responsive to the national interest.

39. Regional Arms Races in Newly Developing Areas.

The development of regional arms races for purposes of prestige or external adventures should be discouraged where possible. Any opportunity for tacit or explicit agreements to limit such competition should be fully exploited. We should constantly be alert to means for creating or embracing such opportunities.

[Here follow sections on “Arms Control and Disarmament,” “Policy Towards the Underdeveloped Areas,” “The Framework of Organization,” “Relations With Communist Regimes,” and “The Domestic Base.”]

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Draft 6/22/62. Secret. For information on previous drafts, see Documents 70, 83, and 90. The underlined text represents the portions that were intended to be included in short version of the paper, which was circulated on August 2. (Attachment to memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to McNamara, October 15; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 (Relo) BNSP 31 Mar 62)

1 That is, in cases where U.S. and allied strength is not sufficient—or could not be made sufficient, with a minor build-up—to permit defense against major assault without a time limit. [Footnote in the source text.]

94. Editorial Note 94. Editorial Note

By June 1962 there was considerable discussion within the U.S. Government of the ultimate disposition of the paper on “Basic National Security Policy” (see Documents 70, 83, 90, and 93). At times consideration of the question was intermingled with that of the publicity the paper had received, a development described in Document 95.

On June 13, 1962, Secretary McNamara, in a letter covering a list of changes in the May 7 draft proposed by his Department, wrote Secretary Rusk that “the thrust of the proposed policy seems highly suitable,” and that as “between the short and the long versions of the paper, I believe the long version to be the preferable format. The shorter one lacks the amplifying background so necessary to full understanding of policy statements as well as to setting the tone of policy.” McNamara suggested that more sensitive portions of the final version might be excerpted and distributed in an NSAM. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3001 (26 Nov 62))

At the White House daily staff meeting on June 20, according to a memorandum for the record by Colonel Ewell, “there was a long discussion of the BNSP due to its having broken into the papers again recently.” McGeorge Bundy decided to obtain the paper “without having Rusk take an official position on it.” Then “Bundy would try to find out what the President actually wanted to do with it.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings, May-September 1962)

In a June 28 memorandum to McNamara, Assistant Secretary of Defense Nitze indicated that by that time the June 22 draft paper was with the President. Nitze pointed out that the Department of State regarded it as unlikely that the President “would simply approve it forthwith,” and that it “would recommend to the President reconsidering such a decision.” Nitze concluded: “State plans no action until the President has indicated his wishes on the BNSP, in the expectation that DOD and JCS will then have a further opportunity to express themselves.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 (Relo) BNSP 31 Mar 62)

In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on July 2, Ewell wrote:

“The BNSP was mentioned. No one knows how Bundy plans to handle this. Kaysen said he really didn't care as he was opposed to publishing the document. He felt that it had served a useful purpose in its development and should be just thrown away. (My reading on this statement is that Kaysen doesn't like certain portions of the document and would just as soon see it killed. My guess would be that Kaysen's major disagreement is the fact that the document comes out for a position of strength in Europe and continued efforts to build Western-oriented strength in Southeast Asia. He has previously indicated he is for a modus vivendi by Western concessions in Europe and is not opposed to a neutralist Southeast Asia. I would therefore hazard the guess that he feels that the BNSP is too tough and should not be published.)” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Daily Staff Meetings, May-September 1962)

On July 10, McGeorge Bundy told Henry Owen, Vice Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, that the President had not yet made up his mind on the next steps, and asked that Rusk send a memorandum with his recommendations in the matter. (Memorandum from Owen to Rusk, July 10; Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, May-July 1962; memorandum and attachment returned to sender) Rostow's repeated drafts of a memorandum for Rusk to send to the President were returned for revision. (Memorandum from John Ford, Executive Secretary of the Policy Planning Council, to Rostow, August 22; ibid., July-August 1962) Rostow's last effort is in the enclosure to a memorandum from Ball to the Secretary dated September 11, in which Ball stated “For reasons which you and I have discussed, I would hope that we could resolve this issue short of the White House.” A marginal note indicates Rostow's memorandum was not sent. (Ibid., S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, BNSP 1961-1962)

In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on August 10, Ewell wrote that Bundy “felt the big document would never fly although Rostow is still trying to push it. He felt that a military version should be prepared to replace the old version now in existence.” Ewell told him of the Joint Staff's fear that it would be bypassed in the final review process and Bundy assured him that its views would be taken into account.

At a State-JCS meeting on October 5, Taylor stated that the Joint Chiefs had never seen the latest draft (the August 2 short form) and wanted to. U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State, suggested that the Chiefs receive the military portions only. “General Wheeler said that for the JCS this would be like having the Book of Revelations without ever having seen Genesis.” After Johnson agreed to send the entire short draft, “General Taylor said that he felt that the BNSP should be like the British Constitution and Mr. Johnson agreed that getting it engraved in concrete was not good. General Taylor then remarked that any document which gains the acceptance of everyone must of necessity be so compromised that it will be used by everyone to further his own ends.” (Memorandum of the substance of discussion at State-JCS meeting; ibid., S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, State-JCS Meetings 1962)

95. Editorial Note 95. Editorial Note

On June 26, 1962, Walt W. Rostow and George W. Ball testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee with respect to their work on the Department of State drafts of “Basic National Security Policy.” This testimony was occasioned by a series of news accounts of the drafts, especially two articles by Willard Edwards that appeared in the Chicago Tribune on June 17-18. Edwards stated that the main theme of the paper was that Soviet domestic and foreign policies were “mellowing,” but that military and intelligence officials who had seen the draft believed that it adduced no evidence to support this assertion.

In his testimony, Rostow stated that “mellowing” was “not a word of my choice” and that although there were significant changes in the Soviet Union which held a long-term hope of liberalization they did “not affect current policy.” They might “in the long run, as Secretary Dulles used to point out,” but meanwhile there were dangerous confrontations in Berlin, South Vietnam, and Laos. Rostow then gave extensive testimony on his views on a wide range of foreign policy and national security topics.

Members of the Committee requested copies of the current draft, but Ball refused on the ground that it was a document “under the control of the National Security Council,” and therefore any such request would have to be made directly to the President. On July 3, Rusk stated before the Committee that he would ask the President about possible publication of Rostow's testimony given on June 26. Edwards' articles, the testimony of Ball and Rostow, and Rusk's remarks are all printed in Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Together With Joint Sessions With the Senate Armed Services Committee (Historical Series), Volume XIV, Eighty-seventh Congress, Second Session, 1962 (Washington, 1986), pages 551-611, 615.

The term “a certain mellowing,” used with regard to liberalizing trends in the Soviet Union, occurs in both the March 26 and May 7 drafts of “Basic National Security Policy,” but is dropped in the draft of June 22. See Documents 70 and 93.

At his press conference on June 27, President Kennedy was asked whether he had assigned the writing of the paper to Rostow “or did he just undertake it on his own to interpret policies of the Government?” Kennedy stated that “we have in the National Security Council voluminous papers from the Fifties which are the general guide of policy lines in the United States. But there have been a good many changes since the nineteen-fifties.” He continued: “We are examining to see guerilla warfare, anti-insurgency, what should be our military policy in it, what should be our force levels. These are matters which both the State Department and the Department of Defense are examining and will come through to the National Security Council and to see whether there should be any changes in the policies that we laid down—were laid down in the nineteen-fifties.” He concluded: “I have not studied the paper; the Secretary of State has it. But Mr. Rostow is acting under instructions and acting very responsibly.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1962, pages 509-517) See also Document 70 and Walt W. Rostow, The Diffusion of Power: An Essay in Recent History (New York: Macmillan, 1972), pages 174-176 and 645-646.

96. National Intelligence Estimate 96. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 6, 1962.

NIE 11-8-62

SOVIET CAPABILITIES FOR LONG RANGE ATTACK

The Problem

To estimate probable trends in the strength and deployment of Soviet weapon systems suitable for long range attack, and in Soviet capabilities for such attack, projecting forward for about five years.1

Conclusions

1. Major new developments are evident in Soviet programs for long range striking forces. First, as forces for attack on Eurasia are reaching planned levels, greater emphasis is being placed on forces for intercontinental attack, especially ICBMs. Second, the Soviets are attempting to improve their capabilities for both preemptive and retaliatory action, by measures designed to shorten reaction times and increase survivability.

2. The tempo of the ICBM program has quickened. The present relatively modest force level of about 50 operational launchers will probably grow substantially, reaching some 125-175 launchers in mid-1963 and 200-300 in mid-1964.2 -3 From 1963 onwards, an increasing proportion of the ICBM force will probably be deployed at launch sites having some degree of hardening.

3. The USSR is developing a submerged-launch ballistic missile submarine system, with medium or intermediate range missiles. This improved system will probably be incorporated into some portion of the 40 or so existing ballistic missile submarines, and into a new submarine class. Soviet submarines armed with cruise-type missiles are also capable of attacking land targets. Within the next few years, Soviet nuclear-powered missile submarines will probably be conducting regular patrols within firing range of the US.

4. For employment against Eurasia, the Soviets have built formidable missile and bomber forces, which they will continue to maintain and improve. Their limited bomber capability against North America will be tailored increasingly to conduct missions supplementary to ballistic missile attack.

5. The weight of nuclear attack which the USSR could launch will increase with the growth of long range striking forces and a general upward trend in weapon yields. Within the next few years, limited numbers of very high yield weapons in the 25-100 megaton range will be available for delivery by bombers and probably ICBMs. Ground-launched missile units are believed to have more than one missile per launcher, to provide a refire capability.

6. In the mid-1960's, the principal Soviet forces for attack on North America will be increasing numbers of ICBM launchers, supplemented by increasing numbers of nuclear-powered missile submarines and decreasing numbers of bombers. In a preemptive attack at that time, the USSR would be able to strike at the fixed bases of an important segment of the US nuclear delivery capability. Moreover, it would have some prospect that a portion of its own long range striking forces could survive an initial US attack and go on to retaliate.

7. With the long range striking forces we estimate it will have in the mid-1960's, however, the USSR could not expect to destroy the hardened, airborne, seaborne, and fast reaction nuclear delivery capabilities of the US.

Discussion

Soviet Policy Toward Long Range Striking Forces

8. The Soviets regard forces for long range attack as essential for supporting an aggressive political posture, deterring the West from resort to military action, and fighting a war as effectively as possible should one occur. In our view, they are building forces which they regard as appropriate to these objectives rather than attempting to achieve the very high degree of superiority required to launch a deliberate attack on the West. Efforts to gear their forces better for both preemptive and retaliatory operations, along with greater emphasis upon forces capable of attacking the US, are the major new developments in the Soviet programs for long range striking forces.

9. In building these forces, the Soviets put initial stress on creating a massive capability against Eurasia and its periphery. Intercontinental capabilities were not neglected, but deployment of medium range delivery systems occurred earlier and in much larger numbers. This pattern is probably changing. We believe that deployment of medium range systems is approaching the planned level, and that major emphasis is now being given to further development of forces for intercontinental attack, primarily ICBMs.

Major Weapon Programs, 1962-1964

Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles

10. The tempo of ICBM development and deployment has quickened noticeably in the past year or two. While present force levels are relatively modest, there is good evidence that the Soviets have been conducting high priority R&D on new ICBM systems, with concurrent construction of deployment complexes. Moreover, the Soviets are probably building new sites with some degree of hardening.

11. Development and Deployment. During the past 18 months, activity on the Soviet ICBM test range has intensified, with firings of three different types of ICBMs. The most urgent recent program at Tyuratam has been the development of the second generation SS-7 ICBM system, which is now being deployed. Testing of the SS-8 ICBM has proceeded at a slower pace; it could be available for operational use in 1963. Firings of the first generation SS-6 ICBM, which probably became operational in 1960, have been at a reduced pace. We believe that within the next year or so the Soviets will begin firing new ICBMs or space vehicles which are as yet unknown to US intelligence.

12. The urgency apparent in the development of the second generation ICBM almost certainly relates to a Soviet decision to deploy the first generation system in only limited numbers. The SS-6 ICBM is a very large vehicle of nearly half a million pounds gross takeoff weight, with nonstorable liquid propellants and radio-inertial guidance. Ground control and support facilities are correspondingly large and include rail service direct to launchers. The second generation SS-7 ICBM is simpler and considerably less bulky, and probably employs storable liquid propellants and all-inertial guidance. A typical SS-7 complex consists of a rail-served support area and eight or more launchers, which are deployed in pairs and are road-served.

13. Probable Hardening. All currently operational Soviet launchers are deployed at soft, fixed sites, but we believe the Soviets have probably initiated a program to construct launch sites having some degree of hardening. Considering past Soviet practices, we estimate that there will be two ICBM launchers at each site. The first of these new sites will probably be operational in early 1963. It is probable that such sites are to employ either the SS-7 ICBM with redesigned ground support equipment or the SS-8 ICBM. Our information on the SS-8 system is inadequate to determine whether the missile employed is even larger than the SS-6 or whether it is smaller than the SS-7.

14. Estimated Force Levels to 1964. The ICBM force will increase substantially above its present level in the next year or so. Our estimate of the growth of the force in this period is affected, on the one hand, by the increasing tempo of the Soviet program, and on the other hand, by the greater time and effort required to build hardened launch sites. Considering these factors, together with all the other evidence available to us, we estimate as follows the size and composition of the ICBM force to 1964:4 -5

[Here follows a table that shows totals of 250-300 SS-7 launchers and 50-150 hardened launch sites by mid-1964.] [Footnote in the source text.]

OPERATIONAL SOVIET ICBM LAUNCHERS, 1962-1964

Mid-1962 Mid-1963 Mid-1964

Soft 1st Generation (SS-6)... 6-10 6-10 6-10

Soft 1st Generation (SS-7).... 40-45 110-140 150-200

Hardened................................... 10-25 50-100

Approximate Total.......................... 50 125-175 200-300

Medium and Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles

15. MRBM and IRBM sites, each with four pads, are soft, fixed, and road-served. More than 90 percent are deployed in a broad belt of Western USSR stretching from the Baltic to the Black Sea, within range of NATO targets in Norway, most of Western Europe, and Turkey. A lesser concentration of sites in the Soviet Far East is capable of bringing Japan, Korea, and Okinawa under fire. A few sites in south central USSR are within range of US and Allied military installations in Turkey and Pakistan. IRBMs could extend the target coverage from these various areas to include all of Spain, North Africa, Taiwan, and the northern Philippines.

16. We estimate that the USSR now has about 500 operational MRBM and IRBM launch pads. We do not have evidence that all of the launch pads are manned, and it is possible that some of them represent alternate firing positions. The site construction program has probably slowed but not ceased. The force will probably grow over the next year or two to a total of about 55-650 launch pads (including some 50-100 IRBMs), after which it will probably level off.

Operational Procedures of Missile Units

17. ICBM, IRBM, and MRBM units are believed to have refire capabilities. Although the evidence is not firm, we believe that an average of two missiles is provided for each launch pad. Preparation to fire initial and subsequent salvoes probably requires a number of hours. Sophisticated methods of attaining a high degree of simultaneity and flexibility in operations are not believed to be employed. The USSR is working to reduce the reaction and refire times of strategic missile units, but current system designs will preclude the constant maintenance of readiness conditions approaching those of US systems.

Submarine-Launched Missiles

18. The Soviets now have operational about 40 long range ballistic missile submarines, including 7 diesel-powered “Z” class, 25 diesel-powered “G” class, and 10 nuclear-powered “H” class submarines. This force carries a total of about 120 ballistic missiles with ranges up to 350 n.m. The effectiveness of these submarines is limited by the small number of missiles each carries, the short range of the missiles, and the requirement for submarines to surface for launching. There is reliable evidence, however, that the Soviets are now developing a capability to launch ballistic missiles from submerged submarines. The range of the missiles may be either 650 or 2,000 n.m. A program to retrofit some portion of the existing force of about 35 “G” and “H” class submarines will probably begin soon. All of these submarines could be so equipped within the next two or four years. A new nuclear-powered submarine class is probably also under development to employ this new missile system; we estimate that the first submarine could become operational in 1963-1964. The probable numbers of ballistic missile submarines in Soviet operational units through mid-1964 are estimated as follow:

SOVIET BALLISTIC MISSILE SUBMARINES 1962-1964

Mid-1962 Mid-1963 Mid-1964

Diesel-powered............ 32 32-35 32-35

Nuclear-powered............ 10 12-15 15-20

19. The Soviet Navy has also developed 350 n.m. submarine-launched cruise missile systems, designed primarily for low altitude, supersonic attack against Western surface ships, particularly carrier task forces. They are now carried by a few converted diesel-powered submarines and at least four nuclear-powered submarines. We believe that the Soviets are now extending their capability to attack land targets with missiles of this type.

Long Range Aviation

20. Soviet Long Range Aviation, by reason of its equipment, basing, and deployment, is much better suited to Eurasian operations than to intercontinental attack. We estimate that as of mid-1962 Long Range Aviation comprises some 165 heavy bombers and 950 jet medium bombers.6 Virtually all of the medium bombers are Badgers, but a few supersonic Blinders have probably now been delivered to units. It is unlikely that a new heavy bomber will be developed for operational use.7 Recent trends indicate little change in total aircraft strength over the next two years.

[Here follows a table that shows totals of 115 Bison bombers, 75 Bear bombers, and 10 follow-on heavy tankers by mid-1964.] [Footnote in the source text.]

ESTIMATED STRENGTH OF LONG RANGE AVIATION 1962-1964

Bombers and Tankers Mid-1962 Mid-1963 Mid-1964

Heavy

Bison............... 110 110 100

Bear................ 55 55 50

Total................ 165 165 150

Medium

Badger............... 950 900 800

Blinder.............. a few 50 100

Total................ 950 950 900

21. In attempting to overcome the range limitations of Long Range Aviation for intercontinental attack, the Soviets have given considerable emphasis to aerial refueling and Arctic training in Badger and Bison units. Most of the Bears have been modified to deliver 350 n.m. air-to-surface missiles. We believe that the Soviets might plan to commit as many as 400-500 aircraft to initial attacks on North America. Considering a variety of operational factors, but excluding combat attrition, we estimate that the Soviets could now put about 200 bombers over North America on two-way missions in initial attacks; of these nearly half could be heavy bombers. The patterns of Arctic training and base utilization indicate that aircraft would probably be staged through a few bases in successive waves over a number of hours.8

Nuclear Weapons

22. The present Soviet stockpile consists almost entirely of weapons developed from nuclear tests conducted prior to the 1961 test series. Most of the weapons allotted to Long Range Aviation are probably high-yield types ranging from about 100 KT to 8 MT. Ballistic missiles now in service could deliver warheads with maximum yields in the megaton range. MRBMs are probably also equipped with lower yield warheads. Naval cruise-type missiles and air-to-surface missiles are probably armed with warheads of low or medium yield for use against ships, but could deliver warheads in the low megaton range against land or coastal targets. The general trend in the yields of weapons allotted to long range attack will probably be upwards. A few very high yield bombs of 25 MT, or even 100 MT, could now be available. It is possible that a few ICBMs capable of delivering these very high yield weapons could be available within the next two years.9

Trends in Long Range Striking Forces, 1965-1967

23. In the middle 1960's the USSR will continue to strengthen and modernize its long range striking forces, with emphasis on those systems capable of attacking the US. The effort devoted to long range attack forces will be affected by the competing demands of other essential military and nonmilitary programs. We cannot estimate with confidence the decisions the Soviet leaders will make or the success they are likely to achieve in various weapons programs. However, we believe that while a mixed striking capability will be retained, the ICBM will be the dominant weapon.

ICBM Forces

24. The Soviet ICBM program will be influenced by a variety of factors: Soviet strategic concepts, technical improvements, other Soviet weapons programs, the nature and size of Western forces, and the international situation. These factors place broad limits on the future Soviet ICBM force but do not lead us too particular program. For this reason we can only estimate the Soviet force level within a broad range. All things considered, we believe the Soviet force level in mid-1967 will be within the range of 300-600 operational launchers. The majority of launchers will probably have a degree of hardening, including some fully hardened. To achieve the high side of the range, the USSR would need to commit resources throughout this period at rates at least as high as those now evident in the ICBM program. Many of the launchers will probably have more than one missile available, to provide a refire capability. Our estimate, reflecting the considerable range of uncertainty in any figures for this period, is as follows:

OPERATIONAL SOVIET ICBM LAUNCHERS

1965-196710 -11

[Here follows a table that shows totals of 250-300 soft ICBM launchers, 150-200 hard launchers, and about 300 fully hard launchers by mid 1967.] [Footnote in the source text.]

Mid-1965 Mid-1966 Mid-1967

Soft............ 150-250 150-250 150-250

Hardened........ 100-175 120-250 125-250

Fully Hard...... 0-a few a few-25 25-100

Approx. Total... 250-425 275-525 300-600

25. The smaller force would give the Soviets high assurance in an initial attack of destroying US soft fixed nuclear bases, semihardened ICBM sites, communication and control facilities, and the principal US metropolitan areas. The larger force would provide an additional attack capability against some hardened targets, control centers, and other elements contributing to US striking and defensive strength, and would increase the Soviet retaliatory capability. We believe that the programmed buildup in US intercontinental attack forces makes it increasingly unlikely that the Soviets would judge that they could launch an on US nuclear forces and inflict sufficient damage to assure that resulting damage to the USSR was acceptable.

26. The accuracy, reliability, and reaction time of the ICBM force will improve. Better command, communications, and other equipment will increase its flexibility and capability for simultaneous attack. The bulk of the force will probably be equipped with warheads in the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] range, but a number of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missiles an. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missiles will probably be available. To improve the survivability of the force, the Soviets will probably continue to deploy ICBMs at launchers which are dispersed and have some degree of hardening. They will also probably develop a fully hardened system which we believe could become operational in 1965 or 1966.

MRBM and IRBM Forces

27. Soviet strength in these systems will probably have been stabilized before 1965 at approximately 550-650 operational launch pads. To improve the survivability of the MRBM force, the Soviets may also develop road mobile or hardened systems.

Submarine-Launched Forces

28. Soviet planners will probably look upon submarine missile forces as an important supplement to their ICBM strength because of their relative invulnerability and their capability for varying the direction and nature of attacks on the US. We believe that the number of nuclear-powered submarines capable of launching ballistic missiles will be on the order of 25-30 in mid-1967. The Soviets will probably also have about two dozen nuclear submarines equipped with cruise-type missiles. In addition, diesel-powered missile submarines will remain in operation. The ranges of submarine-launched missiles may be extended to as much as 2,000 n.m. for ballistic missiles, and to 650 n.m. for cruise missiles. By the mid-1960's, some Soviet nuclear-powered missile submarines will probably be conducting regular patrols within missile range of US coasts.

Bomber Forces

29. With the growth and improvement of missile capabilities, the Soviets would probably plan to employ bomber forces in follow-on attacks after initial missile strikes had been delivered or to supplement the retaliatory blow if the USSR were attacked first. Aircraft equipped with improved penetration aids and nuclear weapons would probably be used for increasingly specialized missions, such as armed reconnaissance and attacks on hard targets. By mid-1967, Long Range Aviation will probably include some 750 medium bombers, about one-third of them supersonic Blinders. Heavy bomber strength will probably have been reduced to about 100 aircraft. We estimate as follows the strength of Long Range Aviation in the mid-1960's:

Bombers and Tankers Mid-1965 Mid-1966 Mid-1967

Heavy12

Bison................. 90 80 70

Bear.................. 45 40 35

Total................ 135 120 105

Medium

Badger................ 700 600 500

Blinder............... 150 200 250

Total................. 850 800 750

Space Systems

30. We have no evidence of Soviet plans or programs for the military use of space. We think it highly unlikely, however, that the USSR would omit this field in its vigorous search for qualitative improvements in its military posture and for achievements with which to support claims of superiority. We believe that the Soviets could launch reconnaissance, communications, meteorological, navigation, or geodetic satellites at any time. There is no evidence that the Soviets are working to develop offensive space weapon systems, but the course of the Soviet space program to date suggests that any effort in this field would be directed toward an orbital bombardment vehicle. It would be technically feasible for the Soviets to launch weapons of limited capability into orbit in the mid-1960's, but we do not believe they could achieve an effective offensive capability by the end of the decade.13

Implications of Capabilities

31. The capabilities of Soviet long range striking forces will be only in part a function of the numbers of weapons available, their performance, and the adequacy of supporting elements. Equally critical will be the way in which the Soviets employ their striking forces, their ability to maximize the effects of these forces under the various circumstances in which war could begin, and their assessment of Western capabilities and plans.

32. The current Soviet targeting concept reflects the view that even a general nuclear war is likely to be protracted and that victory requires the reduction of all elements of the Western warmaking potential. These elements include: the bases of strategic delivery systems; nuclear weapons facilities; communication and governmental centers; military and war supporting industry. We have no evidence that avoidance of heavy civilian casualties is among the objectives underlying Soviet targeting.

33. Should the Soviets conclude that the West was irrevocably committed to an imminent nuclear attack on the USSR, they would launch their available ready forces in a pre-emptive attack designed to blunt the expected Western blow. The mixed force which they have available for such operations would permit flexibility of tactics and complicate Western defensive problems, but would pose severe difficulties of coordination. Initial missile and bomber attacks against the US would probably extend over a period of many hours, and those against Eurasia over at least a few hours. We believe that at present the Soviets would plan to employ few if any missile submarines in initial attacks against the US; initiation of routine submarine patrols within missile range of the US could change this situation.

34. By the mid-1960's, the USSR will have acquired a substantial missile capability to deliver nuclear weapons against the US, in addition to its already formidable forces for strikes in Eurasia. Significant portions of this force will be relatively invulnerable to attack. The Soviets will be in a position to strike pre-emptively at the fixed bases of an important segment of the US nuclear delivery force, and they will have some prospect that a portion of their own force could survive an initial US attack and retaliate with high yield nuclear weapons. With the long range striking forces we estimate that they will have in the mid-1960's, however, the Soviets could still not expect to destroy the growing numbers of US hardened, airborne, seaborne, and fast reaction nuclear delivery vehicles.14

[Here follow a glossary and a set of tables.]

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/62. Top Secret. A note on the cover sheet indicates the estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence. The note reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 The weapon systems considered are ground-launched missiles with ranges of 700 nautical miles (n.m.) or more, submarine-launched missiles, heavy and medium bombers, air-to-surface missiles, and advanced delivery and supporting systems such as orbital and suborbital vehicles. Emphasis is placed on those systems designed primarily to attack land targets in North America, and in Eurasia and its periphery. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, believes that the number of Soviet ICBM launchers is unlikely to exceed the low side of the ranges shown for mid-1963 and mid-1964. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates the number of operational launchers as follows: mid-1962, 75-100; mid-1963, 175-250; and mid-1964, 300-450. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, believes that the number of Soviet ICBM launchers is unlikely to exceed the low side of the ranges shown for mid-1963 and mid-1964. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates about 75-100 operational ICBM launchers in mid-1962. He would estimate the force levels through 1964 as follows:

6 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the heavy bomber force will have the composition included in the following table:

7 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that a follow-on heavy bomber will be introduced in 1964. The continued research and development of large supersonic aircraft substantiates the Soviets' interest in large supersonic vehicles and indicates their intent to increase their strategic attack capabilities by such means. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the Soviets would use a number of bases for staging and would not be restricted in their mode of attack. He further believes that the Soviets could commit about 750 aircraft to initial two-way attacks on North America. Considering operational factors and allowing for noncombat attrition, about 300 bombers could reach North American targets. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 For a detailed discussion of Soviet nuclear weapon characteristics, see NIE 11-2-62, “The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” dated 18 May 1962, Top Secret (Limited Distribution). [Footnote in the source text.]

10 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, believes that the force level is likely to be towards the low side of the estimate presented in the table above. [Footnote in the source text.]

11 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes the operational Soviet ICBM launchers for the period 1965-1967 will be as follows:

12 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that the heavy bomber force will have the composition included in the following table (see footnotes 7 and 8):[Here follows a table that shows totals of 90 Bison bombers, 50 Bear bombers, and 60 follow-on heavy tankers by mid-1967.] [Footnote in the source text.]

13 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that a Soviet orbital bombardment capability could be achieved prior to the end of the decade. Based on technical considerations and using a (large) SS-8 booster and techniques known to exist today or to be within Soviet capability, he believes that such a system could be developed as early as 1965. This system could be composed of orbital vehicles of 30,000 pounds gross weight, which could deorbit a very high yield weapon to a CEP of 4 n.m. initially and later to 1.8 n.m. [Footnote in the source text.]

14 On July 7, Rusk “noted the possible need of an immediate increase in our Polaris program” on the basis of this estimate, and “felt” that a senior group should study the “implications of the new information which we now have on Soviet capabilities. He questioned whether there might not be additional need for disarmament or on the other hand, had we not reached a point where superiority alone had become irrelevant.” (Briefing of Secretary Rusk held July 7; Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/62)

97. Editorial Note 97. Editorial Note

At the 501st and 502d meetings of the National Security Council on July 9 and 10, 1962, the Council considered NIE 11-8-62 (Document 96). At the July 9 meeting, the Council was briefed on the NIE by John McCone and Howard Stoertz of the Office of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. Summary non-substantive minutes of the meeting are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSC 7/19/63. In NSC Action No. 2452, the Council noted the briefing and agreed to discuss the implications of NIE 11-8-62 the next day. (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council)

No full minutes of the July 10 meeting have been found, but NSC Action No. 2453 states that the Council discussed the conclusion of the NIE and noted the President's request that “a study be made of the effect on the conduct of Soviet foreign policy of the Soviet military posture summarized” in the NIE, to include military implications of the estimate for the United States. The study was to be made by a special committee chaired by the Department of State representative and including representatives of the Department of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the White House. The committee's report was to be ready by August 15. (Ibid.) For the report, see Document 103. McCone's partial description of the July 10 meeting is Document 98.

98. Notes for Action 98. Notes for ActionSource

Washington, July 10, 1962.

NOTES FOR DCI ACTION

1. At today's meeting1 Secretary Rusk discussed a plan of the State Department to advise certain allies and neutrals of the board aspects of our satellite reconnaissance program. Rusk read from a draft paper which had been prepared for this purpose. CIA must follow this carefully and so should DOD as this has serious security implications and must not be carried too far in view of the known Soviet penetrations of both our allies and certain free nations.

Action: Discuss with Scoville.

2. The President indicated the appointment of a working committee to examine the implications of the Soviet rising long-range attack capability on their policy in disputed areas, most particularly Berlin. Committee to be headed by Alexis Johnson, DOD represented by Paul Nitze, and CIA to nominate a senior person as our representative. In the discussion McCone proposed the National Board of Estimates be used, and this was agreed. The Johnson subcommittee should prepare the definition of the problem for the Board. The President further directed that this committee should report to a committee of principals composed of Rusk, McNamara, McCone, with Lemnitzer representing JCS, and General Taylor the White House.

3. In discussing the NIE 11-8,2 McNamara gave the following figures as representative of the number of ICBM and MRBM sites in the Soviet Union (as contrasted with launchers). For 1967 the National Intelligence Estimate 11-8 gave a low of 363 and a high of 538; the Air Force in dissent had a low of 488 and a high of 663.

On September 23, 1961, Secretary McNamara presented a paper to the President3 which was used for the purpose of our long-range strike force capability in which he used the Soviet figures as a low of 550 and a high of 1400. McNamara made the point that to offset a Soviet capability of the magnitude indicated in his figures, he felt comfortable with the USIB estimate. Not mentioned, but pertinent, is the destructive power of the weapons as now envisaged in 11-8, as contrasted with the size of warheads envisaged last September.

John A. McCone4
Director

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DCI (McCone) Files: Job 80-B01285A, Box 9, Folder 5, DCI Memoranda 3/1/62-4/30/65. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by McCone.

1 Reference is to the 502d NSC meeting; see Document 97.

2 Presumably McNamara is referring to NIE 11-8-62, Document 96.

3 Possible reference to Document 46.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

99. Memorandum From the Interagency Committee on Police Assistance Programs to President Kennedy 99. Memorandum From the Interagency Committee on Police Assistance Programs to President KennedySource

Washington, July 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report of Committee on Police Assistance Programs

There is hereby submitted the report of the interagency committee created pursuant to your request in National Security Action Memorandum 146.1

Briefly, the Committee believes that the U.S. police assistance programs form a very important but neglected part of our intensified effort to help emerging nations counter subversion and insurgency. Such programs are particularly helpful as “preventive medicine”, since the police are normally responsible for coping with urban and rural dissidence before it reaches major proportions. Moreover, police assistance costs very little in comparison to the potential return. For example, in the peak year of FY 1958 the cost of AID programs in 21 countries, involving 690,000 police, totaled only about $14,000,000. In that year, DOD programs ran $5,800,000 in 5 countries. It is also worth noting that the Bloc has not to date provided much competition in this field. We and our allies should continue to pre-empt them in this highly sensitive area.

However, police programs in general, despite their repeated highest level endorsement since 1954, have not received the U.S. Government attention they deserve. The most serious weakness has been lack of strong central direction by the responsible agencies and comparative neglect by their policy-level officials over the past several years. We have also identified serious technical shortcomings that limit the effectiveness of our programs.

The Committee further believes that we have set our program sights too low. The U.S. should increase its emphasis on the use of police programs as counter-insurgency tools wherever there is a clearly demonstrable need. After a quick survey, we feel that the U.S. could perhaps usefully invest up to double the present program level over the next year or so, if adequate personnel can be found. Thereafter we would envisage a more gradual increase, but almost certainly a continued substantial one in view of the increasing number of new countries needing such help. Indeed, we doubt that there is another aspect of the U.S. internal defense effort where greater gains can be realized at such small cost.

But police assistance programs will not reach their full potential unless the program is given more vigorous management. While the Committee believes that this management should be civilian in character, and thus should remain logically in AID, this agency must greatly strengthen its capabilities to manage police programs if the objective is to be achieved.

Much improved training, both of foreign police personnel and of U.S. trainers, is another pressing need. Since present U.S. facilities are wholly inadequate, there should be established in the U.S. an international police academy for this purpose. Detailed studies should immediately be undertaken to this end. The U.S. needs to develop a professional cadre of experienced police advisors, few of whom exist at present.

Therefore, the Committee recommends that you approve the following recommendations which are designed to overcome these shortcomings and to give proper focus to a key element in the U.S. internal defense effort:2

1. That the U.S. give considerably greater emphasis to police assistance programs in appropriate less developed countries where there is an actual or potential threat of internal subversion or insurgency; to this end, while individual programs should be subject to normal review processes, AID should envisage very substantial increases in the global level of the FY 1963 program, with further increases in subsequent years where there is a demonstrated need. DOD should also give, where appropriate, increased emphasis to the police aspects of existing MAP programs.

2. That the Committee's statement of the role and function of police programs and criteria for their initiation in the attached report be the basis for guidance in Washington and to the field; that, using this guidance, AID insure that Washington agencies and country teams give appropriate priority to police assistance, including equipment where needed.

3. That, subject to the general policy guidance of the Department of State in internal defense matters, the Administrator of AID be charged, in his capacity as coordinator of U.S. aid programs, with responsibility for coordination and vigorous leadership of all police assistance programs; that he establish an interagency police group, to be chaired by his designee, to assist him in this responsibility.

4. That AID be charged with operating and funding responsibility for all such programs, except for their covert aspects and for those programs which the Administrator of AID decides should be carried out by the Department of Defense.

5. That to carry out its responsibilities, AID establish an office specifically charged with police matters, staffed with sufficient qualified personnel to: (a) provide centralized professional and technical planning guidance to the country teams, police missions and State and AID regional bureaus; (b) provide professional and technical guidance and professional and technical supervision in implementing programs; (c) establish and supervise training requirements for U.S. police technicians, and standards of evaluating professional competence; (d) to conduct surveys and program evaluations; (e) to provide an essential repository of technical knowledge based on research in the latest techniques of controlling subversion and mass violence; that AID appoint a senior professional to head this office, responsible to the Special Assistant-Internal Defense with direct access to the Deputy Administrator; that while line responsibility for AID police programs remains with each regional AID bureau, sufficient professional personnel should be assigned to the new Office to provide the centralized staff support outlined above.

6. That AID promptly devise methods for improving recruitment and training of personnel especially suitable for work with foreign police forces; that other U.S. agencies cooperate in making qualified personnel available for duty with the police assistance program without prejudice to their career status.

7. That AID should initiate the necessary studies and interdepartmental coordination looking toward early establishment of an international police academy under Government management to coordinate training more closely with U.S. internal defense objectives and tighten U.S. Government control over all training to improve its quality and insure its responsiveness to need.

8. That, to protect police programs, with their primarily internal defense rationale, from suffering as marginal competitors with primarily economic development projects, AID and the Bureau of the Budget should develop some means of providing the necessary degree of funding autonomy, such as creating a new AID line item for “internal defense” in the FY 1964 budget or funding through the Military Assistance Program though keeping the program in AID.

9. That AID develop ways to expedite delivery of equipment, perhaps through stockpiling standard items.

10. That, whenever possible, we coordinate our police effort with similar programs of other friendly Western countries to assure that they are complementary; that we encourage such countries to provide similar assistance where appropriate but not rely exclusively on them for this purpose; that our aims in this respect should be to assure that adequate Western assistance is available to any country which needs it and to deny the police assistance field to the Communist Bloc.

11. That the Administrator of AID, as coordinator of U.S. aid programs, be charged with carrying out the above recommendations, and that he report to you no later than 1 December 1962 on progress made; that this report include his revised FY 1963 and proposed FY 1964 program level.

12. That the Special Group (C-I) review the implementation of this report in accordance with the responsibilities assigned under National Security Action Memorandum 124.3

FC4
AID Member

Henry Rowen
DOD Member
[name not declassified]
CIA Member

Robert Amory, Jr.
BOB Member

Courtney Evans
Justice Member

RW Komer
WH Staff Member

U. Alexis Johnson
Chairman and State Member

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Interdepartmental Committee on Police. Secret.

1 The 22-page report is not printed. (Ibid.) Regarding NSAM No. 146, see footnote 3, Document 72.

2 In NSAM No. 177, dated August 7, President Kennedy approved all of the numbered recommendations below and put them into the form of a directive. (Department of State, S/S- NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Interdepartmental Committee on Police)

3 Document 68.

4 Frank Coffin was the AID representative.

100. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor) 100. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to the President's Military Representative (Taylor)Source

Washington, July 28, 1962.

SUBJECT

Draft Report of Special Inter-departmental Committee on the Implications of NIE 11-8-62 and Related Intelligence

Attached is the draft Report of our Committee, as prepared by the Bohlen and Nitze working groups.1

It is my understanding that there is full agreement except for the question of the inclusion or non-inclusion of paragraph 8 of section II on “Implications for US Defense Policy” (p. 8), and the corresponding paragraphs 5.f. and g. of Annex A (p. 10 of the Annex).2 Mr. Nitze, as the representative of the Secretary of Defense, does not wish to include those paragraphs, and proposes an alternative concluding sentence to paragraph 5. e. of the Annex to use in place of them. The sentence which he proposes follows:

“In addition to our penetration aids program, two other current US programs have an important bearing on this problem: first, a vigorous continuation of our own efforts to overcome the technical obstacles and develop militarily useful ABM defenses; second, an information program designed to counter Soviet political and propaganda exploitation of the ABM issue.”3

I propose that we meet in my office at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, August 1, to discuss the difference noted above and to approve a final draft of the Report for submission to our Principals.4

I want to thank and to commend the chairmen and members of the working groups who have drafted the Report.

U. Alexis Johnson5

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/62. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Also addressed to General Lemnitzer, Nitze, and Sherman Kent, Assistant Director for National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency. Copies were sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Hilsman, General Holtoner, and Garthoff.

1 Not printed. For text of the final report, see Document 103. Johnson was Chairman of the Special Inter-Agency Committee that prepared the draft report pursuant to NSC Action No. 2453 (see Document 97). The Committee was made up of three working groups. Nitze headed the group that reviewed U.S. defense programs; Charles E. Bohlen, Special Assistant to Secretary Rusk, headed a group that analyzed Soviet political and military policy; and Kent directed an intelligence group.

2 These paragraphs were reworded in the final report; see Document 103.

3 Paragraph 5e was unchanged in the Annex to the final report, but part of this language was incorporated in the revised paragraph 5g.

4 No record of this meeting has been found. In the second of three attachments to an August 1 memorandum to Taylor, Smith wrote: “Mr. Nitze's argument rests principally on his implicit assumption that the Nike Zeus has not solved the technical problems inherent in an anti-missile defense system. He should be asked to detail his reasoning. Then the Committee can better decide whether these technical disadvantages outweigh the political advantages of early deployment.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chronological File, July-September 1962 (4))

5 Printed from a copy that bears Johnson's signature in an unidentified hand.

101. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 101. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, July 29, 1962.

SUBJECT

Report to the President on Implications for U.S. Foreign and Defense Policy of Recent Intelligence Estimates

As you will recall, the President at the NSC meeting on July 10 requested an inter-departmental review of the policy implications of NIE 11-8-62 and other related intelligence on Soviet military progress, under State chairmanship.1

Our committee now has a draft report on which we shall meet Wednesday,2 and which will then be submitted to you and the other Principals concerned for your review preparatory to its submission to the President.

I thought you might want to acquaint yourself with the draft report prior to our meeting on the final version for formal submission to you, and I would of course appreciate any comments you might have at this stage. I also want to alert you to the one disagreement in our considerations.

The divergence of view concerns the implications for our own programs of more rapid Soviet advances in anti-missile programs than we had previously expected. In our view, the rapid Soviet development of an anti-ICBM system, and recent initiation of deployment of an anti-IRBM system, counsels a fresh look at our decisions on deployment of an anti-missile system. We do not believe that we should inject ourselves into the controversy within the Pentagon over whether the degree of military utility of the presently developed anti-missile systems, in particular the Nike Zeus, is sufficient to justify at this time a decision on grounds of the military capabilities of that system. Secretary McNamara has concluded that it is not. However, since the question is one of degree, and since there will be powerful political and propaganda repercussions of who is first in deploying anti-missile defenses, we do believe that the question should be reexamined with due weight given to the political considerations favoring deployment as quickly as feasible at least on a limited scale.

Paul Nitze and, we understand, Bob McNamara prefer not to raise this question. Nevertheless, it seems to us that there is an appropriate policy implication of the new intelligence, calling for a recommendation to look again at this question. We would like to discuss this subject with you further, at an appropriate time, but I wanted now to outline the difference as it presently stands within our committee. The view of the JCS is not yet clear, and that of Max Taylor is not known. CIA has informally indicated agreement with the view we had advanced, but they prefer not to engage directly on the issue other than to support our reading of the intelligence.

Chip Bohlen and Foy Kohler have taken the lead in drawing the foreign policy implications.

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting 7/9/65. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Raymond L. Garthoff, Johnson's Special Assistant and Executive Secretary of the Special Committee. Copies were sent to Bohlen, Kohler, Kitchen, and Hilsman.

1 See Document 97.

2 August 1; see footnote 5, Document 100.

102. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 102. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, July 30, 1962.

SUBJECT

Counterinsurgency Activities of the United States Government

You have requested a comprehensive progress report from all agencies concerned with counterinsurgency activities. The detailed reports have been submitted to the Special Group (Counterinsurgency) and are transmitted under cover of this memorandum.1 It is divided into two parts: General Activities of the Special Group (CI), and summary statements from the individual departments and agencies on their accomplishments in this field since January 1961. A separate report on covert activities in support of counterinsurgency is being presented to you under special security procedures.2 It is proposed to submit similar progress reports every six months, with the next one due January 1, 1963.

I. General Activities of the Special Group (CI)

Establishment of the Special Group (CI)

The Special Group for Counterinsurgency was established on January 18, 1962 to assure the integrated and most effective use of all available resources to prevent and resist subversive insurgency and related forms of indirect aggression in friendly countries. While the Special Group (CI) has ranged far and wide in its review of U.S. counterinsurgency activities, certain major functional categories stand out. These are doctrine, organization, training, research and development, paramilitary assets, country internal defense plans, foreign training, and civic action.

A. Doctrine

In order to reach agreement on the nature of the problem, to establish common objectives, and to assign tasks to the various departments and agencies, it became necessary at the outset to formulate doctrine and policy guidance. The Department of State in collaboration with the other departments and agencies concerned has prepared a statement of national doctrine, which is presently under consideration by the Special Group (CI).3

In developing doctrine, the need for established definitions for the principal terms involved became apparent. Interagency acceptance of an agreed terminology has served to clarify roles and missions between agencies in the field of counterinsurgency.

B. Departmental Organization for Counterinsurgency

The Special Group (CI) is reviewing the counterinsurgency organization of the respective departments and agencies concerned with these activities. Each department and agency concerned has identified a focal point at the senior level for the coordination of counterinsurgency activities. A chart setting forth the organization for counterinsurgency at the national level is attached to this memorandum.4

C. Training

A review of the adequacy of training in the counterinsurgency field was undertaken by the Special Group (CI). A recent tabulation of existing and projected training courses indicates that approximately 50,000 officer grade personnel will receive training in the coming year. A five-week interagency course for senior personnel has completed its first session at the Foreign Service Institute. The War Colleges, service schools, and the civilian agencies have established special courses on counterinsurgency.

At all levels of instruction, government training institutions concerned with foreign affairs or military training have, where appropriate, included significant segments on counterinsurgency in their curricula. A permanent subcommittee on training has been established by the Special Group (CI). The Secretary of State has proposed a National Academy for Foreign Affairs, which, if approved, will absorb the five-week interagency course mentioned above.

D. Research and Development for Counterinsurgency

The greatest possible use is being made of South Viet-Nam as a laboratory for technicians and equipment related to the counterinsurgency program. An intense effort is being made to spread the experience acquired in South Viet-Nam, particularly in the Armed Forces. In Washington, a joint DOD/CIA committee is reviewing all United States Research and Development activities related to counterinsurgency to ensure that our current effort is adequate. A final report5 will be ready toward the end of the year.

E. Review of Paramilitary Assets

Almost a year ago at the termination of the Cuban Study Group, it was decided to make a review of the paramilitary assets of the U.S. and of the likely paramilitary requirements. This review resulted in a series of studies covering U.S. forces and indigenous paramilitary forces world-wide. A final report, setting forth U.S. needs in this field, has been submitted, and a directive issued to appropriate departments to take corrective action relative to the noted deficiencies.

F. Country Internal Defense Plans

At the time of its establishment, the President assigned three countries (Viet-Nam, Laos, and Thailand) to the cognizance of the Special Group (CI). Subsequently, eight other countries (Burma, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Venezuela, and Iran) have been added because of the potential counterinsurgency situation within them. The Department of State has directed Chiefs of Mission to develop country internal defense plans. These plans will be reviewed by the Special Group (CI) during the first week of September. In the meantime, one plan—that for Colombia—has been approved and returned to the Ambassador for discussion with the host government and subsequent implementation. Another, a preliminary plan for Thailand, has been received and is under consideration.

The Group monitors the implementation of counterinsurgency programs in the countries assigned to it, through bi-weekly meetings with the Director of the Southeast Asia Task Force, meetings with Chiefs of Mission at such times as they are in Washington, and through periodic status reports prepared by the Department of State.

G. Police Training

U.S. supported police programs in selected countries are scrutinized by the Special Group (CI) as one of the important elements of the counterinsurgency effort. Related to this activity has been the establishment at Fort Davis, Panama Canal Zone, of a police academy for the training of Latin American students. The first class, which began July 2, consists of sixty-three students drawn from 15 Latin American countries.

H. Civic Action

In the period under discussion the Special Group (CI) has encouraged greater emphasis on civic action based on the use of military forces for economic and social development. AID, together with the Department of Defense, conducted surveys in Latin America, the Far East and Near East; developed a new funding formula; and expanded the program during the fiscal year 1962. New programs in twelve countries were initiated, and the program level increased by approximately 8 million dollars. The program involved a broad range of activities in such fields as health, education, construction, agriculture, and irrigation. For fiscal year 1963 the program is to be expanded further. It is expected that the new level will be approximately 20 million dollars, to be funded approximately equally from military and economic aid resources.

Chairman, Special Group (CI)

Maxwell D. Taylor6

* Source: Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 1/1/62-7/31/62. Secret. Attached to an undated covering note from U. Alexis Johnson to the President. Also attached to the note is a similar memorandum from Taylor to the President dated June 2.

1 Not attached.

2 Not found.

3 The final version of this paper is summarized in Document 106.

4 Not attached.

5 Not found.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

103. Memorandum for President Kennedy 103. Memorandum for President KennedySource

Washington, undated.

SUBJECT

Report on Implications for U. S. Foreign and Defense Policy of Recent Intelligence Estimates

In accordance with your instructions at the 502nd NSC Meeting on July 10, 1962,2 a study has been made of the effect on Soviet foreign policy of recent developments in the Soviet military posture, and of the implications of these Soviet military and political developments for U. S. military policy and defense policy. The study was conducted by a special committee composed of senior officials of the Departments of State and Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the White House. U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State, served as chairman of the Committee, with working groups chaired by Paul Nitze, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Charles Bohlen, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State, and Sherman Kent, Assistant Director for National Estimates, CIA. The findings of this study have now been reviewed by us, and we submit the Report of the Special Committee to you.

We would like to draw your attention particularly to the following broad conclusions of the study: 1. The new estimates of Soviet capabilities for long range attack, and of other Soviet military capabilities, do not require basic revisions or changes either in our foreign policy or in our current defense policy.

2. While intending to avoid war, the Soviets expect their growing strategic strength to lend increasing weight to their foreign policies. On a general level, growing Soviet capabilities will strengthen the Soviet leaders' belief in their ability to influence the course of events in all areas of the world. In particular issues involving a direct clash of Soviet-American interests, however, more acute considerations of military risk figure in Soviet calculations.

3. The Soviets previously were willing to act only with caution on the basis of a capability which they knew existed mainly in their opponents' minds. Their appraisal of risks may change now that their capability has become real and is growing. We recognize this possibility and its hazards for the period ahead. We nevertheless regard it as likely that the Soviets will not abandon caution in Soviet-American confrontations, including Berlin. We believe they recognize that there are limits to the challenges which they can pose without incurring the risk of military response by the U.S.

4. The Soviets will almost certainly test Western, and particularly American, reactions in order to judge whether their gains in strength have so inhibited the U.S. as to widen the scope of action which they can undertake without substantial risk of war. But the depth and vigor of their probing will depend more upon their estimate of U.S. reactions than on their calculations of relative military strength. Accordingly, they will not, in our view, automatically conclude that actions which were heretofore too risky have now become tolerably safe. It is also important to note that the calculations of relative military strength and Western reactions to probes are only part of the host of factors which will affect Soviet decisions.

5. It is clear that the Soviet successes with sputniks and ICBM tests in 1957-1958 had much to do with inspiring the confidence which led the USSR to open its challenge on the Berlin question in November 1958. Beyond this general observation, we find no precise relationship in timing between the USSR's Berlin tactics and the progress of its buildup in strategic forces. In particular, the quickening of the tempo of the ICBM program in 1961 seems unlikely to have resulted from any new decisions regarding Berlin. It reflects development and deployment decisions taken several years previously. The fairly regular buildup of intercontinental forces of all kinds projected in the estimate for the next year or so does not suggest that Soviet efforts are concentrated toward reaching some particular force level of any particular time or in relation to any particular situation, e.g., Berlin.

6. The Soviet forces now estimated for the period 1962-1967 are of a size and character which remain within the parameters used last fall in developing our own recommended strategic force mix (force levels and weapons systems) for this period. Soviet ICBM forces in particular, are estimated for the period to be approximately of the size forecast in the intelligence estimates dated September 19, 1961,3 and they remain substantially less than in the assumed high and median Soviet postures used by DOD in developing our recommended forces last fall. The new estimates indicate that a hardening program may be proceeding somewhat sooner than previously anticipated, but again the total number of hardened sites forecast for the period is still well below our planning assumption figures for 1965 and 1967. Perhaps the principal unknown presented for our planning is the influence which introduction of large yield weapons—and their number—may have on future Soviet offensive and defensive capabilities. While such weapons were taken into account in our force planning last fall, there are still uncertainties as to some of their physical effects which must be resolved before their full military implications can be determined.

7. Among the other changes forecast in recent national estimates are the growing submarine-launched missile threat, the rapid Soviet development of an anti-ballistic missile program, larger MRBM-IRBM forces than previously estimated, the possibility of Soviet weapons in space, and the intensifying problem of civil defense.

8. Our present re-examination of the situation in light of the latest estimates of Soviet posture indicates that the objectives we have been seeking through our recommended strategic forces mix and other programs are still essentially valid. In brief, these objectives have been: first, to provide the United States with the capability, even under unfavorable circumstances of war outbreak, to deny the Soviet Union the prospect of military victory or of knocking out the U.S. retaliatory force, while at the same time assuring prompt destruction of a high proportion of Soviet nuclear bases and remaining nuclear forces; second, to retain a large protected reserve force for (a) follow-on attacks against Soviet military forces, (b) attacks if necessary against Soviet urban society, and (c) attempting to bring the war to a negotiated end without attacks on cities.

9. The general implication of the Soviet military posture and the strategy which it supports would appear to be that the Soviets hope to confront us with continuing political pressure, subversion and various forms of unconventional warfare under the umbrella of their growing strategic power. At the same time, they would hope to capitalize on their conventional military power by the implicit threat of bringing it to bear in situations where they have a local conventional superiority. The broad conclusion to be drawn for our defense policy is to reaffirm the importance of shaping our military posture so as to provide credible military options over a wide spectrum of contingencies from general war at one end to local wars and minor aggressions at the other. It is also important to reaffirm that our own strategic forces must provide a corresponding umbrella under which we may meet Soviet confrontation on lesser scales than general war.

10. We judge the greatest hazard to be in the Soviet calculation (or miscalculation) of the risks of particular courses of action as Soviet military capabilities grow. A dangerous change in the calculus of risks would of course be most likely if the Soviets thought they had obtained a temporary military superiority, especially in the field of AICBMs, whether or not we shared that estimate. The current estimates of future Soviet military strength, and current U.S. defense programs, do not lead us to expect such a situation. Nonetheless, it should be a basic task of the United States, if possible, to see to it that this military advantage does not occur and to this end to give the highest priority to the established defense programs of the United States and to continue and, if possible, to increase the effectiveness of our intelligence collection systems, and to conduct effective informational programs to blunt Soviet efforts to exploit politically real or alleged Soviet military advances, such as an anti-missile capability.

Secretary of State
Secretary of Defense
Director of Central Intelligence
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Attachment4

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL INTER-DEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE ON IMPLICATIONS OF NIE 11-8-62 AND RELATED INTELLIGENCE

I—Implications Clarifying Soviet Policy

1. The evolution of Soviet strategic forces described in NIE 11-8-62, “Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack,” dated 6 July 1962,5 reflects in the first instance the USSR's desire to overcome the advantage which the US had enjoyed in this vital ingredient of the power equation. The Soviet weapons programs are obviously aimed at obtaining greater security for the Bloc and greater freedom for Soviet policy in the face of the immense threat posed by US strategic power. Within the last year, with the availability of a more suitable second-generation missile, a rapidly unfolding deployment program has carried the Soviets farther toward these aims.

Soviet View of the Risks of War

2. It is clear, from the trends in Soviet strategic capabilities estimated in NIE 11-8-62, that the Soviet leaders have considered that they can continue to pursue their present political policy, while simultaneously avoiding courses of action involving high risk of general war. If they had not, they would surely have provided themselves with much stronger forces than they now have and would be embarked on a much steeper buildup. Instead, they are building strategic forces at a pace which, while a substantial burden on an already strained economy, is well below their maximum potential. This in turn implies that they intend to pursue courses of action which, in their view, will keep the risks of war under control. It does not assure, however, that they will always estimate these risks correctly.

Effect on the Soviet Outlook

3. While intending to avoid war, the Soviets expect their strategic strength to lend increasing weight to their foreign policies. On a general level, growing strategic capabilities will strengthen the Soviet leaders' belief in their ability to influence the course of events in all areas of the world. Their sense of the USSR's political weight, its “right” to a voice in all international questions, is closely linked to their appraisal of relative military power. As the gap has grown between their own military strength and that of all other countries save the US, they have increasingly insisted upon their great-power prerogatives and have injected their demands into all sorts of world issues. This attitude has encouraged them to pursue more forward courses of action in remote areas, for example, Southeast Asia. The growing capabilities estimated in NIE 11-8-62 will nourish this tendency.

4. In particular issues involving a direct clash of Soviet-American interests, however, more acute considerations of military risk figure in Soviet calculations. The Soviets know the magnitude of Western military strength. We believe that their appraisals of the implications of that strength are realistic. We also think it certain that the USSR has come to appreciate US intelligence capabilities and now credits the US with a fairly accurate estimate of Soviet long-range striking power. At present, the Soviets estimate that each side could inflict great damage on the other, despite their respective defense capabilities, and they believe that the US makes the same estimate. They realize, however, that the US still has a greater capability to damage Soviet territory than they do to damage US territory. Unless some highly effective antimissile system alters the strategic balance, or some unforeseen break-through in offensive weapons occurs, we believe that they will continue to hold this judgment.6

Uses of the Soviet Deterrent

5. The Soviets hope—indeed they think it all but inevitable—that their growing intercontinental striking power, together with their air defense posture, will so inhibit US policy as to widen the scope of actions which they can undertake without substantial risk of war. During most of the 1950's, the Soviet deterrent consisted mainly of the threat of ground and air attack, and more recently MRBMs, against Western Europe. The Soviets evidently regarded this form of deterrence as insufficient because it could not be applied directly against the US, and their foreign policies reflected a cautious approach to the calculation of risks of war.

6. During the same period, however, they were vigorously pursuing the development of new and more effective systems for attacking the US and for protecting themselves against US attack. They evidently believed that the ICBM, by posing a direct threat to the US homeland, would radically increase the force of their deterrent and thus permit them to undertake bolder advances with no increase of risk. By late 1958, they concluded that their ICBM claims, borrowing credibility from their sputnik demonstrations, had begun to achieve this result. At this point, a decade after the Berlin blockade, they felt themselves able to resume the exploitation of the West's geographic vulnerability in Berlin.

7. Nearly four years have elapsed, and during this time the Soviet leaders' expectations have sobered. They have acquired a keener appreciation of the difficulties of translating gains in military power into tangible political advances. During much of the period, they had reason to believe that the US was overestimating their ICBM force. Even so, they evidently did not consider that the West was so deterred that they could safely undertake unilateral moves against its vital interests in Berlin.

Future Uses of the Deterrent

8. NIE 11-8-62 makes it clear, however, that during 1958 and 1959 the USSR in fact had no ICBM capability, and that even in 1960 and 1961 this capability was quite small. But in 1962 the second generation ICBM is being deployed at operational sites, and the USSR almost certainly knows that the US knows, not only of the deployment, but also the actual location of the sites. The Soviets previously were willing to act only with caution on the basis of a capability which they knew existed mainly in their opponents' minds, but their appraisal of risks may change now that their capability has become real and is growing.

9. We recognize this possibility and its hazards for the period ahead. We nevertheless regard it as likely that the Soviets will not abandon caution in Soviet-American confrontations, including Berlin. We believe they recognize that there are severe limits to the challenges which can be posed with weapons which the challenger is as concerned as the opponent to avoid using. As before, when their inflated ICBM claims had won considerable acceptance, they will again seek to persuade the West of their determination to advance. They will believe that the US ought to draw the conclusion that, under these circumstances, it can no longer maintain its exposed positions. They will almost certainly test Western, and particularly American, reactions in order to judge whether their gains in strength have had this effect. But the depth and vigor of their probing will depend more upon their estimate of US reactions than on their calculations of relative military strength. Accordingly they will not, in our view, automatically conclude that actions which were heretofore too risky have now become tolerably safe.

10. It is also important to note that the calculations of relative military strength and Western reactions to probes are only part of a host of factors which will affect Soviet decisions. The movement of politics within the USSR, the course of intra-Bloc relations, and the nature of opportunities for expansion which arise in the Free World will be fully as important in determining the shape of Soviet foreign policy.

The Question of Timing

11. It is clear that the Soviet successes with sputniks and ICBM tests in 1957-1958 had much to do with inspiring the confidence which led the USSR to open its challenge on the Berlin question in November 1958. Beyond this general observation, we find no precise relationship in timing between the USSR's Berlin tactics and the progress of its buildup in strategic forces. In particular, the quickening of the tempo of the ICBM program in 1961 seems unlikely to have resulted from any new decisions regarding Berlin. It reflects development and deployment decisions taken several years previously. The fairly regular buildup of intercontinental forces projected in the estimate for the next year or so does not suggest that Soviet efforts are concentrated toward reaching some particular force level at any particular time or in relation to any particular situation, e.g. Berlin.

Secrecy

12. One additional implication deserves attention. The Soviet long-range forces estimated in NIE 11- 8-62 for the next few years are neither as large nor as well protected as corresponding US forces. In these circumstances, we believe that the Soviet leaders will continue to think it highly important to make it as difficult as possible for the US to acquire targeting information. This in turn implies that they are unlikely to ease their basic attitude toward inspection of arms control agreements. It also indicates that they will continue to attach a very high priority to the countering of Western reconnaissance.

II—Implications for US Defense Policy

Specific Implications

1. We have examined the implications for our defense policy of changes in the Soviet military posture over the next five years, as pro-jected in NIE 11-8-62 and other pertinent national estimates. Among the changes forecast are several potentially significant developments on which some new light has been shed since earlier estimates, such as: a. A growing sub-launched missile threat.

b. A large-yield weapon threat.

c. Hardening of ICBM sites.

d. Missile readiness and re-load capability.

e. Anti-ballistic missile capability.

f. Larger MRBM/IRBM forces than previously estimated.

2. These developments represent problem areas which require close attention and review of certain US programs. We can, however, tentatively conclude from our examination of estimated changes in the Soviet military posture that these changes, in themselves, presently call for no major alterations in the US strategic retaliatory force structure which was recommended to you by the Department of Defense on 23 September 1961.7 A fuller basis for judging the validity of this conclusion will be provided by an intensive study of strategic force requirements now being conducted by the JCS, and scheduled for completion on 1 October 1962.8 The most immediate effect of Soviet developments is likely to be on our research and development programs in areas associated with such matters as large yield weapons effects, penetration aids, and satellite survivability. Our present examination also reaffirms the continuing need to press ahead with programs we have laid out in other fields, including civil defense, air defense, and general purpose forces.

3. The Soviet forces now estimated for the period 1962-1967 are of a size and character which remain within the parameters used last fall in developing our own recommended strategic force mix (force levels and weapons systems) for this period. Soviet ICBM forces in particular, are estimated for the period to be approximately of the size previously forecast in our intelligence estimates, and they remain substantially less than in the assumed high and median Soviet postures used by DOD in developing our recommended forces last fall.9 The new estimates indicate that a hardening program may be proceeding somewhat sooner than previously anticipated, but again the total number of hardened sites forecast for the period is still well below our planning assumption figures for 1965 and 1967. Perhaps the principal unknown presented for our planning is the influence which introduction of large yield weapons—and their number—may have on future Soviet offensive and defensive capabilities. While such weapons were taken into account in our force planning last fall, there are still uncertainties as to some of their physical effects which must be resolved before their full military implications can be determined.

4. Our present re-examination of the situation in light of the latest estimates of Soviet posture indicates that the objectives we have been seeking through our recommended strategic forces mix and other programs are still essentially valid. In brief, these objectives have been: first, to provide the United States with the capability, even under unfavorable circumstances of war outbreak, to deny the Soviet Union the prospect of military victory or of knocking out the US retaliatory force, while at the same time assuring prompt destruction of a high proportion of Soviet nuclear bases and remaining nuclear forces; second, to retain a large protected reserve force for (a) follow-on attacks against Soviet military forces, (b) attacks if necessary against Soviet urban society, and (c) attempting to bring the war to a negotiated end without attacks on cities.

5. Our present and previous analyses recognize that even in the most favorable case with restraints in targeting on both sides, civil casualties in the United States and Western Europe could be on the order of ten million each, while without restraints during the 1962-1967 period, under many circumstances of war outbreak, they could be on the order of 100 million or more each. As time passes the Soviet potential for doing civil damage to the West will grow; the incentive to actually carry out such attack may, however, diminish.

6. The new estimates of Soviet posture do not lead us to alter our basic assessment that during this time period we retain a relatively strong military posture in the event of nuclear war, but that the potential civil damage implications are progressively more unfavorable with the passage of time. The latter, of course, applies to both sides, so that the prospect of real victors emerging from any major nuclear war diminishes further.

7. In addition to the problem areas given prominence by our latest estimates of Soviet long-range striking forces for the 1962-1967 period, there are several areas of potential significance which merit attention.10 The most important of these are: a. The prospect of Soviet anti-satellite activity.

b. The possibility of Soviet weapons in space.

c. The problem of making clear to Soviets advantages of non-civil targeting.

d. The problem of civil defense.

8. The rapid Soviet development and initiation of deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems require the US to counter Soviet political and propaganda exploitation of their anti-missile program. Preparation for this contingency should include active informational programs on our own progress and on military limitations on Soviet progress. Decisions on our own anti-missile program should be urgently reconsidered with due weight given to the political considerations.11

General Implications

9. It is our view, after examination of the Soviet military posture in light of our most recent intelligence estimates, that the Soviets are pursuing an essentially deterrent military strategy in which their military forces are designed to: a. Support an aggressive political-subversive strategy;

b. Deter the West from military action, particularly from initiation of a first strike with nuclear forces;

c. Afford the option of conducting partially blunting pre-emptive strikes and retaliatory operations against us in the event mutual strategic deterrence breaks down and a major war should occur.

10. Our intelligence estimates indicate an increase in the number of Soviet forces capable of hitting directly at the United States in the 1962-67 period, as well as a general trend of larger warhead yields deliverable by these forces. However, the relative US-USSR military postures during the period do not significantly improve Soviet chances of launching a disarming nuclear strike against us. During this period, the Soviet military posture shows some improvement in surviving nuclear military forces following an initial nuclear exchange, but the Soviet Union would still be left in a militarily inferior position relative to the US under almost all circumstances of war outbreak.12 The Soviet military posture also increases the Soviet ability to inflict civil damage, already great for most war outbreak situations.

11. The general implication of the Soviet military posture and the strategy which it supports would appear to be that the Soviets hope to confront us with continuing political pressure, subversion and various forms of unconventional warfare under the umbrella of their growing strategic power. At the same time, they would hope to capitalize on their conventional military power by the implicit threat of bringing it to bear in situations where they have a local conventional superiority. Thus—barring successful effort on our part to create additional options—such a strategy could, at worst, leave open to us the unpalatable choice of a first strike or swallowing our losses in a series of confrontations at local pressure points around the periphery of the Soviet Bloc. Increased Soviet ability to put direct pressure on the United States (through the threat of larger forces capable of hitting the US) would also open us to added Soviet efforts to separate us from our Allies, and to create divisions among them.

12. The broad conclusion to be drawn for our own defense policy is to reaffirm the importance of shaping our military posture so as to provide credible military options over a wide spectrum of contingencies from nuclear war at one end to local wars and minor aggressions at the other. The developments we have considered here, while not of a kind to dictate basic change in our strategy and military posture, do reduce even further the desirability of resort to the high end of the spectrum of nuclear means and consequently increase the importance of developing alternative means of bringing military power to bear around the world.

III—Implications for US Foreign Policy

1. The estimates contained in NIE 11-8-62 of Soviet capabilities for long-range attack do not require basic revisions or changes in our foreign policy as a whole. This view is predicated on the expectation that the defense policies outlined in Section II of this study are vigorously and effectively carried out. If these policies are effectively implemented, there is no reason to believe, in the period under review, that the correlation of forces in any significant extent will favor the Soviet Union. We can anticipate the continuance of the tensions, strains, and dangers of the cold war. As Soviet strategic capabilities grow the USSR may well judge that it can press more aggressively toward limited objectives without running serious risks of general war. A more aggressive political action by the Soviet Union is, however, not at all certain, and cannot be predicted at this time. Any such development would depend upon a number of factors which, at present cannot be foreseen—in particular, their estimate of relative military strength, and of the Western reactions which they encounter when they try to test the political potency of their strategic strength.

2. We judge the greatest hazard to be in the Soviet calculation (or miscalculation) of the risks of particular courses of action as Soviet military capabilities grow. A dangerous change in the calculus of risks would of course be most likely if the Soviets thought they had obtained a temporary military superiority, especially in the field of AICBMs, whether or not we shared that estimate. In such circumstances, the Soviets might seek to exploit a temporary military advantage before the United States could redress the balance. The current estimates of future Soviet military strength, and current US defense programs, do not lead us to expect such a situation. Nonetheless, it should be a basic task of the United States, if possible, to see to it that this military advantage does not occur and to this end to give the highest priority to the established defense programs of the United States and to continue and, if possible, to increase the effectiveness of our intelligence collection systems, and to conduct effective informational programs to blunt Soviet efforts to exploit politically real or alleged Soviet military advances, such as an anti-missile capability.

3. In general, however, there is nothing in the estimate contained in NIE 11-8-62 which would require any substantive change in our foreign policy.

Annex A13

SPECIFIC PROBLEM AREAS FOR US DEFENSE POLICY

1. Soviet Sub-launched Missile Threat

a. It has long appeared likely that the Soviet Union would follow the United States' lead and develop a submarine missile force of some strength. These forces now appear likely to be larger than was previously estimated. Reasonable figures consistent with the estimates in NIE 11-8-62 are about 90 submarines with some 350 missiles by 1967. This is almost double the numbers forecast a year ago for 1966. (See comparison of estimates and explanatory note in Table 2.)14 It should be noted that the bulk of the increase is accounted for by cruise missiles (30 submarines with 156 missiles by 1967, compared with none in last year's forecast). There is uncertainty both as to the eventual number of these cruise missile subs (which as estimated will include many more nuclear than diesel-powered types), and their intended use—whether they are intended for attack against land targets as well as surface shipping. The latter presently appears to be their more likely major role.

b. Other aspects of the changing composition of the Soviet missile sub force also present difficulties in assessing the potential threat this force poses. On the one hand, there is an increase in the ballistic missile threat (about 60 submarines in 1967 compared with 48 submarines previously forecast for 1966), and a greater number of nuclear-powered submarines (about 50, compared with 24 submarines previously), which will increase the potential for protracted stationing of these forces at sea. Also, there are strong indications that the Soviets are developing a submerged ballistic missile launch capability. With missiles of ranges estimated at 650 to 2,000 miles, these submarines could increase the difficulties of our ASW task when the Soviets have developed them on an operational scale. On the other hand, while the Soviets are actively pursuing a submerged launch program, these developments at their present stage indicate that a Polaris-type threat has not yet materialized. Furthermore, the component of the Soviet force which combines nuclear-powered submarines with ballistic missiles shows no appreciable change from what was previously estimated (25-30 submarines in 1967 compared with 24 submarines previously forecast for 1966).

c. Despite the many uncertainties which exist with respect to the potential threat of the Soviet sub-launched missile force, both in terms of weapons and methods of operation, it is apparent that we shall have our work cut out for us in finding ways to deal with this problem. In the future, as the number of nuclear-powered submarines increases, the Soviets may adopt operational practices that would make it very difficult to counter the sub-launched missile threat. In the mid-60's, a portion of the Soviet nuclear-powered submarine missile force will probably be conducting routine patrols within missile range of US targets.

d. There are asymmetries, to be sure, in the ASW prospects of the United States as compared with the Soviets. We have certain advantages in terms of access to the seas, transit distances, the use of advanced bases, the SOSUS detection system, and a superior naval technology. So far, it has been possible for the United States to operate submarines on station close to Soviet territory while the Soviets have not done likewise. Nevertheless, if the Soviets continue their technical progress, build the numbers of ships estimated, and keep a substantial portion of their force on station with long-range missiles (although probably a much smaller proportion than we will be able to keep on station), we will be presented with problems of great difficulty.

e. Two contrasting cases are of interest in illustrating some of the problems we face. In the first, favorable to us, the Soviet submarine fleet—following current practice—for the most part would not be deployed at war outbreak and virtually some would be in position to launch immediately against the United States. In this case, we could expect our attacks on Soviet naval and submarine bases (some 50 aiming points in the mid 1960's) to kill a large proportion of the missile sub force. The remainder would face further attrition in seeking to reach launch areas. The surviving sub-launched missile threat to the United States in this optimistic case would be minimal in comparison with other Soviet nuclear forces that are likely to survive.

f. In a second and more likely case, much less favorable to us, the Soviet submarine fleet would be largely deployed either on a steady-state basis or during a crisis. The survival to time of launch of the Soviet force would depend, in addition to circumstances of war outbreak, on the effectiveness of our sea surveillance, tracking and sub-killing systems. If the Soviets operate their nuclear submarines very carefully, and especially avoid making much noise, a portion of their force will probably be able to avoid detection while on station within missile range of targets in the United States. On the other hand, with presently planned improvements in SOSUS, and if the number of submarines on station is small, we may be able to count and to track them with fair precision. If ordered to fire in a coordinated attack, the Soviet missiles could undoubtedly be launched before the submarines could be destroyed. However, it might be possible through prompt attack to destroy many of the submarines and at least deny the Soviets the prospect of retaining a highly protected reserve force on station.

g. The Soviets might be able on occasion to put enough submarine missiles on station by the mid-1960's to present a threat with virtually no tactical warning to our soft bomber and missile bases (submarine missiles are unlikely to have a combination of yield and accuracy to present a major threat to hardened dispersed sites). However, during such periods of tension, extra ground and airborne alert and dispersal measures can be adopted. Other possibilities are the development of a warning system against sub-launched missiles and a shift of bomber operations from coastal to inland bases.

h. In terms of future effort, it appears that we should continue to exploit our relative advantage in sea-surveillance capabilities. We cannot count with much confidence on being able to blunt a submarine missile attack; we do have the prospect, however, of being able to keep a fairly close watch over the deployment and movements of enemy submarines.

2. Soviet Large Yield Weapon Threat

a. Within the next few years, the Soviets will probably have limited numbers of large yield weapons (25-100 MT) deliverable by bombers and probably ICBMs. A few bombs of these yields could already be available. These prospects point to a potentially dangerous problem area. Some of the physical effects of large yield weapons—such as electromagnetic pulse, secondary thermal radiation, communications blackout, large-scale general damage from high-altitude bursts—are not yet fully understood; consequently, the full military implications for our command and control systems, air defenses, soft bomber and missile forces, and other elements of our defense posture remain to be ascertained.

b. In connection with our current nuclear test series we are acquiring data which will help reduce some of the present unknowns. To get some needed effects data, larger yield effects tests than are possible in the current series might be necessary to provide a basis for extrapolation to very high yield devices. While it would appear that design fixes can be found to deal with most of the presently identified problems that very large yield weapons may pose for our military systems, such as possible vulnerability of our Minuteman LCC's to electromagnetic pulse effects, it would be unwise at this time to dismiss the potentially serious military implications that Soviet employment of these weapons might have. For example, some recent preliminary investigation suggests that the thermal effects from a 100 MT weapon burst at very high altitude over a bomber base might greatly reduce the number of bombers that would survive to undertake their assigned missions, even with 15 minutes of BMEWS warning. Likewise, the multiple effects of large yield bursts against hardened installations like a Minuteman complex might present a more serious problem than previously thought. (Calculations based on existing data indicate that the advantage over lower yield weapons in this case is not likely to be more than 10-15%, but this is by no means certain.) It must, indeed, be emphasized, that there are still many uncertainties with regard to these and other examples of large yield weapon effects, which can only be determined through further intensive investigation and test.

c. With reservations as to what further study of large-yield weapons effects may indicate, the following implications of possible Soviet employment of such weapons can be drawn from our war gaming and other analyses to date. First, the military outcome in the mid-60's in terms of relative force survival under various circumstances of war outbreak and targeting policies does not appear to be appreciably affected. A major study of United States strategic force requirements now scheduled for completion by 1 October 1962 will, among other things, provide a reassessment of our tentative conclusions on this issue. Second, while a definitive assessment of the direct military advantages of using large yield weapons will depend on factors not yet determinable, such weapons would certainly lend themselves to a Soviet deterrent strategy with strong “terror” overtones. Third, the magnitude of civil damage ensuing as a result of use of large yield weapons would depend heavily on the targeting strategy employed by the Soviets—military, urban-industrial, or mixed. Variations in civil damage from use of high yield weapons are more sensitive to the kind of targeting elected in military attack cases than in urban-industrial or mixed attacks. For example, assuming that 60% of the US population is afforded fall-out protection consistent with our present civil defense goals for the mid-60's, tentative estimates for illustrative cases in this period would be: (1) If the Soviets should strike first, employing a discriminating military attack (assigning their high yield weapons, ground burst, only against hardened targets, and air-bursting all other weapons), collateral civil damage would bring approximately 20 million United States casualties. If the Soviets strike first, attacking military targets less discriminately (i.e., ground bursting on all targets), United States casualties could number about 85 million if large yield weapons were used, and 55 million if only smaller yield weapons were used.

(2) For urban-industrial and mixed targeting cases, with a Soviet first strike, civil damage does not prove greatly sensitive to large yield weapons, where fall-out protection is assumed as above. Civil casualties for the United States would be on the order of 135 million with only lower yield weapons, while the additional employment of large yield weapons would probably increase this casualty level by no more than 10 million.

(3) If the United States were to strike first, with the Soviets receiving little warning, a Soviet retaliatory attack directed against military targets and employing large yield as well as lower yield weapons (all ground burst), would bring about 35 million casualties. If the Soviet retaliatory attack were directed against urban-industrial targets, United States casualties would number around 100 million. For smaller yield weapons only, the casualties for the respective cases would be 20 and 90 million.

3. Hardening of Soviet ICBM Sites

a. Our latest intelligence [three illegible words] Soviet ICBM hardening, based on evidence which has only recently become available, indicate that a probable hardening program has got underway slightly earlier than hitherto estimated. Some 10-25 hardened operational sites are now expected to be available in 1963, whereas initial hardening was not previously considered as a possibility until a year later.

b. It is not presently clear what type of hardening the Soviets are electing as a protective measure. Our estimates have tended toward the probability that the initial Soviet measures would provide only semi-hardening (approximately 25 PSI), but the most recent evidence available to us tentatively suggests that the Soviet program from the outset may involve somewhat greater hardening.

c. If semi-hardening still proves to be the case, it would not appreciably alter the effectiveness of our target destruction capabilities in 1963 and thereafter. We had previously estimated that hard-category Soviet sites (100 to 300 PSI or more) would begin to appear in 1965. By this time, improvements in our Minuteman force will give us reasonable expectation of adequate destruction capabilities against such targets. [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified] Further improvements are anticipated by 1967. These Minuteman accuracies are better than the planning factors used last fall in calculating our force requirements in the 1965-67 period. The spread of assumed numbers of hard (300-PSI) Soviet sites used in last fall's calculations also involved larger numbers of such sites than estimated either in present or previous NIE's (See Table 1).15

d. However, some possible difficulty might occur should the Soviets introduce these hard-category sites in greater numbers than have been hitherto estimated for later 1963 and 1964, that is—before the improved Minuteman becomes available. Such a development could degrade our target destruction capabilities somewhat in this intervening period. We could reassign some Atlas E and F and Titan I and II missiles against additional hard-category sites, but this would be at the cost of target coverage flexibility. The extent of this potential problem is clearly sensitive to: (a) our ability to meet our own operational missile schedules; (b) our criteria for second-strike destruction assurance against hard-category sites; and (c) the actual number of such sites which will have to be dealt with and their degree of hardening. The latter factor highlights the importance of getting a good intelligence fix on the Soviet hardening program.

e. In general, evidence that previous Soviet reliance on soft sites is giving way to a hardening concept does not surprise us. It does, however, reaffirm the importance of our R&D programs for improving the accuracies of our missiles. Carried through, these programs should to a considerable degree offset the effects of the Soviet hardening program after 1965.

4. Missile Readiness and Re-fire Capability

a. Our latest intelligence estimates indicate that the Soviets are working to improve the readiness and reaction times of their medium and long-range missile units, and that they are investing in measures to provide a re-fire capability. Present Soviet procedures for firing initial and subsequent salvoes are relatively slow and complicated, and design limitations of their current missile systems appear to preclude attainment of readiness conditions approaching those of US systems. Nevertheless, some improvement can be expected. These trends, together with the beginning of an ICBM hardening program previously discussed, reflect a Soviet effort to increase the survivability of their missile force. This would have the effect of making it easier for the Soviets to defer decision in any ambiguous situation. It would also place their forces in a somewhat better posture than at present for attempting to carry out preemptive and retaliatory operations.

b. With regard to Soviet refire doctrine and capabilities, several points are worth noting in connection with our own planning. In Soviet eyes, the size of their missile force may be regarded not in terms of numbers of launchers, but launchers plus re-fire. (While the evidence is not firm on this point, we believe an average of two missiles is provided per launcher.) This could lead the Soviets to place somewhat greater weight on the potential of their missile force than circumstances may warrant. Our estimates indicate that Soviet time to re-fire is measured in hours (perhaps 10 hours minimum for ICBM's, and about 4 to 6 hours for MRBM's), which means that in fact, under any likely circumstances of war outbreak and with our planned targeting, the bulk of Soviet launchers would not survive for a second round of fire. Soviet re-load capabilities to date are associated with soft sites. It is not clear whether their hardened sites will be adaptable to re-fire. Should the latter prove to be the case, we would, of course, want to insure that hardened sites were not left to deliver further fire. Even if complete destruction of a hardened site should not be attempted, a weapon detonated in the vicinity could render such a site unfit for re-fire for an indefinite period.

c. For our own part, the pros and cons of developing a re-fire capability from our hardened sites have already been weighed, and it has been considered that such a program is not worth undertaking. This conclusion still appears valid.

5. Soviet Anti-Ballistic Missile Capability

a. Our examination of this problem area in light of relevant technological factors and the latest intelligence on Soviet anti-missile developments suggests that the military implications of Soviet anti-ballistic missile capabilities in the mid-60's should not be underestimated, even though the military impact is likely to be less immediate than the psychological impact, which could be considerable.

b. In a military context, the advantages enjoyed by offensive delivery systems over defensive systems do not seem likely to be significantly narrowed by ABM developments within the next few years. However, this situation cannot be taken for granted without substantial efforts to keep it that way. Our programs for development of multiple warheads and other penetration aids, which have been greatly expanded in the last couple of years, attest to the seriousness which has come to be attached to the problem of assuring that our strategic missile delivery systems will not be seriously degraded by future Soviet ABM capabilities.

c. Our penetration aids programs should probably keep pace with Soviet ABM capabilities foreseeable in the mid-60's. Our first decoy capability (Atlas F) will become available in about a year. Initial decoy capabilities for the A-2 Polaris and Minuteman are scheduled for early 1963 and late 1964 respectively. Our advanced ballistic missile re-entry system research program will provide basic technology from which to design new re-entry systems for any of our projected ballistic missile programs over the longer term. If our present intelligence estimates are borne out, the Soviets are not likely to achieve more than limited deployment of a defensive system against ICBM's in the 1963-66 period. Nevertheless, we face many complex technical problems and, partly owing to our pay-load capacities, some difficult compromises between warhead and penetration packages. Should the Soviets rely on phased array, low frequency radars for their ABM system rather than high frequency radars, and this now seems likely, a considerable amount of our penetration aids work may have to be revised.

d. One factor which should tend to operate to our advantage during the period of the mid-60's, at least, is the probable Soviet intention to give priority to major urban areas in deploying their initial anti-ICBM defenses. While it will be important for us to retain the ability to penetrate ABM-defended urban centers, it would appear that the main task of penetrating to military targets removed from such centers will not be greatly affected. Over a period of time the Soviets are likely to extend the deployment of their ABM defenses, as they did with their SAM defenses, but the huge expense and time required for comparable Soviet ABM deployment would seem to allow us room to work out ways of dealing with the situation.

e. Notwithstanding the likely inadequacies of such Soviet ABM systems as can be foreseen for the mid-60's, it should be recognized that Soviet claims and possible demonstrations of a capability in this field could have significant psychological repercussions. Unless forehanded United States counter-programs are carried out, Soviet exploitation of ABM claims could help to establish a public image of Soviet military advantage and erode the confidence of our Allies in United States military superiority.16

f. Soviet advances with anti-ballistic missile systems require the U.S. to counter Soviet political and propaganda exploitation of their unfolding anti-missile capability. Preparation for this contingency should include active informational programs on our own progress, and on military limitations on Soviet progress.

g. Soviet advances in development and initiation of deployment of anti-ballistic missile systems also call for continuing review of decisions on our own anti-missile program with due weight given to the political considerations. The US should continue vigorous prosecution of current programs to overcome the technical obstacles to development of militarily useful anti-missile defenses.17

6. Soviet MRBM/IRBM Forces

a. Our latest intelligence estimates indicate that the Soviets are building a larger MRBM/IRBM force than previously estimated—roughly, to a level of 550-650 launchers in the mid-60's rather than 350-450. The present size of their force on good evidence, is approximately 500 operational launchers, of which about 90% are deployed against the European area. Some of these launchers may be alternates, not assigned to a first salvo. The increase anticipated for the period of the mid-60's, which amounts in effect to about 50 additional aiming points (200 more launchers, at 4 launchers per aiming point), does not present a major new problem in terms of our own previously recommended force levels.

b. It is estimated, however, that beginning about 1965-67 the Soviets may introduce hardened or mobile MRBM/IRBM systems to provide greater survivability for a portion of their force. Should this occur, some change in our own programs for dealing with the MRBM/IRBM threat may be necessary, and we would be well advised to examine factors bearing on this potential problem. Studies now underway in the Department of Defense are taking this problem into account.

c. With respect to the Soviet MRBM/IRBM force as it is presently configured, the larger number of launchers available does not seem to offer any significant advantages to the Soviets under some circumstances of war outbreak. If we strike first, little more of this highly vulnerable force will survive than if it were somewhat smaller. If the Soviets strike first, they already have such weight of attack against Europe that the additional MRBM/IRBM forces seem to make little difference. However, under some intermediate circumstances, the Soviets might consider it important to have the additional assurance of a larger missile force posed against Europe. The pattern of deployment of this force also shows that the Soviets count on it, particularly on its IRBM elements, to insure neutralization of United States overseas bases and installations outside the immediate area of Western Europe. This is another factor which may seem to them to justify some redundancy with respect to this force.

d. European reaction to the estimate of a larger Soviet MRBM threat is a factor to be considered. Our frank handling of earlier estimates of this threat and reaffirmation of our commitments through such means as our actions on Berlin seem to have prevented acute anxiety on the part of the Europeans. The new larger estimate could give rise to concern, however, and therefore suggests the desirability of continuing our program of frankness, more detailed discussion of nuclear matters, and meaningful reassurances—through our actions—on the extent and firmness of our commitment.

7. Soviet Anti-Satellite Capability

a. The high premium which the Soviets probably attach to being able to take physical countermeasures against certain of our satellite programs provides a strong incentive for early development of an anti-satellite capability. The USSR is conceded to be technically capable of developing a limited anti-satellite capability as soon as, or perhaps before, achieving an anti-missile capability. Studies we have undertaken in this area indicate that by use of decoys and other techniques, originally developed in some cases for other purposes, we can probably negate to a significant extent any Soviet resort to physical attack against our satellites. The important thing at this point is to push forward with programs utilizing existing hardware and techniques that will give us a near-term capability to insure survival of our satellites at the time we are studying longer-term measures to preserve our future capabilities against more sophisticated threats.

b. On the other side of the coin, development of our own capabilities to take physical countermeasures against Soviet satellites should not be allowed to lag. Such capabilities-in-being could become particularly significant in the event the Soviets should suddenly confront us with a weapons-in-space situation, a subject discussed separately below. We now have underway a preliminary exploration of the problems of developing an anti-satellite capability. In this connection, a Nike-Zeus lash-up for firing from Kwajalein against a satellite has been authorized and should give us an initial capability by the Spring of 1963. This program is being conducted without publicity, since we stand more to gain than the Soviets by the unimpeded use of satellites and do not wish to precipitate an open competition in anti-satellite weapons.

8. Possibility of Soviet Weapons in Space

a. Our present intelligence projections do not ascribe to the Soviets an effort within the foreseeable future to place weapons in space for delivery against targets on earth. The military shortcomings of space platform systems of bombardment, compared with available terrestrial means for weapons' delivery, constitute a strong argument against the likelihood of an early Soviet weapons-in-space effort, even though the Soviets probably are now technically capable of it.

b. However, if the Soviets, as appears likely, are pursuing a strategy of building a deterrent force with a potent “terror” component, then the incentive for early placement of some weapons in space may exist, with considerations of military utility being secondary. Should the Soviets decide that weapons in space—or even the claim of weapons in space, which we would find it difficult to disprove—would serve as a useful threat in some future crisis situation, the United States and its Allies would be confronted with a novel and awkward situation. Although this possibility may at the present moment strike us as somewhat remote, it would appear useful to give further thought to what our response in such a situation would be, particularly if a Soviet claim of weapons-in-space were coupled with a series of menacing actions at some trouble-spot on earth, like Berlin. At the very least, it might be well to undertake a program to deflate in advance the psychological impact of such a development.

9. Problem of Making Clear to Soviets Advantages of Non-Civil Targeting

a. One important element in the development of our own strategy has been to include in our plans the option of using restraint to the extent that circumstances warrant in civil targeting. Corollary to this has been the attempt to design our forces and provide options for their use so as to exert pressures on the Soviets to minimize civil targeting in the event of nuclear conflict. As to be expected, there has been conspicuous Soviet refusal (exemplified by Khrushchev's recent utterances on this subject) to take a public line responsive to a civil damage-limiting concept. What we know of private Soviet discourse on the subject, as reflected in NIE 11-8-62, does not indicate that the Soviets have given much thought to minimizing civil damage in a strategic exchange. Clearly, we cannot count on the Soviet Union using restraint in its targeting policies, even in self-interest. Nevertheless, the stakes involved would seem to warrant continued effort to influence the Soviets in this direction. In this connection, planning on our side to ensure a protected reserve force which could be used in a controlled and deliberate way to threaten Soviet cities or remaining military forces after any initial counter-force strikes would appear to be among the more persuasive “educational” tools at our disposal. Our presently recommended forces and the targeting options they permit can fulfill this function.

b. It is also worth noting that two developments in the Soviet military posture—missile hardening and nuclear subs—give the Soviets the possibility of having a protected force of their own. With a protected force they would be in a better position to go along with a policy of restraint and damage-limiting targeting, providing they can be brought to recognize its advantages.

10. Civil Defense Problem

a. Soviet capabilities—as now projected through the mid-60's in submarine launched missiles, in ICBM's and in large-yield weapons—confirm the urgency of the civil defense problem, but do not change the basic objectives of our program. As currently developed, this program calls for protection of the population from the fallout threat. It offers no guarantee against the blast effects of a potential attack. In the mid-range period, this shelter program would be very effective in saving lives in case of attacks primarily against military targets. (See page 5, paragraphs 2c (1) and (3).) If attacks were launched against large urban-industrial areas, there would be very large numbers of fatalities in any event, although fallout shelters would make a significant difference. The currently projected program (about two-thirds complete in the mid-60's) would reduce total US casualties, under a Soviet first strike, approximately on the following order in several illustrative cases: Targeting Without Shelter Program With Shelter Program

(Million Casualties)

Lower Yield Weapons Only

Urban-Industrial 165 135

Military 95 55

Combination High & Lower Yield Weapons

Urban-Industrial 175 145

Military 135 85

b. The potential thermal threat of large yield weapons might change the degree of protection currently established for the civil defense program. However, more data are required as to the magnitude of the thermal threat, fire spread, and the likelihood of the employment of very large yield weapons in the high-altitude thermal mode. More variables could affect the latter—weather conditions, density of burnable materials in target areas, and loss of blast and fallout effects of the weapon. Until such more definite information is available, there will be no basis to change current civil defense policy.

c. Attempts to encourage non-civil targeting options, discussed earlier, have a close bearing on our civil defense effort as well as that of the USSR. Increased emphasis on fallout protection would appear to be a logical corollary to development of non-civil targeting options, since fallout protection would be required to minimize collateral population casualties resulting from attacks against military forces. Otherwise, the potential advantages of targeting restraint would be lowered on both sides.

d. As now laid out, the US fallout shelter program will be substantially completed by 1967-68, provided the passage of the Shelter Incentives Legislation does not slip beyond the next session of Congress. Projected Soviet capabilities require that there be no slippage in the current schedule, and may in fact call for acceleration towards the end of the mid-range period. Further, if response from the public and all levels of government does not develop the number of shelter spaces required, consideration may be necessary for an increase in the federal share of the program.

e. In light of recent Congressional action which threatens the planned civil defense program, we would like to emphasize that our latest estimates of Soviet developments re-emphasize the importance of our planned civil defense program in saving lives in the event of war, and that this program is an integral part of our over-all national defense posture, which will be adversely affected if civil defense measures are allowed to fall by the wayside.

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Strategic Balance. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. The memorandum was sent jointly to the President by Rusk, McNamara, McCone, and Lemnitzer on August 23. The source text and its attachments are enclosures to a letter from U. Alexis Johnson to Taylor in which Johnson stated that he had accepted McNamara's language on the AICBM question but was “pointing this out to” Rusk in case he wanted to pursue the matter further. There is no record of Rusk having done so. Johnson concluded that he knew “of no other issues of substance except that of the Soviet MRBMs, and nobody has suggested exactly what additional we should do about this.”

2 See Document 97.

3 The September 21, 1961 (NIE 11-8/1-61) estimates of Soviet forces were substantially lower than the June 7, 1961 (NIE 11-8-61) estimates. [Footnote in the source text. For text of NIE 11- 8/1-61, see Document 45. Regarding NIE 11-8-61, see the source note, Document 29.]

4 Top Secret.

5 We have taken into account the estimates in NIE 11-3-61, “Sino-Soviet Air Defense Capabilities through Mid-1966,” dated 11 July 1961 (Top Secret), NIE 11-2-62, “The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” dated 16 May 1962 (Limited Distribution), Annexes A and B of NIE 11-4-61, “Main Trends in Soviet Capabilities and Policies, 1961-1966,” dated 24 August 1961 (Top Secret), and Memorandum to Holders of Annexes A and B, NIE 11-4-61, dated 10 January 1962 (Top Secret). [Footnote in the source text. For text of NIE 11-8-62, see Document 96.]

6 The Soviet antimissile effort enjoys a very high priority, and the USSR is almost certain to deploy an antimissile system—of unknown effectiveness—before the US does. A propaganda campaign is already underway to persuade the world of a marked Soviet advantage in this field. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 See Document 46.

8 Possible reference to “Strategic Nuclear Study” by the Chairman's Special Studies Group,“ attached to CM-961-62 from Taylor to McNamara, September 15. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 4611 (6 Jun 62) Sec 1A)

9 A comparison of the latest NIE 11-8-62 ICBM launcher estimate with the NIE 11-8/1-61 figures and the DOD planning assumptions used last fall in calculating our force requirements is shown in Table 1, attached to Annex A. [Footnote in the source text.]

10 In the attached Annex A there is a brief discussion of each of the ten specific problem areas mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 7, together with identification of matters requiring further examination and action in connection with them. The section immediately following sums up the general implications for our defense policy of forecast changes in the Soviet military posture. [Footnote in the source text.]

11 See footnote 5, Document 100.

12 The exception would be an out-of-the blue, perfectly executed and coordinated attack on our forces, without our having received any strategic or tactical warning. In this case, U.S. forces surviving might be limited largely to Polaris submarines and carriers at sea, together with airborne alert aircraft and some hardened missiles. This situation could leave neither side with a clear military superiority. For a variety of reasons, this eventuality appears highly improbable. [Footnote in the source text.]

13 Top Secret. Portions of this Annex are printed in Raymond L. Garthoff, Intelligence Assessment and Policymaking: A Decision Point in the Kennedy Administration (Washington: Brookings, 1984), pp. 46-53.

14 Table 2, entitled “Comparison of Missile Sub Estimates at Selected Periods,” is not printed.

15 Table 1, entitled “Soviet ICBM Forces at Selected Periods,” is not printed.

16 See footnote 4, Document 100.

17 See footnotes 3 and 4, Document 100.

104. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President Kennedy 104. Memorandum From the President's Military Representative (Taylor) to President KennedySource

Washington, August 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Comments on “Report on Implications for U.S. Foreign and Defense Policy of Recent Soviet Intelligence”

1. Although I agree with most of the subject report,1 I do not feel that it sets forth clearly enough the following considerations which are certain to have an important bearing on future Soviet political behavior.

a. Preponderant Soviet Military Strength in Europe

Since World War II, the Soviets have given top priority to the maintenance of undisputed military superiority over the NATO forces in Western Europe. To this end, in recent years they have given emphasis both to conventional forces (which include relatively high yield tactical atomic weapons) and to medium range nuclear missiles sited on Soviet soil. They continue to expand this formidable MRBM array, the effective neutralization of which is beyond the present means of NATO or of the U.S. This combination of unconventional and nuclear strength in Europe has the effect of allaying the deep fear of the Russian leaders of a revanchist Germany, and of providing a potent tool for the intimidation of Western Europe, particularly when the extent of the exposure of NATO to the MRBM is fully appreciated.

b. Soviet Moves to Upset the “Balance of Terror”

Vis-à-vis the United States, the Soviet position is much less secure. Soviet leaders must appreciate their inferiority in certain aspects of the preparations for general nuclear war, particularly in numbers of strategic weapons and delivery vehicles and in early warning means. However, it is clear that they are not content to live with this inferiority and intend to correct it, if possible, tilting the scale in their favor and upsetting the present “balance of terror.” Toward these ends, the Soviets are steadily increasing their offensive strength in deployed ICBM's and in missile-launching submarines, and are augmenting the invulnerability of the ICBM's by hardening and perhaps by concealment of launching sites. A growing appreciation of the effectiveness of U.S. reconnaissance capabilities has probably been a shock to Soviet leaders who may be expected to accelerate these programs in order to correct the weaknesses which they know that we have detected.

The attention paid by the Soviets to the defensive aspects of general war preparations is particularly notable. The effort to offset our superior bomber force by a very extensive system of SAM defenses has been going on for several years and still continues. Recent intelligence indicates the probability of deployment of an Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) which may have already begun. Whatever we may think or say about the effectiveness of this ABM, the Soviets probably feel that it will pay for its cost in giving some degree of protection to Russian cities and in gaining prestige abroad and morale at home. The Soviets probably hope by these efforts to move from the present strategic situation where the U.S. holds the balance of nuclear superiority largely through manned bombers with neither side having an acceptable missile defense, to one where the U.S. offensive strength against military targets is neutralized by an invulnerable Russian missile force on land and sea and the Soviet homeland defenses are significantly better than those of the U.S. The “balance of terror” then would be tipped in favor of the USSR.

c. Possible Trends in Soviet Political Behavior

With the declining U.S. superiority in the strategic field, it is reasonable to expect that the Soviets may increasingly press in Europe to gain local advantages without risking general war. If, beyond this, they succeed in upsetting the “balance of terror” in their favor—particularly if they beat the U.S. to an effective ABM while the U.S. remains unprotected against missile attacks—the potential limits of Soviet aggressiveness are greatly extended. It is not hard to visualize as a consequence a Western Europe swinging to neutralism as the precariousness of the situation becomes clear.

d. Adequacy of U.S. Programs

Events do not need to turn out as forecast above if the U.S. and NATO will otherwise. It is possible to offset Soviet strength in Europe by increased NATO conventional forces supported by improved tactical nuclear weapons and by a quick-reaction medium range missile capable of neutralizing or at least threatening the Soviet MRBM's. To insure continuation of comparative stability in the “balance of terror,” the U.S. must take a decision without delay with regard to the deployment of Nike-Zeus and accept the need to give a higher priority to the requirements of continental air defense in the formulation of the FY 1964 budget. I feel that these points need to come out clearly in the subject report.

Maxwell D. Taylor

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense 7/62-8/62. Top Secret.

1 Document 103.

105. National Security Action Memorandum No. 182 105. National Security Action Memorandum No. 182Source

Washington, August 24, 1962.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Attorney General

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

The Director, U.S. Information Agency

The Military Representative of the President

SUBJECT

Counterinsurgency Doctrine

The President has approved the document entitled “U.S. Overseas Internal Defense Policy”,1 which sets forth a national counterinsurgency doctrine for the use of U.S. departments and agencies concerned with the internal defense of overseas areas threatened by subversive insurgency, and has directed its promulgation to serve as basic policy guidance to diplomatic missions, consular personnel, and military commands abroad; to government departments and agencies at home; and to the government educational system. The addressees of this NSAM will take action to insure that the policies set forth in the document are reflected in departmental and agency operations and in such additional instructions and guidance as may be required to assure uniformity of effort. They will also initiate the formulation of the internal doctrine, tactics, and techniques appropriate to their own department or agency, based upon “U.S. Overseas Defense Policy.” These studies when completed will be reviewed by the Special Group (CI).

The Department of State in consultation with the other addressees of this memorandum is assigned the task of keeping the “U.S. Overseas Internal Defense Policy” up to date, making such modification as changes in policy or practical experience may require, and publishing revised editions as necessary.

McGeorge Bundy

* Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 182. Secret.

1 A copy of this 39-page paper, dated August 6, is attached to a memorandum from U. Alexis Johnson to Rusk dated August 8. (Ibid., Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 8/1/62-10/31/62) Another copy dated September 1962 is substantively identical but lacks two annexes. (Ibid., S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 182) For a summary, see Document 106. According to Johnson, the role of the CIA was “given only an abbreviated treatment in the basic document; for security reasons its function is being separately described in a companion paper to be distributed to qualified recipients.” The companion paper has not been found.

106. Editorial Note 106. Editorial Note

Under date of September 1962, the paper on “U.S. Overseas Internal Defense Policy” approved by the White House in NSAM No. 182 (Document 105) was widely distributed within the U.S. Government and U.S. Missions abroad. The paper opens with an analysis of Communist insurgencies that emphasizes their origin as political responses to the stress of modern economic development and continues with a description of stages of insurgency. The U.S. role should run the gamut from “Immunization of vulnerable societies not yet seriously threatened by communist subversion or insurgency” through defeat of “subversive insurgency in countries actively threatened by assisting the government under attack with military as well as non-military means.” One goal is to “minimize the likelihood of direct U.S. military involvement in internal war by maximizing indigenous capabilities” of defeating insurgency. U.S. strategy should not “assume a stance against revolution, per se, as an historical means of change.” Therefore non-Communist insurgency should be “examined on its merits in the light of U.S. interests.”

The paper recommends land reform, civil action, community development, education, cultivation of existing and emerging elites, police assistance, and diplomatic suasion as preferred means of bringing about successful and largely indigenous counterinsurgency efforts. “Anticipating, preventing and defeating communist-directed insurgency requires a blend of civil and military capabilities and actions to which each U.S. agency at the Country Team level must contribute.” In countering insurgency, however, “the major effort must be indigenous since insurgency is a uniquely local problem involving the aspirations and allegiance of local people.”

In Washington, the paper charges the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) with assuring “a coordinated and unified approach to regional or country programs,” verifying progress in their implementation, and making “decisions on inter-departmental issues arising out of such programs.” The Department of State is “responsible for providing overall policy guidance and assuring the coordination of internal defense programs.” The Secretary of State will determine whether there shall be a military assistance program for a country. The Agency for International Development is responsible for administering economic aid programs in support of community development and civic action. AID is also to strengthen the capability of police and paramilitary organizations to “enforce the law and maintain public order with the minimum use of force,” to “counter communist-inspired or exploited subversion or insurgency,” and to encourage “the development of responsible and humane police administration” and judicial procedure.

The Department of Defense is assigned a wide variety of roles, such as training of U.S. forces in counterinsurgency, military assistance, preparation of military sections of country defense plans, and the support of civilian and military counterinsurgency programs in affected countries with the assistance of AID and CIA. The CIA “is an active participant in the U.S. Internal Defense effort at both the national and the country team levels” and its role “will be carried out in accordance with the provisions of statutory authority and executive direction.” The USIA “will orient its programs toward immunizing the vulnerable sectors of developing societies against communist propaganda and subversive activities, and helping the modernization process to maturity without impairing the progressive enhancement of sovereignty and national values of the recipient country.”

Annex A requires the Department of Defense to “support the CIA in clandestine operations assigned to that agency” and to be “prepared to execute assigned paramilitary operations, wholly or partly covert, which require significant numbers of militarily trained personnel, amounts of military equipment, or military experience of a kind and level peculiar to the Armed Services.” Annex B is a glossary of terms. (Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, Special Group (CI) 8/1/62-10/31/62)

107. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 107. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Kaysen) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 14, 1962.

1. For your first look at McNamara's defense budget memoranda1 I pass on my own first reactions. In general, I think this is a very polished job indeed. The discussions of the RS-70 and the ballistic missile defense problems are particularly excellent.2 By way of sharper comment I would call your attention to two items—strategic retaliatory forces and the naval component of general purpose forces.3

2. On strategic retaliatory forces, I think McNamara has now come around to buying the arguments that some of us were making last year. These arguments, however, are like the different arguments he himself made last year, justifying no particular numbers, and I still think it is true that he is buying more in the way of missiles than we need. The real purpose of his paper is more a defense against service demands for a bigger force than justification of the forces he has requested. I have only one suggestion as to how this observation can be translated into practical terms. This goes to the buildup of Minutemen in relation to the buildup of improved Minutemen (Table, p. 2). If possible, it seems to me there would be some virtue in delaying the buildup from 600 to 800 Minutemen, adding 150 improved Minutemen to the 600-level force in 1966, and building up improved Minutemen more rapidly thereafter, if this then appears appropriate. I am looking into the question of how much would be saved by this change in scheduling now, and what difference it would make to the outcomes of the net evaluation calculations presented in the Appendix.

3. The naval portion of the cost of general purpose forces is substantial, yet there is no justification in logical terms for the naval forces similar to that offered for ground and air forces. There is no analysis of the relation between the kind of navy we want and the kind of wars we wish to be prepared to fight. I find it hard to resist the conclusion that we are maintaining 15 attack carriers by an expensive replacement schedule, and that we are building 6-8 attack submarines per year to maintain that force at its present size for reasons that have more to do with the continuance of past programs than they had to do with a sharp analysis of needs. As a horseback judgment I would think that a billion dollars taken from naval general purpose forces by cutting down the size of the fleet somewhat and put into increasing army and air force logistic support would add to the kind of fighting capability which McNamara is looking for. Or alternatively, it might be a way to save a billion dollars.

C.K.

P.S. I have not read the Continental Air Defense portion which just came in.4

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964, Miscellaneous Volume I. Top Secret.

1 In 1962 McNamara sent to the President seven draft Presidential memoranda (DPMs) on strategy, procurement, and the defense budget. A version of the draft memorandum of “Proposed Major Changes in Military Compensation,” dated October 15, is ibid., Volume I. Another DPM, labeled “Preliminary Draft,” deals with “The Naval Shipbuilding Program” and is dated October 31. (Ibid.) The others are cited below.

2 Kaysen apparently saw copies of early versions of DPMs on “The B- 70 Program” and “Ballistic Missile Defense,” sent by McNamara to the JCS on September 28 and October 6, respectively. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (28 Sep 62) Sec 1 and ibid., JMF 4740 (6 Oct 62), respectively) The final version of the missile paper is Document 111. In the B-70 paper as sent to Kennedy on November 20, McNamara recommended addition of $50 million to B-70 funds, but opposed continuing the RS-70, whose primary mission was to locate residual targets after a missile exchange, on the ground that in such a situation, “the value of a mop-up capability [was] not likely to be great.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, DOD Budget Vol I)

3 McNamara circulated initial versions of the DPMs on “Recommended General Purpose Forces” and “Recommended Strategic Retaliatory Forces” to the Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 31 and November 5, respectively. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 2285/85, JMF 7000 (17 Feb 62) Sec 3 and ibid., JCS 1800/636, JMF 7000 (5 Nov 62), respectively) For the final versions, see Documents 115 and 112.

4 Reference is to a draft memorandum to the President, “Continental Air Defense,” dated November 11. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964, Vol I)

108. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 108. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource

Washington, November 16, 1962.

SUBJECT

The National Security Council and Supporting Staff Organization

When we came in, it was the very strong feeling of most of those connected with the new Administration that the Planning Board and the Operations Coordinating Board had both become rather rigid and paper-ridden organizations. Neither of them seemed likely to be responsive to a new Chief Executive and his principal cabinet officers. Your Secretaries of State and Defense argued strongly that a more streamlined organization would be better for your particular purposes, and the Secretary of State in particular believed that it was most important to emphasize the operational responsibility of his department, as against the rather diffuse authority of staff committees without the power of decision. This impatience with much of the existing staff machinery was shared by a number of advisers who had had experience of it in the Eisenhower Administration—notably Douglas Dillon, and later John McCone.

It is probably also true that we did not promptly develop fully adequate new procedures of our own. The State Department has not proved to be as effective an agency of executive management as we hoped, and above all it has not shown the capacity for inter-departmental coordination which we hoped to force upon it. This, in my judgment, is largely because neither the Secretary nor the Under Secretary has taken the lead in this direction, so that the burden has fallen on George McGhee and Alexis Johnson, who simply lack the necessary standing and authority. Under a strong President, even more than a relatively inactive one, there can be no final coordination except from the White House.

We have always had, however, rather more organization then General Eisenhower probably recognizes. We have, for example, kept in our service the most effective professional members of the National Security Council staff, and we have added to them such notably qualified staff officers as Forrestal, Komer, Kaysen, and now Colonel Legere. We have instituted a system of administrative follow-up on Presidential decisions which works both by formal memorandum and by informal and continuous communication.

We have also increased the administrative support and certain important inter-departmental committees. This is notably true of the 5412 committee which is run with a much better and more thorough staff process than was true in January 1961, and the same applies to the Special Group for Counter-Insurgency, organized under General Taylor's leadership.

The National Security Council as such has seemed to us a much too cumbersome instrument for intensive use, but in the course of the recent Cuban crisis, you have instituted an Executive Committee which so far has worked unusually well. We are thinking of continuing the Executive Committee with a wider mandate on a regular weekly basis, and it is probable that certain continuing subcommittees may also be useful.

It will remain true that our operating style will be somewhat different from General Eisenhower's. Your own instinct is to work closely with the men who are most directly concerned with a particular problem, and to seek advice from a wider and more varied circle than General Eisenhower used. For this reason, your tendency is to use frequent small meetings with those who have an immediate concern with a problem—Laos, the Congo, the Defense budget, nuclear testing, Cuba, Berlin, and balance of payments. This is simply the way you do your job, and I see no chance that you will want to take the opposite course of reviewing the agreed papers laboriously ground forward by a third-level bureaucracy and presented to you through the medium of weekly meetings of 30 or 40 people.

As I reread John McCone's memorandum,1 I think that much of General Eisenhower's criticism may be directed against phenomena which were more characteristic of our first few months than of your present operations. I think that it may be worthwhile to emphasize both that we have learned a lot in the last year and a half, and that your own staff have never publicly engaged in any criticism whatever of General Eisenhower's choice of staff methods. What we have said and what I, at least, have deeply believed, is that different Presidents are bound to have different administrative methods. General Eisenhower is a believer in a military concept of staff operations, and you govern by direct personal involvement and decision.

McG. B.2

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, NSC Organization and Administration. No classification marking. This memorandum was apparently written in response to remarks by former President Eisenhower and in preparation for the President's news conference on November 20. The subject of the memorandum was not raised at the news conference.

1 Not further identified.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

109. Editorial Note 109. Editorial Note

On November 20, 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff forwarded to Secretary of Defense McNamara a memorandum (JCSM-907-62) on his recommendations for FY 1964-1968 strategic retaliatory forces (see footnote 3, Document 107). The Chiefs' memorandum reads in part:

“3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have serious reservations concerning certain portions of the rationale contained in the draft memorandum. It is agreed that a full first-strike capability as defined in the subject paper is not feasible in the time period under consideration. Neither the Joint Chiefs of Staff nor the Air Force recommend such a concept. Below is a quotation taken from an Air Force Study, part of which was contained in the draft memorandum. The underlining has been added to indicate an omitted portion.

“‘The Air Force has never counseled a “full“ first-strike capability in the sense of indemnifying the United States completely from serious consequences. The Air Force has rather supported the development of forces which provide the United States a first-strike capability credible to the Soviet Union, as well as to our Allies, by virtue of our ability to limit damage to the United States and our Allies to levels acceptable in light of the circumstances and the alternatives available.'

“4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that a first-strike capability is both feasible and desirable, although the degree or level of attainment is a matter of judgment and depends upon the US reaction to a changing Soviet capability. They consider the definition of adequate US first-strike capability to be that military power required to conduct a nuclear attack against the Sino-Soviet Bloc, prior to its striking the United States, that would degrade substantially the capability of the Sino-Soviet Bloc to inflict damage on the United States and Free World forces, economic structure, and society to the extent that the United States and its Allies would emerge with a relative power advantage over the Sino-Soviet Bloc. A first-strike, or a pre-emptive option, provides the United States and its Allies increased latitude within the total spectrum of military possibilities. It is also fundamental in maintaining the cohesion of the free-world alliances. For example, a capability for pre-emption is essential if the United States is to convince the NATO Alliance of its determination to employ external forces when such is necessary to prevent the over-running of Europe by Soviet forces. A first-strike capability is a credible threat which, if employed firmly and judiciously in consort with other major elements of national military power, can serve to confine and prevent escalation of lesser levels of conflict. In light of this, a first-strike option is required to meet our military commitments and provide for guarantees already made by the United States to its NATO Allies. The degree to which a first-strike capability has deterred limited aggression is difficult to determine since we are unable to assess Soviet behavior had the United States possessed a lesser capability. The Soviets have shown restraint in their actions and have carefully avoided direct commitment of Russian forces to limited aggression.

“5. If the rationale presented in the draft memorandum is intended to suggest that there are no circumstances in which we will initiate the use of strategic forces, then we believe that we must face fully the cost of other alternatives, such as matching the Soviet Union in other areas of military strength, including those areas in which it now possesses a clear margin of advantage. The ultimate strength of our position among the nations of the Free World has resided in the realization on the part of our enemies that an interest identified as vital to the United States will be defended with whatever means are necessary. The ultimate level of defense rests with the possession of a clear military superiority by the United States. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that in the interest of added flexibility the ability to execute a coercive strategy would be a desirable option, if attainable. A coercive strategy is based on the ability to threaten such great destruction of Soviet population, either after the USSR has expended most of its strategic nuclear strength or after most of this strength has been destroyed, that the Soviets would be willing to accept an end to hostilities on terms favorable to the United States and its Allies without further strategic nuclear exchange. We recommended that the desirability of such a strategy continue to be recognized as an available option under pre-emptive circumstances.

“6. The force levels and composition contained in the draft memorandum, as related to Minuteman and Skybolt, do not reflect the previous recommendation provided by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The US strategic nuclear forces as shown in JSOP-67 and the Skybolt program have been reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and are considered necessary if the United States is to maintain the clear margin of superiority over its potential adversaries.

“7. If the GAM-87 program is discontinued and its contribution is not replaced by an equivalent capability, the result will be a substantial degradation in the over-all strategic capability. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that provision of 100 additional Minuteman missiles by 1968 does not constitute a capability equivalent to the 1012 Skybolt missile program.

“8. The cancellation of the Skybolt could have political implications since the British decision to participate in the Skybolt program required the British to reject the Blue Streak missile which they have developed. This was a contentious and almost unprecedented departure from previous British policy of using domestic resources for their aircraft programs. If the British elect to continue the program on their own it could have considerable impact on the other important elements of their national military strength together with their NATO contribution. If they cancel their portion of the program, within the context of the present agreement, an equivalent capability will be required or we must accept the alternative of a further degraded capability. Perhaps the most accurate measurement of the impact on the combined Allied capability is contained in a recent statement from USCINCEUR concerning 1967 and 1968 force objectives. He recommends a force of 120 medium UK bombers, 72 of which would be equipped with Skybolts. The task of this bomber force is to conduct operations in coordination with the US Strategic Air Command.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1800/644, JMF 7000 (5 Nov 62); another copy is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 B 3542, 110.01 Package 1, 12 April 62)

For the final version of McNamara's draft memorandum to the President, see Document 112. Force recommendations for JSOP (Joint Strategic Operations Plan) 67 are in a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs to McNamara dated August 27. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 2143/170, JMF 3130 (24 Oct 61) Sec 3) The “Air Force study” quoted by the Joint Chiefs in the November 20 memorandum has not been further identified.

110. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 110. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, November 20, 1962.

CM-128-62

SUBJECT

Recommended Fiscal Year 1964-1968 Strategic Retaliatory Forces

1. In JCSM-907-621 I forwarded the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the proposed draft memorandum to the President on the above subject.2 While I am generally in agreement with the views of the Chiefs, I would like to express in this memorandum a differing opinion on the Skybolt air-to-ground missile program, the cancellation of which is the most important single issue in your memorandum.

2. The basic question in the Skybolt issue is how much we should pay to extend the useful life of the B-52 bombers by providing penetration assistance in the form of air-to-ground missiles. The argument in favor of providing this assistance is the need to continue to exploit the asset of the manned strategic bomber, waning though that asset be, in order to superimpose its delivery capacity upon the impressive megatonnage which can be delivered by our long range missiles in the 1968 time frame. Since the B-52s will at that time represent an important part of the total potential weight of our strategic attack in a retaliatory situation with warning, it would seem prudent to retain this delivery system during the next few years if, by giving it penetration aids, we can assure bombs on target for a significant percentage of its delivery capacity.

3. Your proposed letter to the President3 would meet the requirements for assisting the B-52s in FY 1968 by providing 100 more Minuteman missiles and 172 more Hound Dogs, both additions being primarily for air defense suppression in support of the B-52s. The total programmed Hound Dogs would thus increase from 408 to 580 in FY 1968. In compensation for these additions, you propose to cancel the 1012 Skybolts originally programmed for 1968 with a net saving by this substitution of approximately 1.3 billion dollars. The question then becomes whether this is an acceptable substitution or whether, as the Joint Chiefs of Staff have stated, your proposed program would result in a “substantial degradation in the over-all strategic capability.”

4. My conclusion is that, while the decision is a close one, the facts as I know them do not establish a compelling case for the judgment of the Chiefs cited above. This conclusion rests upon the following considerations.

5. While the B-52 bomber fleet is still important during the next few years in contributing to our deterrent posture, the target system left to attack by bombers after penetration tends to decline in importance as missiles take over the most important targets which require attack with minimum delay. Hence, the price paid for the penetration of the B-52s should not be too high. Furthermore, the penetration aids bought should become available quickly or they will not have concurrent availability with the useful remaining life of the B-52s.

6. In this respect, I am impressed with the danger that the Skybolt program with its present test difficulties which it must overcome would arrive too late to contribute long to the usefulness of the B-52s. Even if kept upon schedule, the Skybolt will not be available in numbers before 1966 and it is difficult to foresee much use for the B-52s in the 1970 era. With a little slippage in the Skybolt program, we would have an expensive auxiliary weapon system which, like BOMARC, arrived too late to perform a remunerative mission.

7. Assuming that we concede the need of reinforcing the penetration capability of the B-52s, is it necessary to go for a new and complicated system such as Skybolt? This question raises the matter of relative capabilities of Hound Dog and of Skybolt, a matter about which the experts disagree. My over-all impression is that the advantages attributed to Skybolt are not sufficiently impressive to provide a clear margin of superiority over Hound Dog if supplemented by other penetration aids. If-52s with Hound Dog are preceded with an adequate number of Minuteman missiles provided for air defense suppression, and if maximum effort is put on ECM in support of the B-52s, it would seem to me that the over-all penetrability of the force would be comparable to that which may be obtained from a successful Skybolt program.

8. My lukewarmness for spending any substantial sum for a new standoff missile for the B-52s results from my own doubt as to the long-term effectiveness of the manned bomber in the strategic mission. Henceforth, in the missile age, all aircraft on the ground will be highly vulnerable to surprise attack and the B-52s are no exception. Under conditions of surprise attack, they are unlikely to make a significant contribution to our over-all strategic effort. In the other extreme case, a U.S. preemptive attack, the B-52 forces will not be necessary to add to the destruction of the enemy, which can be accomplished in large measures by other means. Only in the case of U.S. retaliation after receiving tactical warning does it appear that the B-52 mission may be an important one. In this situation, the Skybolt could be a valuable weapon, although how much better than the combination of the Hound Dog plus Minuteman is difficult to say.

9. In conclusion, although the choice is a narrow one, I would support the cancellation of the Skybolt program and the addition of Minuteman missiles and Hound Dogs to compensate therefor. Because of the uncertainty of the size and nature of the air suppression target system to be struck, I do not have a feel for the adequacy of the numbers which you suggest, namely 100 more Minuteman missiles and 172 more Hound Dogs. My over-all judgment on the Skybolt issues results from a conviction of the over-all redundancy of our nuclear strategic strike capability to deter the USSR or to attack those targets which must be struck to destroy or to cripple the enemy. I am also impressed with the greater priority of need for other important programs which compete for our resources, such as the antimissile missile program, the program for the modernization and increase of conventional forces, and projects to increase the reliability and the penetrability of our long-range missiles. Even if the decision is taken to continue the Skybolt program, I should like to be assured that these more important programs receive the weight of fiscal support necessary for their success, before making provision for a relatively marginal program such as Skybolt.

Maxwell D. Taylor4

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 Package I—12 Apr 62. Top Secret.

1 See Document 109.

2 See footnote 4, Document 107. For the final version, see Document 112.

3 Reference is to the proposed DPM mentioned in paragraph 1.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Taylor signed the original.

111. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 111. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, November 20, 1962.

SUBJECT

Ballistic Missile Defense

In 1961, the Army proposed full development of the Nike-Zeus and deployment of the system for the defense of 27 cities. The development program recommended by the Army was approved but, because of limitations in the effectiveness of the system, deployment of Nike-Zeus was disapproved. Congress appropriated $384 million in FY 1963 for ballistic missile defense development, including $274 million for Nike-Zeus.

During the past year we have gained a much broader understanding of the problems of ballistic missile defense, the level of defense that may be achieved, and the characteristics of the most effective system. The technical opportunities offered by alternatives to or modifications of Nike-Zeus were thoroughly examined by the Army. This effort led to the initial design of four major improvements: 1. Use of the Zeus discrimination radar as a high volume, lower accuracy target tracker.

2. Modification of the Zeus missile to reduce the minimum intercept altitude.

3. Development of a new high acceleration missile (Sprint); this missile would increase the time available for discrimination.

4. Development of a new phased array radar; this radar could simultaneously acquire, evaluate, and track a large number of objects.

The addition of (1.) and (2.) above to the Nike-Zeus yields Improved Nike Zeus. Nike Zeus Improved plus (3.) and (4.) provide Nike Zeus Augmented A and Nike Zeus Augmented B respectively. A system based on (3.) and (4.) (plus some small number of Zeus missiles) is Nike-X.

New programs are now proposed to incorporate these developments. Our currently approved program, the new Army proposal, and my recommendation for the future are briefly summarized below.

The Current Approved Program

Continue development and tests of the Nike-Zeus system and limited development of the phased array radar. Development costs for this program for FY 1964 through FY 1967 total $600 million. Initial deployment of this system, if it appeared worthwhile, could begin within four years of the time a deployment decision is made.

The Proposed Army Program

Develop both the Improved and Augmented Nike-Zeus systems and the Nike-X system. Sixteen Zeus batteries for twelve urban areas would be deployed beginning in 1967. Ten Nike-X batteries, for ten additional urban areas, would be deployed beginning in 1969. Sprint missiles and array radars would also be added to the first 16 batteries, and the Zeus missiles would be redistributed over all 26 batteries. Development costs for this program, beyond FY 1963, would total $1.4 billion, and the initial costs for a 26 battery defense would total around $12.2 billion. The twenty-two urban areas around which these batteries would be deployed include approximately 30 percent of our population.

The Recommended Program

Develop fully only the Nike-X system. (The Nike-Zeus test program would be reduced below the currently approved level and would be limited to the study of re-entry phenomena and defense techniques, including anti-satellite defense.) Development costs for this program, beyond FY 1963, would total around $1.3 billion. A decision to deploy the Nike-X system would be deferred until mid-1964. The first Nike-X batteries could be deployed in 1969 and a 26 battery defense could be completed three or four years later. The initial costs for a 26 battery defense would total around $11.7 billion.

The estimated costs of the Current Program, the Proposed Army Program, and my Recommended Program are summarized in Table 1.

[Here follows Table 1.]

The program recommended by the Army to begin deployment of a composite system incorporating the Improved and Augmented Nike-Zeus systems instead of the Nike-X development (and possible deployment) does not seem to me to provide an interim defense capability which is worth the minimum of $2.7 billion additional which it requires. This interim deployment proposal has the additional undesirable effect of providing, at completion of deployment, a heterogeneous system of somewhat lower quality than Nike-X. It also commits us at this time to the deployment of a ballistic missile defense system, which my recommendation does not. Without being convinced that the Nike-X system should eventually be deployed, I recommend that we proceed vigorously with its development on a schedule which will preserve the option of the earliest possible deployment.

The rationale for these recommendations is briefly summarized below: 1. The proposed Army program represents a substantial improvement over the Nike Zeus. The final Army system is almost as good as Nike-X against various types of determined attacks. However, in its early stages the Army deployment is a marginal effectiveness due to its limited target handling capability. Even in the final deployment the vulnerability of parts of the Army system to modest blast effects and the lower traffic handling capability make it somewhat inferior. The major arguments for the Improved/Augmented system are its earlier availability and the insurance it provides against unexpected problems in developing an advanced system.

2. The Nike-X system promises a sufficient capability to insure a more equal contest with offensive weapons and tactics. A Nike-X defense would probably still cost more than the cost of offensive weapons which could overcome this defense; such a defense, however, would significantly reduce the damage from any given number of weapons targeted against our cities. For the same deployment cost, Nike -X will provide a more effective system than the Army's program, although the first units would be delayed two years.

3. The recommended program will make a potentially satisfactory deployment option available at the earliest possible time without a current financial commitment for procurement planning.

The remainder of this paper discusses in detail:1 I. The Views of the JCS on Ballistic Missile Defense.

II. Additional Strategic Considerations.

III. A Description of the Alternative Systems.

IV. Effectiveness of the Alternative Systems.

V. Relation of Active Defense and Civil Defense.

VI. Some Key Issues.

I. VIEWS OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the various options available for terminal ballistic missile defense. The Chief of Staff of the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations support the program proposed by the Secretary of the Army; they understood, however, that the Army program would cost only $380 million more than my recommended program instead of around $3 billion more. The Chief of Staff of the Air Force recommends that the Nike -X and Nike -Zeus research and development programs and Nike-Zeus tests should be conducted, but that a decision should not be taken at this time to begin deployment. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff supports the views of the Chief of Staff of the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations.

The following salient factors were presented by the Chiefs in support of their position:2

a. Chief of Staff Army and Chief of Naval Operations: (1) Militarily, the most glaring present deficiency in the U.S. military posture is the lack of an anti-ballistic missile capability. CINCNORAD emphasizes that ballistic missile defense has first priority.

(2) There is growing evidence of a substantial Soviet AICBM effort. The extent of damage that the military and scientific prestige of the United States will suffer, if the Soviets are credited with a major achievement in this area, is most impressive.

(3) The absence of an anti-ballistic missile capability subjects the United States to the possibility of significant damage or public humiliation at the hands of minor powers who acquire a missile capability. Our recent experiences in the Cuban crisis stress the relevance of this concern.

(4) Without a defense, major urban areas are exposed to accidental, irrational, and unauthorized attacks.

(5) The program recommended by the Army will provide a defense two to three years earlier than possible with a Nike-X program. By 1973 the effectiveness of these deployments is comparable. A defense in the earlier years is considered vital to the security of the United States.

(6) The attainment of a much needed hard point defense capability using Nike-X components should be considered.

b. Chief of Staff Air Force: (1) Parallel research and development of the Nike-X and Nike-Zeus proposals, to gain knowledge essential to the ultimate achievement of both an effective defense and an effective penetration capability, appears justified.

(2) A decision now for production constitutes acceptance before any measure of the defense system effectiveness has been established.

(3) A decision to deploy active ballistic missile defense should depend, in part, on the required complementary civil defense program.

(4) The terminal defense systems now attainable or forecast do not provide an effective defense for urban areas. They may have application to defense of selected and hardened elements of the national military comment structure.

In supporting the views of the Chief of Staff of the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff believes that it is of vital national importance to embark at once upon a production and deployment program as recommended by the Secretary of the Army.3

II. ADDITIONAL STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

The comments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff describe a number of the strategic considerations associated with a decision to deploy a ballistic missile defense. A broader range of strategic and economic considerations, together with the technical situation at the time, will determine whether such a defense should eventually be deployed. These additional arguments for deployment of a less than perfect ballistic missile defense are also pertinent: a. A ballistic missile defense of limited capability would contribute to the deterrence of large attacks by raising doubt about the attacker's ability to penetrate. Such a defense, even though limited, greatly complicates the design and tactics for offensive weapons. The Soviets may not pursue an extensive penetration aids program even though it is in their interest to do so; if penetration aids are developed, the total yield of an attack would be considerably degraded by the weight penalty.

b. A ballistic missile defense system with the effectiveness of Nike-X would significantly reduce the damage from a given number of weapons directed against our urban areas. Only a small proportion of the Soviet missiles may be used for an attack on urban targets in a general war in which either we or they initiate a counter-force strike.

On the opposite side of the issue, the following additional arguments are relevant: a. Deployment of a ballistic missile defense would almost surely provoke a Soviet reaction. This reaction could be a penetration aids program, an increase in the number of missiles, or the deployment of very large yield weapons. The nature and scale of their response depends, in large part, on the cost of the actions necessary to overcome our defense. Some idea of their response can be gained from our own experience. The cost of our penetration aids program will be less than one-fifth the cost of a ballistic missile defense system and the lead time for improved penetration aids is substantially shorter. The incremental cost of the number of missiles required to overcome a good ballistic missile defense would be from one-tenth to one-half the cost of the defense. We cannot be sure the Soviets would respond on a scale necessary to overcome our defense, but the economic advantage is definitely in favor of the offense.

b. The value of a defense against a relatively small missile force in the hands of a minor power has been noted. Minor powers, however, could still threaten cities with a population of around one million that are not defended.4

[Here follow sections III-VI.]

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, FY 1964 Defense Budget Volume I. Top Secret.

1 Sections III-VI are not printed. At the close of Section VI, in which he outlined a number of technical problems, McNamara stated: “I therefore recommend against making a commitment now to deploy either Nike -X or the Army's systems. I believe, however, that anti-missile defense is so important in the strategic equation that we must be willing to make very substantial development expenditures even if the probability of deployment is rather low.”

2 Paragraphs a and b below partially summarize Appendix A to a November 10 memorandum from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to McNamara. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 2012/219, JMF 4740 (6 Oct 62))

3 Taylor's views are in a separate November 10 memorandum to McNamara, CM-103-62. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 471.94 16 Aug 62)

4 In a November 10 memorandum to McNamara, Wiesner enclosed the “Report of the AICBM Panel of the President's Science Advisory Committee on the Nike Zeus System.” The Panel found that the “present Nike Zeus, because of its technical recommendations, would be inadequate to deal with the anticipated threat,” and recommended that it not be deployed “in its present form.” The Panel concluded that systems “growing out of the basic Nike Zeus concept” gave promise for the future, and that one using phased array radar and a high-acceleration interceptor should be intensively developed before commitment to deployment, which should be preceded by basic decisions on the role of AICBM and civil defense in the U.S. defense posture. (Ibid.)

112. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 112. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, November 21, 1962.

SUBJECT

Recommended FY 1964-FY 1968 Strategic Retaliatory Forces (U)

I have recently completed my review of the long-range nuclear delivery forces and their associated support for FY 1964-FY 1968. The program recommended will form the basis for the preparation of the FY 1964 budget. This memorandum summarizes the main factors I have taken into consideration in determining United States requirements for these forces.

My recommendations concerning the B-70 program are the subject of another memorandum1 and these will not be discussed in this paper.

I recommend that you approve, for inclusion in the FY 1964 budget, the development and procurement of the following operational missiles and aircraft to supplement our Long Range Nuclear Delivery Forces:

Total Purchase Cost to Be Funded FY 1964 NOA

(Millions of Dollars)

a. Development of Improved Minuteman $366.1 $190.0

b. 150 Improved Minutemen Hardened and Dispersed $855.0 $396.0

c. 6 Polaris Submarines (Completing planned force of 41) $936.3 $646.5

After a careful evaluation of the GAM-87 (Skybolt), and for reasons that I shall make clear later in this memorandum, I recommend the cancellation of the program. This action will result in savings of $568 million in FY 1964 and of about $2.5 billion over the period FY 1963-FY 1968, of which about $600 million is for warheads and $1.9 billion is for Skybolt development and production. Further, as a partial offset to this reduction, I recommend approval of 100 additional Improved Minutemen by end-FY 1968.

Moreover, I recommend that we adopt, for planning purposes, the force structure summarized in the following table. Where they differ from my recommendations, the forces proposed by the Services are shown beneath mine in parentheses.

RECOMMENDED AND SERVICE-PROPOSED FORCESa

End-Fiscal Year 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968

Bombers

B-52 555 615 630 630 630 630 630 630

B/E-47 900 810 585 450 225

B-58 40 80 80 80 80 80 72 66

RS-70 0

(25)

Total Bombers 1495 1505 1295 1160 935 710 702 696

(721)

Air Launched Missiles

Hound Dog 216 460 580 580 580 580 580 580

(540) (432) (408) (408)

Skybolt 0 0 0 0

(184) (552) (1012) (1012)

Total GAM's 216 460 580 580 580 580 580 580

(724) (984) (1420) (1420)

Surface-to-Surface Missiles

Atlas 28 77 126 126 126 120 111 99

Titan 44 77 108 108 108 108 108

Minuteman 150 600 800 800 800 800

(900) (900) (850) (750)

Improved Minutemanb 150 350 500

(300) (800) (1200)

Polaris A-1-2-3 80 144 192 288 464 560 656 656

(640) (448)

Polaris A3A 0 0

(16) (208)

Total Missiles 108 265 545 1122 1498 1738 2025 2163

(1598) (1988) (2525) (2812)

Other

Quail 224 392 392 392 392 392 392 392

KC-135c 400 440 500 580 620 620 620 620

KC-97 600 580 340 240 120

RC-135 23 23 23 23

RB-47 90 45 45 45 15

Thord 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60

Jupitere 45 45 45 45 45 45 45 45

Regulus 17 17 17 17 5

Alert Force Weapons

Weapons 1074 1512 2364 2681 3053 3209 3455 3568

(3254) (3744) (4544) (5227)

[1 entry not declassified]

a The Service proposed forces, where different from the Recommended forces, are shown in parentheses. The Air Force has also proposed the procurement of the MRBM force, with costs to be shared by NATO. This proposal is not discussed in this memorandum.

b Includes 100 Improved Minutemen programmed by FY 1968 in place of the Skybolt missiles.

c Includes National Emergency Airborne Command Post and Post-Attack Command and Control System aircraft.

The estimated Total Obligational Authority required to procure and operate these forces over this period is shown in the following table. The difference between the Total Obligational Authority required to finance the forces I am recommending and that required to finance the forces recommended by the individual Services is shown on the second line.

Total Obligational Authority End-Fiscal Yearf (billions of dollars) 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1964-1968

Secretary of Defense Recommendations 8.64 7.74 5.52 4.68 3.71 3.42 25.07

Service Proposals +.58 +1.93 +2.26 +3.52 +3.54 +1.25 +12.50

Over the five years, 1964-1968, the complete cost to buy and operate the aircraft and missiles recommended by the Air Force and the Polaris recommended by the Navy exceeds the cost of the forces I am recommending by approximately $12.5 billion, of which about $5 billion is for the RS-70. (The Air Force plan would entail additional costs for the RS-70 in later years.) As will be shown later in this paper, the extra capability provided by the individual Service proposals runs up against strongly diminishing returns and yields very little in terms of extra target destruction. In my judgment, it is an increment not worth the cost of $12.5 billion over the five year period.

The forces I am recommending differ from the recommendations of the Joint Chiefs in the following respects. First, the JCS have stated a requirement for an additional 100 operational Minutemen by end-FY 1965. The costs of such an increase in FY 1963 and FY 1964 would amount to approximately $500 million. Second, the JCS recommend a force of 1,200 Minutemen by end-FY 1967. (My recommended force reaches 1,150 by that time.) Third, the Chiefs of Staff of the Army and Air Force, and the Chief of Naval Operations, recommend that the Skybolt program be continued as proposed by the Air Force.2 The Chairman of the JCS supports my recommendation to cancel this program.3

As well as these forces, I recommend that we continue development and procurement of the Post-Attack Command and Control System (PACCS) airborne system and initiation of construction of a Deep Underground Survivable Center. The airborne system consists of 17 airborne command posts (ABNCP's) and 36 B-47 communications relay aircraft. To date, 12 KC-135A command post aircraft are in place and one is maintained continuously airborne. All 17 ABNCP's are scheduled to be in place by June of 1963 and the relay aircraft by May 1963. The KC-135B ABNCP's with improved communications will be in place at the end of 1964. The approved investment costs for the airborne system are $162 million (plus $26 million R&D), with a level-off annual operating cost of $36.5 million. Additional funds will be needed as continued improvements to communications and command center capability evolve.

I recommend initiation of construction for a Deep Underground Command Post for SAC in FY 1964. This would be operational in 1967-1969 and would provide a highly survivable, long-endurance center for post-strike control. The initial cost is estimated to be on the order of $155 million.

The following sections describe in greater detail the basis for my recommendations, by reviewing, first, strategic objectives, the Soviet-Bloc nuclear threat and our target destruction capabilities, general nuclear war outcomes, and second, the particular key decisions to be made this year.

I. General Basis for Force Level Recommendations

In order to provide a firm basis for determining the capabilities of Strategic Retaliatory Forces in general nuclear war missions, I asked the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to establish a Special Studies Group which would have, as one of its tasks, to examine strategic objectives and force requirements on a continuing basis. This Group analyzed the comparative capabilities of alternative strategic forces for the 1968 period. These studies, in addition to other studies by the Services and my staff, supplemented the advice of the Joint Chiefs and, together with that advice, provided the basis for my recommendations.

General Nuclear War Objectives

The forces I am recommending have been chosen, primarily, to satisfy two requirements. They are, first, to provide the United States with a secure, protected retaliatory force able to survive any attack within enemy capabilities and capable of striking back and destroying Soviet urban society, if necessary, in a controlled and deliberate way; and, second, to deny the enemy the prospect of achieving a military victory by attacking our forces. The forces I am recommending should thereby give any rational Soviet decisionmaker the strongest possible incentives to avoid a nuclear attack on ourselves or our allies.

However, I recognize that despite our possession of a most powerful deterrent, nuclear war may break out in an accidental or unpremeditated way, or as the consequence of enemy irrationality or miscalculation. Therefore, I believe that we should take all measures that offer a reasonable prospect of effectively limiting damage to ourselves and our allies in the event that deterrence fails and thermonuclear war does occur. Such measures include active anti-bomber and anti-missile defenses and civil defenses. Strategic offensive forces can also make an important contribution by striking back against Soviet bomber bases, missile sites, and other vulnerable elements of Soviet follow-on forces. In some circumstances, our counterattack may succeed in blunting the Soviet attack and make a substantial contribution to the damage-limiting objectives. The forces and program I am recommending meet this requirement.

It has become clear to me that the Air Force proposals, both for the RS-70 and for the rest of their Strategic Retaliatory Forces are based on the objective of achieving a first-strike capability. In the words of an Air Force report to me:

“The Air Force has rather supported the development of forces which provide the United States a first-strike capability credible to the Soviet Union, as well as to our Allies, by virtue of our ability to limit damage to the United States and our Allies to levels acceptable in light of the circumstances and the alternatives available.”4

Of course, any force designed primarily for a controlled second-strike, and for the limiting of damage to the U.S. and its Allies, will inevitably have in it to an important degree a first-strike capability. What is at issue here is whether our forces should be augmented beyond what I am recommending in an attempt to achieve a capability to start a thermonuclear war in which the resulting damage to ourselves and our Allies could be considered acceptable on some reasonable definition of the term.

In my memorandum to you on this subject last year,5 I defined a “full first-strike capability” as a capability that “would be achieved if our forces were so large and so effective, in relation to those of the Soviet Union, that we would be able to attack and reduce Soviet retaliatory power to the point at which it could not cause severe damage to U.S. population and industry.” I indicated then and I reaffirm now my belief that the “full first-strike capability”—and I now include the Air Force's variant of it—should be rejected as a U.S. policy objective. This is for several reasons.

a. It is almost certainly infeasible.

By this I mean that the same means for achieving a secure, protected retaliatory force able to survive any attack and be capable of striking back that we are using are also available to the Soviets. In particular, I was recently informed by the JCS that the Soviet Union now has a submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) capability which, if unopposed, would permit deployment of nearly 100 missiles against CONUS. The Soviets also have submarine-launched cruise missiles. The NIE now estimates6 that by mid-1967, the Soviets will have some 186 SLBM's and 156 cruise missiles. Although we have an effective capability to sink enemy submarines in a protracted war at sea, we have no realistic prospect of being able to destroy a major part of deployed enemy SLBM forces in a sudden attack, thereby preventing Soviet retaliation after a U.S. attack. Moreover, like ourselves, the Soviets can harden their land-based missiles. Recent intelligence indicates that they are beginning to harden both their IRBM's and their ICBM's. They have the further option of protecting these forces with active ballistic missile defenses, a choice which appears uneconomic to us, but which may be attractive to them. There is a problem of uncertainty of location of some of their missile sites. Furthermore, I am convinced that we would not be able to achieve tactical surprise, especially in the kinds of crisis circumstances in which a first-strike capability might be relevant. Thus, the Soviets would be able to launch some of their retaliatory forces before we had destroyed their bases.

Finally, it is clear to me that the forces proposed by the Air Force itself cannot give us this capability. For example, in mid-1968, under very favorable circumstances, the Air Force proposed force would at best be able to reduce Soviet strategic forces to roughly 100 surviving ICBM's (for example, assume that we locate and target about 93 per cent of a force of 700 missiles and destroy in time about 93 per cent of the missiles we target). In addition, approximately 100 submarine-launched missiles could be at sea. If these remaining forces were targeted against U.S. cities, they could inflict roughly 50 million direct fatalities in the United States, even with fallout protection. I do not consider this an “acceptable” level of damage.

I have said almost certainly infeasible because I can think of at least two reasons why it might not prove to be infeasible. First, the Soviets could blunder and leave themselves vulnerable to a U.S. first-strike. I do not consider this to be a very likely possibility. As I indicated earlier, already the Soviets are deploying SLBM's and hardened ICBM's and IRBM's. Moreover, even if they were to be so foolish as to leave themselves vulnerable to a U.S. first-strike, because of the presence of diminishing returns in target destruction, the extra forces proposed by the Air Force do not appear to add a great deal. The possible circumstances in which the Air Force proposed forces would provide the U.S. with a good first-strike capability and those proposed by me would not seem unclear and improbable.

Secondly, one might argue that we could hope to achieve a satisfactory outcome by combining a good first-strike capability with a coercive strategy. That is, we might try to knock out most of the Soviet strategic nuclear forces, while keeping Russian cities intact, and then coerce the Soviets into avoiding our cities (by the threat of controlled reprisal) and accepting our peace terms. In this case we would be counting on our ability to destroy their will, not their ability, to destroy our cities. I believe that the coercive strategy is a sensible and desirable option to have in second-strike circumstances in which we are trying to make the best of a bad situation. There the only justification it requires is a reasonable possibility that it might work. But it would be foolish to count on it working to the point that it would form the basis for a belief that we could strike first without retaliation. Moreover, there are limits to the extent to which extra strategic retaliatory forces help in these circumstances once we have a protected capability to destroy essentially all of their urban society.

b. It is neither necessary nor particularly useful.

The threat of U.S. first-strike has long since been shown to be ineffective in deterring limited provocations and aggression. Therefore, it has been necessary to build up our theatre forces at levels at which they would be adequate to meet our commitments without resort to nuclear weapons. We have made a great deal of progress toward this objective in the past two years, and we plan further progress.

c. It would be extremely costly.

A “full” or “credible” first-strike capability, even if feasible, would cost much more than the costs of the Air Force proposed Strategic Retaliatory Forces. As well as much larger and more effective Strategic Retaliatory Forces, such a capability would require very large expenditures on Civil Defense and Continental Air and Missile Defenses.

For these reasons, the following discussion is limited to evaluation of the recommended and alternative forces in second-strike conditions. Although I examine the capability of these forces to destroy Soviet military targets in a second-strike, I want to make it clear that an ability to destroy 100 per cent of these targets is not one that I think we can possibly attain. Rather, I believe that we should stop augmenting our forces for this purpose when the extra capability the increments offer is small in relation to the extra costs.

The Soviet Long-Range Nuclear Threat

We have intelligence estimates of the Soviet strategic forces through 1967.7 These estimates have been extrapolated for 1968 in the following table which summarizes the size and composition of the Soviet forces. The Low numbers represent the smaller force estimated by USIB; the Medium numbers correspond to the upper bound of the range projected by USIB; the High force corresponds to the upper bound of the range indicated by the Air Force in its dissent from the majority view.

SOVIET STRATEGIC RETALIATORY FORCES Intelligence Estimates Extrapolation Mid 1966- Mid-1967 Mid-1968 Low Med. High Low Med High Low Med. High (NIE) (NIE) (AF) (NIE) (NIE) (AF) (Low) (High) (High) (Low) (High) (High)

Oper. ICBM Launchers

Soft 150 250 300 150 250 300 150 250 300

Hardened 125 250 200 125 250 200 125 250 200

Fully Hard (few) 25 150 25 100 300 100 200 450

Total 275 525 650 300 600 800 375 700 950

Oper. IRBM Launchers

Softa 550 650 650 550 650 650 550 650 650

Total 550 650 650 550 650 650 550 650 650

Submarine-Launched Forces

Ballistic Missiles 174 186 198

Cruise Missiles 132 156 192

Total 306 342 390

Bombers and Tankers

Heavy 120 200 105 200 90 120 200

Medium 800 800 750 750 700 700 700

Total 920 1000 855 950 790 820 900

a Intelligence recently received indicates that the Soviets are not hardening their IRBM launchers.

The principal defensive weapon systems that the Soviets are estimated to have deployed in the 1966-1968 period are:

(1) SA-2;

(2) SA-3;

(3) fighter interceptors for anti-bomber defense; and,

(4) anti-missile defense system against an MRBM/IRBM and ICBM threat.

The present generation Soviet ground-to-air missile, the SA-2, is similar to the U.S. Nike-Hercules. We expect the Soviets to have deployed about 600 SA-2 batteries in 1966-1968. This system has a good capability against bombers at moderate altitudes, but its low altitude capability is minimal. An improved SA-2 may have an intercept capability against high-altitude non-ballistic air-to-surface missiles. This system is also estimated to have some minimal capability against tactical missiles launched 50-150 miles away. Some of the improved SA-2's may be configured for mobile operations.

The SA-3, Hawk type system, is estimated to be designed to intercept low-altitude penetrators (including high speed low-altitude ASM's). We expect roughly 400-800 SA-3 batteries to be deployed in 1968.

The current generation Soviet interceptors have airborne intercept radars with track/search ranges much smaller than comparable U.S. fighters. Improvements are expected when advanced all-weather interceptors are phased into the operational inventory. The Soviet fighter system is dependent on ground controlled intercept radar for terminal vectoring to targets. Like our own, the ground direction centers are vulnerable to ballistic missile attack. The effectiveness of Soviet interceptors against air-launched missiles, and to a lesser extent against bombers, is expected to be small, not because of terminal performance considerations, but because of the difficulties encountered by interceptors in acquiring targets within a degraded ground environment.

The Soviets are known to be working on an anti-MRBM/IRBM system, designated the AM-1, that is believed to be effective against ballistic missiles launched from 300-1000 n.mi. It is believed that the Soviets are currently deploying this system around Leningrad and future deployment is possible in the 1963-1964 time period. The system may be made transportable. The AM-1 is considered capable, under favorable conditions, of engaging an ICBM re-entry vehicle. However, the capability of the AM-1 does not seem sufficient to warrant deployment to targets threatened only by the ICBM.

The Soviets are also believed to be making a major effort to develop a single ABM system, designated AM-2, for defense of the “homeland” against all strategic ballistic missile threats, IRBM's, ALBM's, and FBM's, as well as ICBM's. This system could probably be initially deployed some time in the 1965-1966 time period. For purposes of the calculations which follow, we have assumed 20 ABM batteries deployed in 1968.

The following table shows a projected Soviet-Bloc target list for end-FY 1968. The list is based on the one used by the JCS Special Studies Group for their Strategic Nuclear Study, but includes the high projection of the USIB for the number of Soviet missile launchers. The numbers of weapons assigned to these targets are the numbers used in the calculations summarized later in this memorandum. They can be taken as an approximate expression of the way in which the numbers of weapons in the forces I am recommending (Force I) and the forces the Services propose (Force II) might be allocated to targets.8

SOVIET BLOC TARGET LIST (Median Assumptions)

End-Fiscal Year 1968 Weapons Assigned No. of Targets Force I Force II

Strategic Nuclear High Urgency

Soft Targets

Primary Bomber, Dispersal & Fighter Control 200 400 533

ICBM-Soft 125 220 284

MRBM/IRBM 162 286 316

Space-System Control 5 10 10

Sub-Total 492 916 1143

Hardened Targets

ICBM-Hardened 125 138 198

ICBM-Fully Hardened 200 396 669

Submarine Bases 30 38 38

Offensive Controls 10 13 13

Sub-Total 365 585 918

Strategic Nuclear Moderate Urgency

Soft Targets

Bomber Capable Fields 110 220 248

Air Defense Fields 100 100 300

Missile Storage 20 40 40

Nuc/CBR Production 30 60 60

SAM Sites a(350) 406 775

Sub-Total 260 826 1423

Hardened Targets

Nat/Regional Nuclear Storage 68 262 363

Other Nuclear Storage 115 315 482

Sub-Total 183 577 845

Urban-Industrial 210 349 349

Total 1510 3523 4678

a Not included in totals of targets killed.

Second-Strike Effectiveness

Using the high and moderate urgency Soviet-Bloc target list and the operational factors shown in the Appendix, the expected target destruction capabilities of the alternative Strategic Retaliatory Forces were derived for a controlled retaliatory mission for the 1968 period. The effectiveness of the U.S. second-strike missile attack was developed for the varying Soviet-Bloc threat and is shown as the “quick kill” capability of the force considered. The effectiveness of the follow-on manned bomber attack was also developed and the combined target destruction capabilities of the total force is shown as “ultimate kill” capability. Because the bombers are dependent on warning and alert response for their survival, differentiating the destruction capabilities in this manner allows the comparison of the effectiveness of the U.S. second-strike under conditions of “tactical warning” and “inadequate warning.” For the mid-1968 period, 295 Polaris missiles and 54 Titan II missiles were held as a protected reserve for possible attacks against Soviet-Bloc urban-industrial areas.

The second-strike effectiveness of attacks against Soviet-Bloc strategic military targets by the Recommended and Service proposed strategic forces is shown in the table below. The results are shown for the median Soviet-Bloc target structure and median operational factors for the U.S. forces. For both forces, the Improved Minuteman was assumed to utilize its retargeting capability based on “good guidance” indicators. The effects of varying the assumptions about the number of targets and the U.S. operational factors are shown in similar tables in the Appendix.

EXPECTED SECOND-STRIKE TARGET DESTRUCTION

CAPABILITIES

(Median Assumptions)

End-Fiscal Year 1968 Targets Destroyed a No. of Targets Force I Force II Quick Ult Quick Ult

Strategic Nuclear b

High Urgency

Soft 492 418 418 418 445

Hardened 365 245 262 287 313

Moderate Urgency

Soft 260 0 113 101 214

Hardened 183 8 38 42 65

Total 1,300 671 831 848 c1,037

Urban-Industrial

Per cent Industry Destroyed 55 60

a Assumes all Improved Minutemen use good guidance indicators and can be retargeted.

b The analysis assumes that 20 per cent of the Soviet targets are within ABM coverage, and that 12 per cent of the missile sites have varying degrees of locational uncertainty.

c Includes the destruction of targets by 16 alert RS-70's.

General Nuclear War Outcomes

The discussion of general nuclear war outcomes in mid-1968 will be limited to wars initiated by the Soviet Union, and to the median assumptions. The outcomes are measured in civilian and industrial damage, and in reserve and recoverable forces surviving the first exchange. Two Soviet attack strategies are considered: first, a counter-military attack in which only weapons targeted against hardened targets are ground burst, and, second, a mixed military and urban-industrial attack in which weapons are ground burst. Results of this analysis are summarized below. In both years, existence of an improvised fallout protection program is assumed.

SUMMARY OF NATO DAMAGE UNDER A SOVIET STRIKE—1968

United States a Western Europe b

Soviet First-Strike On Fat. Cas. Ind. Fat. Cas. Ind.

(# in Mils.) (%) (# in Mils.) (%

Military & Urban-Indl Targets 95 125 60 100 130 N/A

Military Targets Only 30 45 10 10 15 N/A

a A civil defense and a shelter incentive program is assumed to exist with a median residual protection number between .05 and .1. Ninety percent of the population is assumed to be protected in this manner. In the absence of a civil defense program, between 80 to 85 per cent of the U.S. population (estimated at 210 million) could be potential casualties in the case in which cities are targeted.

b The population of Western Europe is estimated at 275 million. The calculation assumes that 40 per cent of the population receives radiation dosages consistent with a median residual protection number of .5 and 60 per cent are afforded median protection numbers varying between .1 and .2.

The Soviet damage resulting from the U.S. retaliatory attacks by the Recommended Force (Force I) and the Service proposed force are shown in the following table. For the retaliatory attack on military targets, 295 Polaris missiles and the surviving Titan II's are used on urban-industrial targets. The Soviets are assumed to have a fallout protection program.

SUMMARY OF SOVIET DAMAGE UNDER A U.S. RETALIATORY STRIKE—1968

Soviet Union a

Fatalities Casualties Industry

I II I II I II

(Nos. in Millions) (Percent)

U.S. Retaliatory Strike On

Military & Urban-Indl Targets 83 86 107 110 50 55

Military Targets Only 17 25 27 37 9 15

a The Soviet population is estimated at 230 million. Twenty per cent of the population is assumed afforded a median protection number of .5, while 80 per cent are afforded a median protection number of .1. In the absence of fallout protection at least 70 per cent of the population could be potential casualties under urban-industrial attacks.

Under median assumptions the residual forces after the initial exchanges including the execution of urban-industrial attacks by each of the belligerents are shown below. The results are for the case in which the U.S. bomber force receives tactical warning.

RESIDUAL FORCES AFTER INITIAL EXCHANGES—1968

United States Soviet Union

Force I Force II Force I Force II

Bombers 95 100 30 30

ICBM's 65 85 25 20

Sub/Missiles 30 30 20 20

II. Basis for Recommendations on Particular Weapon Systems

Within the general quantitative requirements for long range nuclear delivery systems discussed above, the following are reasons for my specific program recommendations.

Skybolt (GAM-87)

The Air Force has proposed, in its revised program submission, the procurement of 22 squadrons (46 total and 32 alert missiles per squadron) of Skybolt to be operational by end-FY 1967. By the end of FY 1965, 4 squadrons of Skybolt could be operational. There has been slippage both in the estimated time and costs required to complete this program. The R&D costs, originally estimated to be a small fraction of that amount, are now estimated to be $492.6 million, and there is reason to believe that further increases are likely. In the six month period (February 1962 submission to June 1962 submission) the total estimated procurement costs increased from $1,426.4 million to $1,771.0 million, an increase of 24 per cent.9 I have felt for some time now that Skybolt was a questionable program.

The Skybolt system combines the disadvantages of the bomber with those of the missile. Being associated with the bombers, it shares their vulnerability on the ground and their slow over-all time-to-target. The vulnerability of our bomber force remains a problem. The sudden appearance in Cuba of ballistic missiles capable of reaching all SAC bases with flight time so short as to make tactical warning based on detection of missile launchings practically unusable, and the recent appearance of a Soviet trawler, with a previous history of cable cutting, over our BMEWS cables, has underlined once again the undesirability of dependence on the tactical warning plus alert response mechanism for the protection of our strategic forces. But the Skybolt does not share the advantages of the bomber. Rather, it has the inaccuracy and relatively low payload characteristic of missiles. That is, it has the disadvantages of missiles without their advantages (quick time-to-target plus protection through hardening and dispersal or continuous peacetime mobility).

The value of Sykbolt is to be found primarily in the defense suppression role. Skybolt is not a good choice as a weapon system for attacking high priority military targets because it takes hours to reach its targets and is vulnerable on the ground. It is not a good choice for counter-city retaliation because of the low survival potential in the wartime environment of the bombers that carry it, and the fact that they have to be committed to attack, if at all, early in the war. However, for defense suppression, Skybolt would be a good choice if it had a substantial cost advantage over other systems that might do that mission. But the recent and continuing slippages in that program have called that advantage into question.

The number of defense suppression targets that it will be necessary to attack to allow penetration of our bombers in the later 1960's is uncertain. Various studies have been done suggesting numbers between 100 and 300. Of course, there is an upper limit to the number it makes sense to attack. For example, if it were necessary to destroy 300 targets in order to permit the bombers to penetrate and destroy 500 other targets, the question would naturally arise as to whether it wouldn't make more sense to direct the whole effort at the destruction of the 500 “primary” targets themselves. Defense suppression can price itself out of the market.

However, suppose the number is about 300. If we go ahead with Skybolt, by mid-1967, we would have about 976 air-launched missiles on alert (272 Hound Dog and 704 Skybolt), at a remaining development and procurement cost of about $1.9 billion. This would enable us to program two air-launched missiles at each defense suppression target and still have 376 left over for other low priority military targets.

Alternatively, if we cancel Skybolt, by making maximum use of existing resources, we can retain about 400 Hound Dogs on alert. I believe that these 400 missiles plus 100 extra Minutemen can do the defense suppression job satisfactorily, and that the other air-launched missiles are not required. This would permit the assignment of either two Hound Dogs or one Minuteman to each of the 300 targets.10 The total initial investment cost of the 100 extra Minutemen will be approximately $500 million. There is concern that the recent announcement of the U.K. decision to phase-out the Thor weapon system has increased the British dependence on Skybolt. There has been no official commitment for Skybolt by the U.K., and their expenditures on the system so far have been very small. The U.K. has initially stated, for planning purposes, a requirement for about 180 missiles for their Vulcan bomber force. This requirement has recently been reduced to 100 missiles. For the British, a deployment of other weapon systems could take the place of Skybolt, achieving the same deterrent at a lower cost than maintaining their bomber force. The possibility of providing alternative nuclear forces is under study.

One of the most frequently used arguments for Skybolt is that “it extends the usefulness of the manned bomber.” In the sense that, by doing defense suppression it permits the bombers to penetrate, the argument is correct; but Skybolt is by no means unique in this role. As I have just indicated, this task can be performed satisfactorily at much less cost in other ways. But in any other sense, I believe the argument is wrong. The appropriate objective for the design of our strategic retaliatory force is to be able to destroy the required number of targets at a minimum cost; it is not to prolong the lives of particular weapon systems beyond the point at which their continued operation is no longer compatible with that objective.

Improved Minuteman

The Air Force has proposed an Improved Minuteman which would be phased into the operational inventory in FY 1966. The Improved Minuteman is to have approximately twice the yield and half the CEP of the original Minuteman, plus provisions for multiple targets, remote launching, and for carrying trajectory prediction systems, and additional safety features. The RDT&E program leading to the development of the Improved Minuteman has been approved, and I recommend inclusion of $190 million of RDT&E funds in the FY 1964 budget for this purpose.

The Air Force proposed for planning purposes a FY 1966 force size of 900 Minutemen and 300 Improved Minutemen. By FY 1968 the Minuteman force would consist of 750 Minutemen and 1,200 Improved Minutemen.

I recommend that additional Minutemen missile sites beyond the 800 force level be in the Improved configuration. For planning purposes, I recommend 800 Minutemen and 500 Improved Minutemen by end-FY 1968.

Polaris A-3A

The Navy has proposed the development of a Polaris A-3A missile. The proposed program would have 368 A-3A missiles and 288 A-3 missiles in submarines by FY 1969 at an additional cost of $1.6 billion. The A-3 missile has approximately 300 lbs. available for decoys; the A-3A has approximately 920 lbs. available for decoys at the same ranges. Although I believe that further development of a more advanced Polaris missile may be desirable, I do not believe that the extra capabilities offered by the A-3 missile, by comparison with the A-3, are worth the cost of development and procurement. Therefore, I recommend that the Navy proposal be disapproved.

Polaris A-3 and Support

The Navy has proposed the following changes in the approved program: a. To reduce the cost of the six SSBN's from $720.3 million to $714.8 million.

b. To defer the construction of one of the two AS(FBM) support ships until FY 1965. Planned operational commitments permit this deferral.

c. In addition to the two new construction AK(FBM) now approved, two more are proposed, one each in FY 1967 and FY 1968. Two AK(FBM) conversions now assigned in the Polaris fleet would be returned to the General Purpose Forces upon the entrance into the force structure of the last two new construction AK(FBM)'s.

The Navy justifies the new construction AK's on the basis that they would have the capability of loading missiles (in calm waters) directly into SSBN's. The converted AK's cannot do this. Currently, only the tenders are capable of storing and loading missiles. The rationale for this is that the tenders would, with high probability, be destroyed in a nuclear attack. In this event, surviving Polaris boats could rendezvous at predesignated locations with surviving AK's for missile reloading.

I recommend that repricing of the SSBN's and the proposal to defer construction of one AS(FBM) be approved. I further recommend that the AK(FBM) conversion for FY 1964 be approved at a cost of $8.5 million, but that the proposed program for new construction AK(FBM)'s be disapproved. In lieu of these four new construction ships, the two converted AK(FBM)'s currently in the fleet should be retained in this use, and two additional AK(FBM) conversions should be scheduled, one each in FY 1965 and FY 1966 at a total cost of $17 million. Because of the uncertainty as to the number of AK(FBM)'s that would survive a nuclear attack, and the fact that the reload capability would not come into being until FY 1967-1970, by which time large numbers of Minutemen missiles will be available, I do not believe that the reload capability provided by the new construction AK(FBM)'s is worth the extra cost. Moreover, a program of conversions rather than new construction will permit the required force of six AK(FBM)'s to be achieved one year earlier, which will bring it into phase with the rest of the FBM force structure.

In addition to the shipbuilding costs of $131 million, the Navy proposal would require an expenditure of about $234 million for reload missiles.

Regulus and SLAM Submarines

The Navy proposed to program nuclear submarines equipped with the nuclear powered SLAM (Supersonic Low Altitude Missile) system, as a follow-on to Regulus and complement to Polaris. Retention of one Regulus until it could be converted to SLAM, and new construction of one SLAM SSGN in FY 1967 and two in FY 1968 were proposed.

I recommend that the proposal to retain the SSGN for conversion to SLAM and the new construction SLAM SSGN's be disapproved; and that the Regulus force phase-out be completed by the end of FY 1965 as currently planned. I believe that the presently uncertain R&D status of SLAM makes any plans for SLAM submarines premature.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964 Volume I. Top Secret.

1 Document 111.

d Thor and Jupiter assigned to NATO are not considered as part of the U.S. force in the structure in the discussion in this memorandum.

e Bombers have flexibility in the choice of weapons and yields. For purposes of this table, current average loadings are assumed for the B-47's and B-52's; B-58's are assumed to carry planned loadings.

f Includes costs of B/RS-70 programs. Excludes MMRBM's.

2 See Document 109.

3 See Document 110.

4 The source of the quotation is not identified. In the memorandum cited in footnote 3 above, the JCS denied favoring a first strike capability in the sense of protecting the United States completely from serious consequences. But they did want the United States to retain a relative power over the “Sino-Soviet Bloc,” and stated that a preemptive option would provide “increased latitude within the total spectrum of military possibilities.”

5 Document 46.

6 The NIE has not been identified.

7 NIE 11-8-62, July 6, 1962. [Footnote in the source text. See Document 96.]

8 The breakdown of these weapons by various types of weapon system can be found in the Appendix to this memorandum. [Footnote in the source text. The Appendix is not printed.]

9 Warhead costs are not included. [Footnote in the source text.]

10 In the memorandum cited in footnote 3 above, the JCS argued that 400 Hound Dogs and 100 Minutemen were not equal to the previously projected 1,012 Skybolts.

113. Memorandum for the Record 113. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Hyannis Port, November 23, 1962.

SUBJECT

Second Meeting with the President on FY 64 DoD Budget Issues1

At this morning's meeting with the President (attended by McNamara, Taylor, Gilpatric, Hitch and Brown2 for DoD; Bell and Staats3 for BoB; and Bundy and Wiesner for the White House), the Secretary of Defense's draft memoranda of November 20 and 21, 1962, on the following three subjects4 were considered with the results indicated below, in each instance subject to a general reservation for all concerned pending a final review of the total budget amounts:

I. Strategic Retaliatory Forces

1. Minuteman Program—Approval given to FY 66 force level of 950, of which 150 will be improved Minuteman.

2. Polaris Program— (a) Approval given to 6 additional submarines (completing planned force of 41).

(b) A3A missile proposal disapproved.

3. Skybolt—Cancellation approved subject to consultation with the U.K. on alternatives.

4. SAC Hardened Support Center—Approved in principle, with preference for a location as near as possible to present SAC Headquarters.

II. B-70

1. RS-70—Approval given to recommendation not to proceed with full development but with addition of $50 million of FY 63 funds for sensor components.

2. Reconnaissance Aircraft—R-X concept approved with program decisions to be made following validation of requirements.

III. Nike-Zeus

1. Recommendation to defer deployment decision approved.

2. Approval given to development program recommended by the Secretary of Defense.

Roswell Gilpatric

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 FY 64 (23 Nov 62). No classification marking. Drafted by Gilpatric.

1 The meeting was held in the Kennedy Compound at Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, where the President was spending the Thanksgiving weekend. The first meeting has not been identified. (Kennedy Library, President's Appointment Book)

2 Charles J. Hitch, Assistant Secretary (Comptroller) of Defense, and Harold Brown, Director of Defense Research and Engineering.

3 Elmer B. Staats, Deputy Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

4 See Document 112, footnote 3 to Document 107, and Document 111.

114. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 114. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, November 28, 1962.

Dear Bob: I greatly appreciated having the opportunity to review the series of memoranda which you have prepared for the President of the FY ‘64 (and forward) Defense Programs. The quality of these memoranda is most impressive and I think the forces, which implementation of the proposals contained therein would produce, are generally consistent with our basic national security policy. In particular, I wish to underline the point which you make in the memorandum on General Purpose Forces1 on the need for strategic lift in the face of the difficulties attending the acquisition of bases in troubled parts of the world.

I also note that the study of forces required for non-nuclear defense in Europe was predicated on defense of the Rhine.2 In accordance with the conclusion which we reached at the first Defense Policy Conference,3 a study of requirements for a more forward and therefore more politically acceptable defense of the Central Front is under way. I think this is a point well worth mentioning to the President since it could presumably support the need for a subsequent adjustment in General Purpose Force requirements.

Of all of the highly important matters touched upon in your memoranda, to my mind the issue which stands out above all others is that relating to the question of the advisability of deploying an anti-ballistic missile defense. One can only be impressed by the technical complexity of the problem. However, what seems to emerge in this discussion is that a system, having considerable operational uncertainties but, nevertheless, promising significant defensive capabilities under certain conditions, could be deployed beginning as early as 1967, were the decision made at this time to do so. Obviously your technical review, which I gather includes a heavy emphasis on alternative trade-off advantages as between investment in ballistic missile defense and competing weapon systems, inclines you to recommend against a decision to deploy at this time. I gather, however, that this is by no means a black and white issue and, in fact, may represent a rather close balance.

I would have no independent judgment on the technical feasibility/cost consideration factors. If, however, these have led to a negative decision, but only in close balance, then I would think that the decision warrants further review in light of the immense political and psychological implications for our entire security posture over the next decade of a negative decision on deployment. Though undoubtedly taken into account in your decision, the extent to which these implications were weighed is not clear from your memorandum. For that reason, I have set out in a separate enclosure to this letter my own views as to the significance which I attach to the development and deployment by the US of an anti-ballistic missile system in the shorter, rather than the longer, time period. It is my feeling that if such a system, having a reasonable degree of technological effectiveness can be deployed beginning as early as 1967, we should carefully consider the advisability of doing so.

Since this is a matter of highest importance, you undoubtedly contemplate it as a principal item for discussion with the President. I am prepared to enter into such discussions whenever the President deems it appropriate.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

Enclosure

4 SIGNIFICANCE OF AN ANTI-BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM AS A PART OF US NATIONAL SECURITY UNDERTAKINGS OVER THE NEXT DECADE

1. If the Soviet Union were to deploy an anti-ballistic missile defense system substantially before the United States, such an action could adversely affect the current delicate world power equilibrium and seriously impair the effectiveness with which the US would be able to pursue its national security policy. The basis for this conclusion will be developed in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. In order to explain the basis for the preceding conclusion, it is necessary to clarify a few assumptions which we make.

We accept the obvious fact that any system of ballistic missile defense which we might choose to develop and deploy is at this point in time fraught with great uncertainties and immense technical complexities. From the memorandum prepared by the Secretary of Defense to the President,5 we would gather that of the two possible systems, Nike Zeus or Nike X, the latter has greater potentialities than the former. Both, however, would seem to embody considerable uncertainties, with perhaps Nike X being more uncertain if only because it is a newer concept having been subjected to a lesser degree of research and development. In any event, however, accepting the current best estimates of system limitations and reliabilities, we would gather that there is a good likelihood that an anti-ballistic missile system could be developed and deployed having a considerable degree of military effectiveness under certain assumptions. (We gather that it is estimated that deployment of 26 batteries might result in survival of as much as 30 to 40% of our population and production base.)

3. Proceeding from the foregoing, with full recognition of all existing uncertainties, if such a system could be deployed, even accepting its operational limitations, it could have an immense impact on our relations with (a) the Soviets and (b) our Allies.

4. We do not ignore the significance of the tremendous cost implication. But this is a matter which must be placed in the perspective of the value of what it is we are buying. In this connection, we think we need to re-look at, and perhaps somewhat alter our thinking about, the military exchange ratio problem. It seems to us in considering the value of this weapon system to US security, we must go well beyond the weighing of the technical advantages and disadvantages of investment in alternative weapon systems. Though it is difficult, if not impossible, to precisely quantify, we must introduce political and psychological considerations which will weigh so heavily over the future decade. This is particularly significant in terms of the ability of the US to mobilize public will, both within the US and amongst our Allies, to accept the risks inherent in living in a world of such sharply competing ideologies. Thus, while we appreciate the logic which lies behind the thought that the procurement of offensive ballistic weapons may for sometime to come continue to be far less expensive than procurement of an adequate ballistic missile defense system, this is clearly not the whole story. The essential issue is whether the availability of such a system to the Soviets at a time when the West does not have an equal capability will adversely affect the willingness and, therefore, in a very real sense, the capability of the Western Alliance to effectively contest with the Communists. Or to put the question in another and more positive way, whether the availability of a system to the West, even one having admitted technological limitations, will support and, conceivably, even greatly strengthen our willingness to accept difficult, costly and dangerous undertakings so necessary if we are to preserve and succeed in the contest with the Communists.

5. From the DOD memorandum it would appear that the Soviets are now in process of deploying an anti-ballistic missile system around Leningrad. While this program may be limited in its present capabilities, we gather that we have no full understanding of its present capabilities or of its ultimate potentialities. It does, however, seem significant that with a stringency on resources which in any real sense is greater than that under which the US labors, the Soviets have chosen to make the beginning which presumably could, if they project and expand their present effort, result in a sizeable Soviet deployment over the next several years. The Soviets are notable for their determination to make military undertakings serve a political end. It would be surprising if their policy in connection with deployment of an anti-ballistic missile system fails to take account of this relationship.

6. The danger, of course, is that the deployment by the Soviets of an anti-ballistic missile system, during a period when our own defensive posture did not involve such an undertaking, could result in a serious unbalancing of the present power structure, an effort which the Soviets have desperately been trying to accomplish even at the expense of such a risky undertaking as the recent Cuban experience. The change in power balance could occur either because (a) the Soviet system as actually developed proved to be better than we now predict and even conceivably better than the performance which we attribute to our own system (a possibility which however unlikely cannot be overlooked), or (b) because even if the system, in fact, is not as technologically excellent as the preceding assumptions suggest, the Soviets may over-estimate its importance and attempt to use it as a part of a grand political ploy designed to achieve through political means what might not be attainable through actual military means. Either of these two reasons might support a Soviet policy far more active and belligerent than would otherwise be the case. This is not something to be accepted with equanimity.

7. At the same time, the effect upon our Allies, especially in Europe, of a Soviet attainment of ABM defense in the absence of an equal Western effort, must be carefully assessed. It seems entirely likely that the psychological and political impact would be immense, if not immediately, then ultimately, on peoples living under the daily threat of a massive attack as have our European Allies. Presumably the adverse impact can to some extent be mitigated by explaining the limitations of the Soviet system and pointing up our own immense offensive capabilities (the offense-defense trade argument), but this is unlikely to carry the day. It is well worth remembering, that to the people living under the threat of a massive nuclear missile attack, the fact that it may be sounder economics to buy more offensive missiles than defensive ones, will be vitiated if not entirely lost when it is recognized that only defensive missiles offer the possibility of saving lives.

8. In view of the foregoing, it is necessary that we consider not only how important it is that we make a decision to deploy an anti-ballistic missile system, but that we also consider the importance of an earlier, rather than a later, deployment. Were the factor of cost not so heavy the answer would be self-evident, viz., that we should proceed with all speed to deploy the first reasonably technically adequate system which is available, namely the Nike Zeus. However, the cost factor is important and in this connection we are struck by the following factors: a. That the cost differential between the Nike Zeus and the Nike X, while significant, is not overwhelming. I gather that the former system would cost a total of 15% more than the latter.

b. That the deployment of the Zeus would apparently not represent a total waste in the sense that the Nike X would be built upon and would in some measure be a logical extension of the Nike Zeus. If this is true, this would seem to me a factor of very great significance. To some extent, especially from the political point of view, it would appear that here is a case where we may be able to have at least some of our cake and eat it too.

c. If, as is undoubtedly the case, the Nike Zeus has uncertainties as to its performance, presumably the Nike X must be considered a system of even greater uncertainly. If we understand correctly the normal evolution of weapon systems, they invariably demonstrate problems as they move from development through production, problems which are never fully predictable in advance. The further away from completion of development and from initial production, the greater are the uncertainties likely to be. By this standard one might question whether reliance upon the Nike X might not result in even further delay in achieving actual deployment than the two years beyond Nike Zeus estimated for this system's availability.

9. Consideration of all of the foregoing factors as they bear upon the conduct of our national security policy over the next several years, gives rise to concern over the prospect of a Soviet deployment of an anti-ballistic missile system in the absence of a similar US action. Even if each of the systems have some technological limitations as the DOD studies contemplate to be the case, the political and psychological impact of having, or not having, a system to offset that of the Soviets, would be immense. Thus, even if the Sputniks had no military significance whatsoever, the mere fact that the Soviets were able to orbit their vessel in space before we were, created a serious liability under which we labored for sometime and under which we still labor to some extent even today. Indeed in such circumstances the tendency of the US is to try to overcome lost time through an accelerated effort which may not always result in the most economical use of funds and which can never fully regain lost political ground. This is a prospect which cannot be ignored when considering the anti-ballistic missile problem. It is possible that with the availability to the Soviets of an ABM defense the political and psychological pressures will become so great that we will have no alternative other than to launch an emergency deployment of a system having thereby sacrificed the opportunity to gain a favorable impact through an earlier voluntary undertaking and at the same time having to accept what may be a less economical solution to the problem.

10. There is one last aspect to the problem which, so far as we are aware, has not received any prior consideration. This has to do with the possibility and utility of considering the eventual extension of an anti-ballistic missile system to Europe. As previously indicated, as Soviet capabilities in this field are developed and begin to grow, the pressures upon our European Allies to have a missile defense will mount. The political pressure within the countries will unquestionably be reflected in the make-up of governments and in the manner and extent to which governments can function effectively in support of policies which the US believes important. Even if we are ourselves convinced of the limitations of a ballistic missile defense it is the advantages and virtues of such a system which the Europeans will emphasize. As with the problem of the lack of European knowledge about nuclear weapons and the effects of their employment which now plagues us in our efforts to gain a common strategic concept with our Allies, so too a failure to hold open the promise of a ballistic missile defense may have an analogous effect. While the tremendous cost involved will always represent a practical inhibition to active European interests in this area, we do not think we can exclude or downgrade that interest solely on those grounds. To the contrary, particularly if the US were to encourage the notion that a considerable degree of defense could be bought through deployment of an anti-ballistic missile system, it seems not improbable that the Europeans might well be inclined to invest considerable resources to this end. We recognize, of course, that to some extent this could be counter-productive insofar as it drains away European resources from other defense expenditures, which, from our point of view, we would prefer to see them make. It might, however, have a contrary effect by draining away resources from low priority defense programs. Whether we like it or not, however, the pressures are quite likely to exist. Either we will be able to satisfy them at least to some extent, or we will have to pay the possible serious political price of not being able to meet what the Europeans will probably consider to be a legitimate requirement.

* Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 452 10 Jan 62. Top Secret.

1 For the final version of this memorandum, see Document 115. Regarding an earlier draft, see footnote 4, Document 107.

2 This discussion occurs in the section of “US Non-Nuclear Force Requirements Worldwide,” which also notes that “the Joint Chiefs believe that military strategy must be based on containing the enemy well forward, placing his forces in jeopardy, and assuming an early counter-offensive, rather than allowing him to take a sizeable amount of territory that can be used as a fait accompli in any pause negotiations.” This language paraphrases part of a September 30 memorandum from the JCS to McNamara. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 Project #22)

3 See footnote 5, Document 86.

4 Top Secret.

5 Document 111.

115. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 115. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, December 3, 1962.

1

SUBJECT

Recommended FY 1964-1968 General Purpose Forces

I have recently completed my review of force levels for the tactical ground, sea, and air force (the General Purpose Forces) and their associated lift forces for the FY 1964-FY 1968 Program. This Program will form the basis for the preparation of the FY 1964 budget. The exact dollar amounts cited in this memorandum are subject to some further refinement during the next year.

My recommendations are as follows:

1. Ground Forces

a. Maintain the current 16 combat-ready Army divisions.

b. Add new provisional air assault and air mobile units, totalling 15,000 personnel, to test the Howze Board2 concepts described below.

c. Procure in FY 1964 about $3.3 billion of Army equipment, an amount more than double the average of the five years prior to FY 1962.

d. Complete the reorganization of Army divisions to the ROAD structure.

e. Maintain the current active force of three Marine division-wing teams.

2. Land-Based Tactical Air

a. Increase the number of tactical fighter wings from 16 as of July 1, 1961, to 21 fully operational wings by January 1, 1964.

b. Budget $1.3 billion in FY 1964, compared to $1.4 billion in FY 1963, and $0.7 billion in FY 1962, to procure new aircraft for the new wings and for further modernization of the existing wings and to improve conventional war readiness through procurement of increased stocks of modern ordnance and construction of aircraft shelters.

c. Procure additional reconnaissance aircraft to permit an increase in the number of tactical reconnaissance squadrons from 14 to 18 by FY 1966 and 20 by FY 1967, as well as modernize the existing 14 squadrons. Expenditures on reconnaissance aircraft will increase from about $100 million in FY 1963 to $374 million in FY 1964.

3. General Purpose Sea Forces

a. Maintain the current 15 attack carrier strike force.

b. Maintain the current anti-submarine warfare force, including 9 ASW carriers.

c. Maintain the current amphibious lift for the assault elements of the two Marine division-wing teams or equivalent numbers of other forces.

d. Continue to modernize the Navy through a shipbuilding program (for General Purpose Forces) costing about $1.6 billion in FY 1964. This compares with about $1.7 billion in FY 1963, $1.3 billion in FY 1962, and $985 million in FY 1961.

Table 1 following sets forth the recommended forces in more detail. The Service proposals, shown in red after mine on Table 1 where they differ, are described in subsequent sections. Table 2 indicates the costs associated with the recommended program as compared to that proposed by the Service.3

4. Airlift

You will recall that provision was made in the FY 1962 budget amendments and in the FY 1963 budget for major additions to the airlift force. This program will be continued without change in FY 1964 except for the procurement of two additional squadrons of C-130s. The programmed airlift force will increase air-deployment capabilities nearly three-fold in the FY 1963-67 period. Table 2 also shows the costs of the recommended lift forces as compared to Service proposals.

[Here follow Tables 1 and 2.]

The Basis for the Recommendations

The basis for my recommendations can be summarized in three propositions: 1. The forces proposed will be sufficient to counter, by non-nuclear means, a wide spectrum of likely Sino-Soviet Bloc aggression in regions outside of Europe. However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff state that in the case of simultaneous, large-scale attacks, the US would be faced with a choice between the use of tactical nuclear weapons or the possible temporary loss of large areas of the Free World.

2. While the forces proposed will not provide adequate non-nuclear forces for NATO, the remedies lie primarily with the other NATO countries rather than with a major increase in US forces. Although the political obstacles loom large, and many of the deficiencies require considerable time to overcome, I think we can demonstrate to our Allies that the NATO non-nuclear inferiority stems from specific remediable deficiencies. The Chiefs state that until adequate forces are available, NATO must be prepared to use tactical nuclear weapons early in any conflict in Western Europe.

3. I consider that the increase in combat effectiveness which we require above present levels can be best achieved in large part through increased quantities and improved quality of equipment and through reallocations from the more marginal units to those that promise a greater contribution to combat, rather than through the addition of large numbers of new units.

The subsequent sections describe in more detail the basis for these propositions, by reviewing, first, the threat and our capabilities in the critical regions of Europe, Southeast Asia, Korea, and the Middle East and second, by examining Service proposals, together with my recommendations for ground forces, tactical air, naval forces, and lift.

I. US NON-NUCLEAR FORCE REQUIREMENTS WORLDWIDE

[Here follows an analysis of force requirements needed to meet possible enemy attacks in Europe, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia, and in several multi-regional situations.]

Concluding Comments

I interpret these studies4 to indicate we have the required active divisions for the initial stages of non-European large scale, single region conflict. It would, however, be necessary to call up priority reserve units at the start of combat to provide additional divisions and non-divisional units to meet the requirements of sustained combat and to reconstitute the strategic reserve. The situations in the study represent major actions of about Korean war size or greater, often near the upper limit of enemy capability. For this scale of conflict, the call-up of the reserves is required.

NATO does not have adequate ground forces, but the deficiencies can most effectively be met by improvement in the quantity and quality of the non-US NATO forces rather than by a larger US contribution.5 I shall continue to urge our NATO allies to remedy their deficiencies.

The studies we have carried out are subject, of course, to a considerable margin of error. In contrast to Strategic Forces, for which relatively precise analysis is possible, the General Purpose Forces must be evaluated for a broad range of situations, none of which can be specified with much exactness. Intelligence data for enemy non-nuclear capabilities are of a lower quality than for nuclear forces. Finally the results are highly sensitive to estimates of the quantity and quality of the allied contribution. Nonetheless, I think the study by the Chairman's Working Group, together with the parallel studies carried out by the Army Staff, are as authoritative with respect to ground divisions as the uncertainties of the problem now permit. We will be conducting further studies on requirements and this question will be under my continuing review.

[Here follow the introduction to the section on ground forces and an analysis and discussion of the Howze Board's recommendations concerning a provisional air assault division.]

An Additional Army Infantry Division in FY 1964

The Secretary of the Army6 has proposed an additional infantry division for FY 1964, the seventh of that type in the active Army. He views this additional division as a step towards an 18 division active Army.7 He urges that serious consideration be given to deploying an infantry division to the Philippines in order to assist allies, develop bases of operations, and reduce our reaction time in Southeast Asia.8 The direct cost to activate, to equip and to operate a ROAD infantry division for five years, with associated non-divisional troops, service-wide support, and combat stocks is about $1.8 billion.9 The Joint Chiefs also recommend an additional infantry division in FY 1964, but they have not commented on the deployment of a division to the Philippines.

I do not support the addition of a division force, of the type recommended, for three reasons: 1. To deploy a division to Southeast Asia would permanently commit a division to a specific area of the world where a clear need for such a unit has not been established. The commitment would tend to become irreversible, add to our balance of payment problem, and would require international negotiations with the host government. On the other hand, the usefulness of additional CONUS divisions is limited by lift capabilities, particularly prior to FY 1966 when substantial numbers of highly productive C-141 aircraft are in the lift forces. Since the lift limitations are in moving equipment rather than personnel, it would be preferable to preposition divisional sets of equipment in Southeast Asia. As discussed below, we already have equipment prepositioned in Okinawa and are making provision for floating depots.

2. Another division at this time would aggravate the serious imbalance between equipment, combat stocks, and number of units described below.

3. An additional infantry division does not promise the significant qualitative improvements in ground combat capability of the air mobile units described in the preceding section. Increased resources for the Army would be better spent on testing this new concept.

[Here follow the conclusion of the section on ground forces and sections on airlift and sealift forces, land-based tactical forces, and naval general purpose forces.]

VI. TACTICAL NUCLEAR FORCES

The General Purpose Forces also include tactical nuclear forces. We are currently conducting studies on the requirement for these forces and I shall be sending you a separate memorandum on this topic.10

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget FY 1964 Volume I. Top Secret. This memorandum is 70 double-spaced typewritten pages long.

1 This date is handwritten on the source text. According to a control sheet, the draft memorandum arrived in the White House on December 4.

2 In a memorandum dated April 19, McNamara directed Secretary of the Army Elvis Stahr to examine ways of achieving sharp increases in mobility. For text, see Alain Enthoven and Wayne K. Smith, How Much Is Enough? Shaping the Defense Program, 1961-1969, pp. 101-104. A board headed by Lieutenant General Hamilton K. Howze undertook the reappraisal. (Final Report of the U.S. Army Tactical Mobility Requirements Board, August 20; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3230 (24 Jan 62) Sec 1)

3 Neither Table 1 nor Table 2 is printed.

4 Reference is to a series of studies, described in the omitted section, ordered by McNamara in the spring of 1962 and prepared by a Chairman's Working Group headed by Vice Admiral Herbert D. Riley, Director of the Joint Staff. (Report of Chairman's Working Group, undated; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (17 Feb 62))

5 The Chiefs state that until NATO countries achieve their force goals the US must be prepared to fill the void or accept a calculated risk. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 Cyrus Vance.

7 The Chief of Staff of the Army adds that a substantial increase in ground forces is clearly justified by the increased emphasis on non-nuclear defense. He also notes that nuclear weapons do not provide a clear-cut answer to the problem of defending Europe. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 In an October 17 memorandum to McNamara, Vance argued: “Such a combat force in this area would provide firm notice of our intentions to friends and enemies alike, and would permit access to trouble spots throughout the regional area.” He noted that the “effectiveness of Army forces is increased by their deployment well forward—implementing a forward strategy, deterring overt aggression, motivating allies, and in position to accomplish initial combat tasks should war occur.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 66 A 3542, 110.01 Project #22)

9 A footnote in the source text provides a breakdown of the costs.

10 No DPM on this subject has been found for 1962. For a later discussion of tactical nuclear weapons, see Document 145.

116. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 116. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, December 3, 1962.

SUBJECT

Defense Department Budget for FY ‘64

I have now substantially completed my review of the Department of Defense budget for FY 1964. This review was conducted jointly with the Bureau of the Budget, and I have discussed all outstanding issues with the Director of the Bureau of the Budget. As shown on Table 1,1 I am recommending new obligation authority for Military Functions, Military Assistance, and Civil Defense of $54.4 billion compared with $51.3 billion appropriated by the Congress for FY 1963, $49.4 billion appropriated for FY 1962 after your three budget amendments for that year, and $43.1 billion in the budget presented by President Eisenhower for FY 1962. We estimate that the expenditures in FY 1964 corresponding to this amount of new obligational authority will be $53.1 billion compared with $50.1 billion in FY 1963. Over $1.5 billion of the increase in FY 1964 expenditures results from increases in rates of compensation.

The forces supported by this budget are summarized in Tables 2 through 12. I have explained my position on the major issues affecting these forces in my earlier memoranda on: Strategic Retaliatory Forces; the B-70 Program; Ballistic Missile Defense; and the General Purpose Forces (tactical ground, sea, and air forces).2 The recommended force structure was based on requirements for national security and was not limited by arbitrary budget ceilings. In my review of the budgets proposed by the Services, I have attempted, as last year, to eliminate all non-essential, marginal, and postponable expenditures with the objective of minimizing the cost of supporting the required forces. In total I have reduced the Service proposals by approximately $13 billion.

In developing the program and reviewing the budget proposals, I have had the continuing counsel and assistance of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Although the force structure does not include all the forces recommended by each of the Services or by the Joint Chiefs of Staff collectively, the Joint Chiefs agree that the program supported by this budget will further increase our combat effectiveness and provide powerful forces in a high state of readiness for defense of the security interests of the United States.3

The principal differences in the forces proposed by the Services are the following: RS-70. The Air Force proposed full concurrent development and an early commitment to deployment.

Minuteman. The Air Force proposed a rapid build-up to a force of 900 by the end of FY ‘65 and 1950 by 1968.

Polaris. The Navy proposed an improved A-3a missile to replace the A-1 and A-2 missiles.

Nike Zeus. The Army proposed an immediate decision to procure and deploy an improved version of Zeus.

Improved Manned Interceptor. The Air Force proposed accelerated development and a commitment to procure and deploy.

Army Strength. The Army proposed 36,250 additional men for the current 16 Divisions and an additional Infantry Division as well as the new Air Assault Division.

Tactical Air. The Air Force proposed four additional wings of tactical fighters.

Airlift. The Air Force proposed substantially increasing the force objective for C-130-E and C-141 transports.

With the exceptions noted below, I believe that Dave Bell concurs on all of my recommendations. We agree that the following outstanding issues should be brought to your attention: 1. The level of Strategic Nuclear Forces. Three proposals have been made for possible reductions in the program which we discussed with you at Hyannis Port on November 23:4 a. Should we cancel 150 of the 950 Minuteman missiles programmed through FY 1964? If so, should we cancel 150 of the 200 Minuteman missiles approved by the Congress in FY 1963 or the 150 Improved Minuteman missiles recommended in my FY 1964 budget? Dave leans to the first of these alternatives; I remain strongly opposed to any reduction at this tim.5

b. What is the total number of Minuteman missiles that we should plan for in our Five-Year Force Structure and Financial Program? I have recommended a total program of 1300 to be completed by the end of FY ‘68. Five hundred of these would be Improved Minutemen. If the total number to be programmed is substantially less than 1300, it is doubtful that the development of the Improved Minuteman is worth its cost of $366 million.

c. Should we buy the last six Polaris submarines included in my budget recommendations, completing the programmed force of 41? I understand Dr. Wiesner questions the requirement for more than 35 submarines.

I was informed by the Air Force on November 30 that a cost over-run of approximately $400 million is now anticipated in the approved 800 missile Minuteman program. Because I have had no time to investigate the causes or the validity of this new estimate, I propose to make no change at this time in my budget recommendations. After we have completed our study of this problem next spring, some adjustments will have to be made in either the force structure or the financial program, but I do not contemplate requesting supplemental appropriations.

2. Nike Zeus and Nike-X. General Taylor wants to again recommend to you that we proceed immediately with the procurement and deployment of Nike Zeus. Dave Bell agrees with me that we should not now deploy the Nike Zeus, but he believes that we should develop Nike-X at a reduced rate, since he regards it as an insurance type development which we may never decide to deploy. I still believe that we should develop Nike-X as rapidly as we can and that the provision for its development in my recommended budget will make this possible.

3. Strength for Experimental Air Assault Division. I am recommending that the Army strength be increased by 15,000 by FY 1964 to test the air assault division and other new air units proposed by the Howze Board. Dave Bell is inclined to think that the testing should be done by existing units without an increase in strength.6

4. Titan III. I understand that Dr. Wiesner questions the desirability of this development. I propose to appoint a review board, which will include Dr. Wiesner, to make a thorough study of the alternative and report in four months. If at that time it appears that Titan III does not offer sufficient advantages over Saturn C-1, I will recommend cancellation and a corresponding reduction in our FY 1964 budget request.

5. Civil Defense. Dr. Wiesner has raised some questions regarding the nature of the civil defense program. I am recommending only $300 million for Civil Defense in FY 1964—I do not believe that we should eliminate the shelter-incentive part of the program.

[Here follow paragraphs on military compensation, family housing, and military assistance.]

Robert S. McNamara7

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget 1964 Miscellaneous Volume I. Secret.

1 Tables 1-12 were not found.

2 See Document 112, footnote 3 to Document 107, Document 111, and Document 115.

3 In approving the above statement, the Chief of Naval Operations, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps retain certain reservations, particularly as regards the rate of modernization and the growth in combat effectiveness of certain US forces in relation to the Sino-Soviet threat. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 See Document 113.

5 In a December 6 memorandum to Bundy, Kaysen stated that Wiesner had proposed a number of cost-cutting alternatives to McNamara's recommendations on strategic retaliatory forces. Of Wiesner's suggestions, Kaysen recommended for particular consideration either substituting 150 improved Minutemen for the last 150 of the already-funded program, and adding 150 more to reach a total of 800, rather than 950, of both types by 1966, or cancelling the entire improved Minuteman program. According to Kaysen, McNamara had stated at a meeting on November 17 that if the figure of 950 was too big, “he would prefer cancelling the improved Minuteman to any other alternative, since he didn't think there was much in the improved Minuteman.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Defense Budget 1964 Miscellaneous Volume I)

6 All of McNamara's recommendations were in the defense budget as submitted to the Congress with the general budget on January 17, 1963. For the text of the President's accompanying message concerning defense, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963, pp. 32-34.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

117. National Intelligence Estimate 117. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, December 5, 1962.

NIE 11-1-62

CAPABILITIES OF THE SOVIET THEATER FORCES

The Problem

To estimate the role and capabilities of the Soviet theater forces, especially against the NATO area in Europe, at present and over the next two years or so.

Foreword

1. As considered in this estimate, the components of the Soviet theater forces include: the ground forces and their weapons; tactical aircraft and missiles; supporting and logistical elements such as transport aircraft; and major portions of the surface naval and submarine fleets. The roles and capabilities of those Soviet forces which would perform other primary military missions, notably long-range striking forces and air and missile defense forces, are the subject of other National Intelligence Estimates.

2. In recent years, Soviets have debated at greater depth than in the past the probable nature of a general nuclear conflict between the Bloc and the West, and the information available to us reflects this increased attention. In this estimate, particularly in Chapters I and IV, we consider mainly the employment of Soviet theater forces in general nuclear war, taking some account of the way in which Soviet plans might be affected if operations were begun on short notice, or after a period of preparation. In Chapter V, we consider at much shorter length the possible employment of these forces in limited nuclear or conventional warfare under the threat of escalation.

3. It should be emphasized that, in discussing Soviet theater forces and their capabilities, we do not take account of the actions of opposing Western forces. In particular, we do not assess the effect of Soviet theater forces of an initial, strategic nuclear exchange. We believe, however, that the effect of such an exchange could be a principal factor governing the ability of Soviet theater forces to carry out their assigned missions in a general war.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS1

A. Soviet military doctrine for general nuclear war stresses the use of all types of forces, and not strategic forces alone, from the outset of hostilities. The requirements for general nuclear war, as the Soviets see them, include forces prepared for action during a relatively brief strategic exchange, and forces suitable for protracted theater warfare involving extensive campaigns. Although this position imposes heavy demands on Soviet resources, it is still being sustained after extensive debate within the political and military leadership. We believe that for at least the next few years the Soviets will continue to regard large theater forces as essential. (Paras. 1-5)

B. Soviet doctrine continues to assume the full-scale employment of theater forces from the outset of a general war, with the ultimate objective of annihilating enemy military capabilities and occupying territory. The prospect of nuclear warfare has led to many modifications but no radical revisions in operational doctrine for theater forces. Efforts are being made to adjust organization and training to the requirements of rapid advance and flexible maneuver, to coordinate the employment of tactical nuclear support for Soviet forces, and to ensure destruction of the comparable nuclear means of the enemy. The traditional Soviet concept of combined arms operations has provided a basis for gearing modernized tactical air and missile support to the motorized and armored ground forces. (Paras. 6-11)

C. The ground elements of Soviet theater forces, containing nearly two million men and representing the largest part of the total military establishment, are well-trained and equipped with excellent materiel. Present trends point to a continuing emphasis on firepower and mobility. We estimate that there are about 145 line divisions, approximately 80 of them considered to be combat ready and the remainder at low and cadre strength. The strongest concentrations are in East Germany and in the western and southern border regions of the USSR. If the Soviets were able to mobilize for 30 days before the initiation of hostilities, they could expand their total forces to about 100 combat ready and 125 nonready divisions, although there would be deficiencies in training, equipment, and supporting units. (Paras. 13-16, 46-49)

D. Short-range rockets and road mobile missiles with ranges up to 350 nautical miles are now in the artillery support structure of major Soviet theater commands. Tactical Aviation has been sharply reduced in quantity, and a prime current deficiency is the small number of modern aircraft, particularly fighter bombers. However, there have been qualitative improvements in aircraft and their armament, and this trend will continue. In addition, tactical ballistic and antiaircraft missiles are now available, and theater support could also be afforded by MRBMs and IRBMs in western USSR. These developments provide a net increase in the firepower available to support theater forces in the event of general war, but at the expense of some flexibility. (Paras. 17-21)

E. Organic air transport is now sufficient to airlift simultaneously only one airborne division or the assault echelons of two such divisions; we believe that this capacity may be doubled in the next several years. Amphibious assault capabilities are extremely limited, and there are no indications of significant future improvements. (Paras. 29-30, 33-34)

F. Tactical nuclear support is still limited in quantity and quality, but it has improved markedly over the past few years. Soviet military planners are now in a position to think in terms of committing up to a few hundred nuclear weapons virtually all with yields in the kiloton range, to a typical front operation.2 Limitations on the quantity and variety of nuclear weapons available to theater forces will have eased by the mid-1960's. The Soviets are probably developing subkiloton weapons, but we have no present evidence of work on delivery systems designed specifically for such weapons. We believe that chemical warfare munitions are available in quantity and would be used extensively in conjunction with nuclear and conventional weapons in general war. (Paras. 25-27, 45)

G. Although tactical nuclear delivery systems are integral to Soviet theater forces, the nuclear weapons themselves do not appear to be in their custody. Such weapons are normally stored in depots operated by the Ministry of Defense and located within the USSR. Soviet procedures for controlling these weapons ensure the national leadership that they will not be used without authorization. Existing procedures, together with deficiencies in logistical support, appear to penalize the Soviets in terms of operational readiness and rapid response for tactical nuclear weapons employment. (Paras. 22-24)

H. The Soviets probably consider the East European Satellite forces to a be a sizable but problematic asset, because of their varying levels of effectiveness and reliability. In the event of war, however, the USSR would probably employ some Satellite forces in combined combat operations, by integrating selected Satellite divisions, corps, or even field armies directly into major Soviet commands. Other Satellite units would be retained under national command for security, reserve, and other functions. (Paras. 36-37, 41-42)

I. The principal operations of Soviet theater forces in general war would be directed against NATO in Europe. The Soviets plan to move massive forces rapidly toward the Channel coast in the initial days of such a war. This campaign would probably be augmented by operations in Scandinavia, operations toward the Mediterranean, and operations toward the exits of the Baltic and Black Seas. The Soviet submarine fleet would contribute to the campaign against Western Europe by interdiction operations against the highly important Atlantic supply lines. Other peripheral areas, notably the Far East, apparently have lesser priority for theater force operations. Soviet capabilities to conduct theater force operations against North America are limited to minor airborne and amphibious attacks against Alaska and other Arctic bases. (Paras. 44, 59)

J. Although Soviet theater forces are formidable, especially in the area facing NATO in Europe, they continue to have certain limitations beyond those of tactical nuclear support. In the initial period of a general war, a significant portion of the tactical fighters would need to be assigned to interceptor as well as to ground attack missions. In offensive operations, the highly mechanized group forces are in constant danger of outrunning their logistic support. Finally, existing command and control systems do not permit the Soviets to exercise their traditional strict supervision over subordinates in the widely extended deployment requirement on the nuclear battlefield. (Para. 45)

K. The Soviets currently have 22 line divisions and 1,200 tactical aircraft stationed in East Germany and Poland. In a situation in which surprise or pre-emption were overriding considerations, they could launch an attack against Western Europe without prior buildup. If circumstances permitted, however, the USSR would seek to assemble a considerably larger striking force, primarily of Soviet but probably including some Satellite units. This force could comprise three fronts with a total of 50-60 divisions and 2,000 tactical aircraft. We estimate that under non-combat conditions, such a striking force could be built up in East Germany and western Czechoslovakia within 30 days, and a theater reserve could be provided for backup. The ability of these and other Soviet theater forces to carry out their assigned general war campaigns could be governed principally by the effects of the initial nuclear exchange. (Paras. 53-58)

L. The adjustments in Soviet theater forces in the past few years have not materially impaired their capabilities to conduct nonnuclear operations. The USSR's highly mechanized forces have favorable characteristics for the dispersed operations required because of the constant possibility of escalation to nuclear warfare. Over the past two years, the nonnuclear firepower of ground units has not been significantly altered, but the supporting nonnuclear firepower which can be delivered by tactical aircraft has decreased. There are indications that the Soviets have recently given recognition to the possibility of nonnuclear war with NATO forces in Europe. They probably intend to retain capabilities for conventional warfare against NATO, but they do not appear to have revised their expectation that any major conflict with NATO would be nuclear from the start or would probably escalate. (Paras. 63-66)

M. The Soviets have evidently not elaborated any doctrine for limited nuclear warfare by theater forces, involving the use of tactical weapons only. We think they would be severely handicapped in any attempts to conduct such warfare at present. Moreover, thus far the Soviets appear to think that limited nuclear conflict in the NATO area would almost certainly escalate to general war. (Para. 67)

[Here follow the “Views of the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF” and the “Discussion” section, totaling 31 pages, plus 7 pages of tables and 1 map.]

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 110. Secret. A table of contents is not printed. A note on the source text reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, dissents from major aspects of this estimate. For his views, see pages 7-10, immediately following the Summary and Conclusions. [Footnote in the source text. The dissent maintains that the estimate gives insufficent attention to the Soviet military doctrine. This doctrine is said to emphasize that nuclear weapons would play the dominant role in all phases of general war and to lay great stress on surprise and preemption. “No doctrine of limited war, whether nuclear or nonnuclear, has been discussed.”]

2 A front is roughly comparable to a Western army group. [Footnote in the source text.]

118. Editorial Note 118. Editorial Note

On December 7, 1962, President Kennedy visited Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha, Nebraska, where he and other officials received a briefing by officers of the Strategic Air Command. Among those present at the briefing were Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNamara, all of the Joint Chiefs except General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and General Power. In his memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on December 10, Colonel Legere reported on the President's visit as follows: “Komer asked how the Omaha part of the President's weekend trip had gone. Bundy said that the SAC people out there, although they did an excellent technical job, seemed to be speaking from two underlying convictions: firstly, that the Soviets probably had about four times as many missiles as the rest of the intelligence community, including the USAF, seemed to think; and secondly, that the really neat and clean way to get around all these complexities was to strike first. Bundy said that of course the President had not reacted with any such comments, but Bundy's clear implication was that the President felt that way.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman's Staff Group December 1962-January 1963)

119. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamara 119. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to Secretary of Defense McNamaraSource

Washington, December 7, 1962.

JSCM-952-62

SUBJECT

Review of Basic National Security Policy—Short Version (U)

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the Basic National Security Policy (BNSP) draft short version, dated 2 August 1962.1

2. In response to Mr. U.A. Johnson's suggestion that appropriate extracts of the document be fowarded, through the National Security Council, for approval by the President,2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider it inadvisable to attempt to identify and isolate purely military portions of basic national security policy. A proper interpretation of military objectives and the delineation of missions and tasks for the armed forces depends on a thorough knowledge and understanding of the entirety of national objectives and policies which relate to national security. Fragmentation of the BNSP for the purpose of piecemeal submission to the President well might lead to a dilution of the essential inter-relationship of the various elements of national policy—political, economic, and military. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that a completely balanced version of BNSP rather than a series of compartmented excerpts is urgently needed in order to provide, in one document, the amplifying background necessary to an adequate understanding of the policies upon which military planning and implementing actions must be based.

3. With respect to the military implications of certain expressions of policy in the draft document, dated 2 August 1962, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider, inter alia, that implementation of our national strategy requires an over-all military capability adequate to respond effectively, together with our Allies, to the present and foreseeable enemy threat in all of its various forms and intensities. This combined military capability must cover the full spectrum of force, and must be able not only to prevent the enemy from attaining his goals, but also to accomplish other related US objectives to force a conclusion of hostilities on terms advantageous3 to the United States and its Allies.

4. In more specific terms, US military forces must be capable of conducting operations employing strategic nuclear, tactical nuclear, and conventional weapons. Strategic nuclear capabilities required for general war, in which the total resources of the nation are committed, do not of themselves preclude a concurrent military requirement for adequate capabilities to employ appropriate nuclear weapons in the lesser circumstances of limited war. US forces should not be foreclosed by policy from developing, possessing, and, if necessary employing weapons which permit the application of optional levels of force depending on the circumstances. Present and forecast Soviet capabilities to employ tactical nuclear weapons render more urgent the necessity of clarifying this aspect of US policy.

5. To provide a sound basis for broad military planning, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the approved BNSP contain a statement of the continuing nature of the over-all threat as well as US regional interests and objectives. They recommend substantive modifications in other areas of the proposed policy: a. Paragraphs relating to arms control and disarmament should be expanded and clarified.

b. The military requirements for and composition of a NATO MRBM force should not be specified as a matter of basic policy.

c. Nuclear assistance to Allies, including continued nuclear assistance to the United Kingdom and provision of assistance to France, should not be discouraged in basic policy.

d. The “two-China” problem, including US policy regarding the Chinese Offshore Islands, should be reconsidered.

While it is recognized that policy statements on the above topics represent national policy as reflected in other documents, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that these policies should be modified.

6. In other matters of specific military interest the Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned over certain omissions and inadequacies in the draft policy that require additional precision and clarity. For example, in the basic mission of US forces, there is inadequate recognition of the existence and requirement for unilateral US action in circumstances short of direct attack; the draft policy provides only for supplementing friendly and Allied powers.

7. Specific changes recommended, together with supporting comments, are contained in the Appendix hereto.4

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the modified version of the 2 August 1962 draft of BNSP, incorporating their proposed changes and appended hereto, constitutes an acceptable expression of basic national security policy for military purposes. They recommend that the document modified as indicated herein be forwarded for National Security Council and Presidential consideration as a matter of priority.5

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 1962. Top Secret. Another copy is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 65 A 3464, 381 (Relo) BNSP 31 Mar 62.

1 Concerning the August 2 draft, which is a condensation of the June 22 draft, see the source note, Document 93.

2 Johnson made this suggestion in an October 15 letter to McNamara, with which he forwarded the August 2 draft BNSP. (Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/10-1562)

3 Rather than “acceptable,” as specified in the August 2 draft.

4 In this 73-page appendix, not printed, the JCS proposed specific modifications of the August 22 draft to incorporate most of the points made above but recommended deleting all of the language on China until completion of reconsideration of China policy.

5 In a memorandum to McNamara also dated December 7, Taylor recommended “withholding action” on this recommendation. “The immediate requirement is to provide the Chiefs with a basis for the development of JSOP 68, a need which can be met by your noting or approving this draft BNSP. To seek governmental approval” would take so long “that it would not be available in approved form to assist the Chiefs in the development of the next JSOP. I doubt the wisdom of pressing for higher action on this document at this time.” (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP 1962)

120. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council 120. Address by Secretary of Defense McNamara at the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic CouncilSource

Paris, December 14, 1962.

Mr. Chairman, Gentlemen:

I appreciate the opportunity to make some remarks today on the relationship among Alliance strategy, defense budgets and military force, and to submit for your consideration some suggestions as to how we might proceed to obtain a more effective common defense. Despite the great strides made during the past thirteen years, we are in some danger of letting our strategic concepts, forces, and defense budgets get out of touch with international and technological developments. I would like to suggest, therefore, that the Alliance take a fresh and comprehensive look at the threats we are likely to face, at the ways we might meet them, at the forces we should have, and at the funds that we should allocate to procure and support those forces.

War in the Nuclear age

For the greater part of its history NATO has concentrated on the threat of a massive Soviet invasion of Western Europe. Although General Norstad introduced as early as 1957 the idea that a Soviet attack might be limited, and proposed enforcing a “pause” to counter it, we have tended too much to fix our strategy, our budgets, and our forces on the threat as originally conceived in 1949. I doubt that we have drawn the full implication of the maturing nuclear age on the evolving nature of the dangers facing us.

In wars prior to the advent of nuclear weapons, damage was reparable and victory attainable. But after a full nuclear exchange such as the Soviet Bloc and the NATO Alliance are now able to carry out, the fatalities might well exceed 150,000,000. As I observed at Athens,1 such damage is not certain—but it is probable. In such a situation the devastation would be complete and victory a meaningless term. Responsible political and military leaders are constantly aware of this reality of the nuclear age.

Even during the years when the West possessed a virtual nuclear monopoly, that nuclear superiority did not serve as a universal deterrent against all forms of Communist political and military aggression. Still less does it do so today, and even less can we count on it to do so in the future. This is not to say that nuclear weapons will never be used, but that this use becomes rational only when the alternative would be even worse than nuclear war; for example, a surrender to Communist aggression. We in the West must maintain nuclear forces so large as to preclude such a possibility and to deter the first use of nuclear weapons by our opponents. But it is becoming increasingly clear that such forces by themselves will not prevent less violent acts of political and military aggression. If the Alliance's foreign policies are to rest on military power which can be used in political and military crises of less intensity than those involving the very survival of one or more of its members, then that military power must include effective non-nuclear forces and the ability to concentrate that power where it is most needed.

The Cuban experience is consistent with this view. During the Cuban crisis, Soviet nuclear power was in effect neutralized by U.S. nuclear power. In the Caribbean area, the United States had superior non-nuclear land, sea and air forces which were quite capable of destroying the Soviet missiles. The Soviet Union's non-nuclear forces in the area were inferior. Since the controversy between the United States and the Soviet Union was not over the issue of Soviet national survival, the Soviet Union was not prepared to use its nuclear power. And it had no other force it could effectively use. We faced a challenge which forced us to support diplomacy with military action; in this action military and diplomatic moves were meshed; there was an effort on both sides to localize the confrontation. And, perhaps, most significantly, the forces that were the cutting edge of action were the non-nuclear ones. Nuclear force was not irrelevant but it was in the background. Non-nuclear forces were our sword, our nuclear forces were our shield.

The situation in Europe is of course very different. Nevertheless, the confrontation in Cuba may throw light on certain of the military and political threats which NATO must be prepared to face. I believe that most probable threat is not a nuclear attack or even an all-out conventional attack on Western Europe. It seems far more likely that the Soviets will continue to engage in probes, tests, exploitation of weak spots and efforts to divide. These may be bold and backed by impressive force, but given their careful calculation of risks, their emphasis on keeping events under control and their preference for a blend of political and military action, the Soviets are likely to be attracted by other and more tempting programs than nuclear war, or events certain to lead to it. There can be little doubt that such a Soviet strategy presents us with a most serious threat. Therefore, should we not emphasize more the cases in which our position would be gravely weakened unless we can apply effective counter-pressure with non-nuclear forces and emphasize less those situations of major attack in which nuclear weapons must be used. Against the latter contingencies NATO already has very formidable deterrents indeed.

It is quite likely, of course, that the nature of the Soviet threat has changed precisely because NATO has constructed an adequate deterrent to more ambitious actions. That deterrent will be maintained and strengthened. But I would suggest that NATO's problems in the 1960's are radically different from those of the late forties and that it is time for us to discard those solutions and strategies that are no longer in tune with the times.

Perspectives for the Future

If we were to agree that the sudden massive Soviet assault on Europe is a most unlikely contingency, how should this affect our planning? The possibilities are many. Witness some of the events of the past ten years: the suppression of uprisings in East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Soviet aid on a substantial scale to the United Arab Republic and Iraq, attempts at subversion in Africa, pressure on Berlin, and a rash but supple move into Cuba.

We should expect analogous indirect or direct challenges to the security of members of the Alliance to continue in the future. Members of the Alliance are concerned with the containment of the Communist threat in parts of the world outside of Europe. In such situations, there may be conflict, the conflict may spread, and military responses by the Alliance may become necessary.

One can easily imagine such circumstances arising in the Middle East and Africa. What is more difficult to support is that the appropriate response would involve the use of nuclear weapons.

We should not exclude Soviet subversion and political aggression backed up by military measures in areas of even more direct and immediate concern to Europe. Such countries as Finland, Austria, and Sweden are geographically vulnerable and might, in some circumstances, become targets for these tactics. We could not remain indifferent to actions in these areas that would upset the military balance in Europe and threaten our security.

We also cannot exclude the possibility of spontaneous events that would bring heightened danger of conflict—that is, events outside the control of either NATO or the Soviet Union.

There is, more directly, the ever-present danger of Soviet incursions into NATO territory itself. Berlin is the most exposed area, but the flanks and the center also contain potential targets of military pressure and attack.

Should any of these more likely contingencies arise, they would be highly dangerous. Inaction, or weak action, could result in a serious setback, a missed opportunity, or even disaster. Nor can we entirely discount the possibility that such limited conflicts might lead to a major Soviet attack. Such an attack might involve the use of nuclear weapons locally in Europe. It might even be the grand non-nuclear invasion of Western Europe. Or it might take the form of an all-out nuclear assault although this is still more doubtful.

A review of these contingencies suggests, first, the conflicts most likely to occur will almost certainly begin in a non-nuclear fashion. Second, NATO or some of its members may have to take a military counter-initiative. Third, if we can manage local conflicts successfully against a background of increased and adequate strength, we will not have to meet the remote contingencies. Fourth, our military posture should be as relevant to the likely as to the unlikely contingencies.

This is not to say that we should ignore the remote contingencies of nuclear or major non-nuclear attack. Quite the contrary. It makes a great deal of sense to prepare for the unlikely—especially when the lack of preparation would bring about catastrophic consequences.

Accordingly, I wish to take up two questions as urgent matters for the Alliance: first, what additional capabilities do we need in order to meet the real challenges that are apt to face us; second, what resources will be needed over the next five years in order to reach these goals?

Strategic Nuclear Posture

Since I have recently reported to you at length on the strategic nuclear posture of the Alliance, there are only a few additional points on this subject that I wish to bring to your attention. This awesome capability would naturally be the decisive element in any major nuclear war. In its deterrent function it remains a necessary—but not sufficient—condition of flexibility and initiative in other realms. The United States, in recognition of these facts, has every intention of maintaining the forces adequate to these two tasks. Plans are also in hand to increase the choices open to the strategic forces and to permit the exercise of the greatest discrimination possible in the conduct of strategic attacks if these forces should be called into play. U. S. programs, extending to 1968, provide, within the limits permitted by technology, timely and coordinated coverage of major strategic forces that might threaten the Alliance.

It is the view of the United States, in the light of this assessment, that Alliance expenditures in the strategic nuclear field—$15 billion per year in the case of the U. S. alone—remain adequate for the contingency of general nuclear war and its deterrence. The addition of nuclear vehicles in current programs is already producing sharply declining marginal returns, partly because of the investments already made, but also because the Soviets are moving steadily toward a land-based and sea-based strategic nuclear force protected by hardening, mobility and dispersal. A basic change is taking place in the nuclear relationship between NATO and the Soviet Union. Both sides are rapidly increasing their nuclear strength. NATO is and will undoubtedly remain ahead in most relevant dimensions: number of warheads and major delivery vehicles, degree of protection, diversity of systems, and effectiveness of command and control. But the benefits of this military advantage will be sharply reduced as compared with those of the 1940's and 1950's. In the circumstances of the 1960's, it now appears that general nuclear war is likely to be even more devastating than appeared probable when I spoke to you at Athens, however much we might try further to strengthen our offensive capabilities.

If military considerations alone were at issue, I would therefore recommend against the commitment of Alliance resources to strategic nuclear forces beyond those now programmed. It does not follow, however, that some shift within present strategic nuclear programs may not be desirable, because of course the problem is not military alone. It is political, and its political meaning is of great importance. We in the United States are deeply interested in having these matters so managed that all members of the Alliance can have full confidence in the effectiveness and reliability of NATO's strategic nuclear strength. We fully recognize that this is a problem for the Alliance as a whole and that no single member of the Alliance can or should attempt to monopolize responsibility or authority.

We have an inescapable political, legal, and moral responsibility for the management of the awesome power which our government controls. We have an equal responsibility to deal faithfully with the Alliance. In our effort to discharge this double responsibility we are seeking to make progress in two major directions.

The first is the expansion of understanding, consultation, and advance planning for the handling of the strategic deterrent. Inasmuch as more than 95 percent of strategic Alliance strength is American, we have a special duty here, and we want to do more to fulfill it. We are accelerating programs already begun for this purpose, and we are determined to search with you for new and stronger instruments of active consultation.

Our second effort is to explore the ways and means by which the Alliance as a whole might come to share effectively in the actual operations, manning, deployment and support of the strategic deterrent. For reasons we have expressed before we doubt if the best solution here is an expanding series of separate national efforts (though we have no desire to reopen an argument on which feelings are strong)—and so we have been assisting in the exploration of a possible multilateral arrangement. We shall continue in the effort, and I want to make it very clear that in this exploration our central interest is to assist as best we can in meeting the legitimate security interests of our European partners. In great measure, necessarily, judgment on what is wanted and needed must come from our European friends, but we emphasize again our readiness to help to the limit in exploring every one of the relevant questions of technique, deployment, control, financing, and policy—and our equal readiness to join with others in the necessary action to create a multilateral force.

The Tactical Nuclear Posture

What we may need in the tactical nuclear field is a more difficult question to answer. As one of the more remote contingencies, the Alliance must recognize and prepare for the possibility that the Soviets would initiate the use of tactical nuclear weapons in Europe. Furthermore, since NATO, even with appropriate non-nuclear increases, could not expect to have non-nuclear superiority everywhere, there are situations in which the Alliance might perceive an apparent advantage in using nuclear weapons locally. Alternatively, it has been suggested we might wish to use nuclear weapons on a large scale, but try to limit their use geographically. As I observed at Athens, however, we see no effective operational boundary which could be counted on to restrict such a war according to intensity or area. In particular, because of the problems of target acquisition and troop densities, the pressure to employ large-yield nuclear weapons to support a tactical nuclear engagement would almost certainly rise. And in all likelihood the accompanying civilian damage would be extremely great.

At this juncture, however, it is premature to suggest specific changes in our tactical nuclear programs. Because of the great strategic and tactical nuclear power already at our disposal, we have time. I strongly urge that we use the time not only to review our programs but also to re-examine the assumption that tactical use of nuclear weapons by both sides would generally be to the advantage of the Alliance.

I want to make it perfectly clear that it is our intention to maintain and to increase tactical nuclear weapons in Europe. However, I doubt that they are the means by which we can compensate for non-nuclear weaknesses.

The Non-Nuclear Posture

It seems to me to be quite clear that a stronger non-nuclear posture would confer large political benefits on the Alliance, and especially on its European members. It would give them a sense of freedom and initiative that primary reliance on nuclear power does not provide. It would enhance their bargaining power with the Soviet Union. It would enhance the attractive power of Western Europe to Eastern Europe.

In the contingencies I earlier categorized as likely, non-nuclear force may very well have to be used locally, in strength, and very probably against Soviet forces. We may find it necessary to conduct a probe in strength, to block Soviet forces from a threatening deployment, to repel a Soviet incursion into NATO territory, or to apply force in one locality in order to relieve enemy pressure against a different area. For this we need strong, deployable forces, with adequate air and sea lift, and pre-stocking of supplies and equipment, forces that are exercised realistically in peacetime.

Essential to this ability to deploy and use non-nuclear strength locally is a strong non-nuclear forward defense. We will want to be able to take action without dangerously weakening our defensive position. Such action is made more perilous if it leaves us vulnerable to a Soviet counter-action. Moreover, the stronger our non-nuclear forces, the more time we will have to develop and exploit advantageous courses of action—local and global, diplomatic and military.

In reviewing the prospects for a stronger non-nuclear posture, let us look at the overall strengths of the two sides. On most overall measures NATO has a position of some superiority in non-nuclear arms over the Warsaw Pact countries. It has more men under arms, 6 million to 4 million. It has more tactical aircraft worldwide, 15,000 to about 10,000. It has more major combat ships, 730 to 610. In terms of basic resources that bear especially on non-nuclear strength, it has far greater industrial resources and manpower. We are superior in a wide range of technical skills and our population aggregates 490 million as against 320 million. Of course not all of these resources are directly applicable in any particular locality on short notice. But this is true on both sides. Just as members of NATO have military interests, and forces, in the Far and Middle East, so do the Soviets. In short, our problem is not resources, but the low effectiveness of many of our forces, the likelihood that the Soviets will have the military initiative, and the Soviet position of operating in a geographically more compact area.

[Here follows discussion of NATO and Warsaw Pact force dispositions and of the “forward strategy.”]

* Source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1-PA/12-2162. Top Secret. The source text is the enclosure to circular airgram CA-6769, December 21. The Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council was held December 13-15 in Paris.

1 See Document 82.

121. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 121. Memorandum of Conference With President KennedySource

Palm Beach, Florida, December 27, 1962, 10:45 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary McNamara

Deputy Secretary Gilpatric

General Taylor

General Wheeler

Admiral Anderson

General LeMay

General Shoup

General Clifton

Secretary McNamara and General Taylor stated that they had discussed the defense budget thoroughly with the Joint Chiefs and the Service Secretaries and had also given the President their views beforehand. They wanted the Joint Chiefs to do the talking at this meeting and they would comment as the discussion grew.

Admiral Anderson summarized the Navy viewpoint and included the comment that for the Joint Chiefs it was a difficult period of transition in two respects; first, the technological advances in weaponry were tremendous; and, second, they had to recognize that we were approaching a point where both sides hold a Sword of Damocles (in the nuclear sense) over the Soviet and the free world heads which could inhibit the use of nuclear weapons against each other's homeland while fairly large-scale war with conventional forces—including war at sea—might take place.

Although this is the 1964 budget, Admiral Anderson pointed out, it really forecasts in many respects what the 1968-70 capabilities would be. Consequently, it has long-range connotations. For the Navy, he found two major difficulties for Fiscal 1964: personnel is too limited to be really adequate, and the funds for operations, spare parts and maintenance were less than required. In spite of this, however, they were going to do the job and meet commitments. To meet one of these problems, he hoped to reduce the tempo of operations wherever possible. He pleaded that in these areas, the Navy be given more control over the decisions about their operations and about the handling of their personnel. He pointed out that new ships take more people than old ships take in the era of technological change, and that the Navy actually needed 685,000 people, which would be an increase of 20,000. Instead, they have an allowance of 670,000. So they will be undermanned in some areas. In some cases they would have to man standby ships with 20% crew strength and either transfer some ships to the reserves or call up reserves in case of an emergency. The personnel hurts especially in the short-term area.

For the long-term, the Navy's greatest concern is the adequacy of the shipbuilding program to replace old ships. From the Navy's request, their shipbuilding program was reduced by a half-dozen ships. The program is well balanced but it leaves the Navy with the knowledge that in 1970 there will be a greater percentage of over-age ships than should be in the fleet. As an example, the Navy asked for eight nuclear attack submarines and the number was reduced to six. The lead time on a submarine is 40-plus months. Aircraft procurement is less than needed—for example, the Navy asked for 180 F-4-Hs and it was reduced to 132.

In research and development, Admiral Anderson was convinced the Navy could use more money; at the same time he pledged that the Navy could and would use the money they have in the best way possible to meet its requirements. He reiterated his pleas for more Navy authority, with more attention being paid to professional judgment in all of the fields he mentioned.

The President asked about the progress on surface-to-surface missiles.

Admiral Anderson reported much progress in adapting surface-to-air missiles to the surface-to-surface role, but they hadn't fully licked the problem. Work in this area continues.

The President asked about Soviet ships carrying surface-to-surface missiles and Admiral Anderson confirmed his statement and said that primary reliance for countering them at the present time is attack by naval aircraft.

The President asked, in relation to the missiles in Cuba, about the 30-40 mile range missiles that are on shore which would keep the fleet way out. Admiral Anderson answered that they would have to knock those out by either carrier- or land-based air before making a landing in their vicinity.

In the field of antisubmarine warfare, Admiral Anderson stated that there was no magic breakthrough in sight, and that current developments are incremental in continuing improvements over past capabilities. He said that they would keep working on the problem but that we should have no illusions as to its magnitude even though we had considerable success in the Cuban operations over Soviet conventionally powered submarines. He also pointed out the important contributions on the part of our allies, indicating his apprehension that the British interest in achieving an independent nuclear capability might result in a decrease of British naval capabilities in ASW and meeting worldwide commitments.

General Wheeler stated that the 1964 budget was most satisfactory from the Army point of view and that, as Mr. McNamara had pointed out in a general purpose forces paper,1 the Army would be in the best shape it has been since Korea. There are $3.3 billions of PEMA funds, of which $3.2 billion is in new obligational authority. This would give the Army sufficient funds to procure the initial complement of combat equipment required for the 16 active and 6 priority reserve divisions plus such replacements, spares and combat consumables as are necessary to permit 16 divisions to operate in combat for the period between D-Day and the time when the production resources of the country can furnish equipment at a rate equal to combat consumption.

General Wheeler pointed out that the two greatest problems were personnel and Nike-Zeus. He spoke at some length about the Army personnel situation with a 960,000 ceiling. Of this number, 406,000 people are devoted to other than direct divisional activity. Of the remaining 554,000, there are 70,000 in Alaska, the Caribbean area, and Berlin which had to be there but which would not really be counted on for combat capabilities outside of those areas. This leaves the Army with a “division slice” of about 36,000 for a division and its combat support elements. The Army asked for more people, especially for artillery battalions, signal units, etc. The result of this 960,000 ceiling would be that the Army would have to depend on the reserves earlier in a war than they would really like to. Meanwhile, General Wheeler is going over the Army layer by layer to cut functions and to cut people, and he feels that the greatest savings can only be made by cutting functions.

In regard to Nike-Zeus, there was a rather lengthy discussion with the President, Secretary McNamara, General Taylor and General Wheeler, in which they analyzed the results of a missile defense and discussed the Soviet capabilities. The President made the point that at the present reading there is a $9 billion deficit in the government budget for FY 1964. He said that it would just be too expensive to buy the proportionate share of $19 billion spread over ten years for Nike-Zeus at this stage.

The President questioned our forces in Europe and the advisability of trying to maintain the equivalent of a six-division force with a logistic base enabling it to fight for 60-90 days when the NATO allies were not building the conventional forces to make a 90-day conventional warfare a possibility. The French have a 5-10 day supply basis, the Germans hopefully would have 90 days in the near future, and in substance NATO would only have 18 divisions, plus or minus a few spare parts which could be put on a 90-day basis, unless the allies improve their effort.

General Wheeler stated, and it was the consensus, that our only realistic approach was to get the allies to move forward on the conventional force program.

In a discussion of the need for the equivalent of six divisions, as opposed to a lesser number, General Wheeler pointed out the fact that our air bases are forward in Germany and must be protected until they can be effective in carrying out their part of the mission, even if we opt for a shorter period (10 days) from D-Day to the use of nuclear weapons. This led the President to question the advisability of the U.S. keeping a total of 257,000 people there to support six divisions on a 60- to 90-day basis, if future strategy dictates our earlier resort to nuclear warfare.

The President said that U.S. forces in Europe would have to be “thinned out” unless NATO allies improved their readiness and supported the forward strategy. He said that he expects Secretary McNamara and the Joint Chiefs to make a judgment during 1963 about whether this effort with our allies is going to be successful or unsuccessful. As a corollary, he said that he felt that a judgment would also have to be made on whether we, along with our allies, can ever fight a conventional war for 60-90 days in Europe, and if we decide that a non-nuclear war for that long is not a real possibility, then we should certainly examine the level of supply that we now plan as essential. This corollary judgment would be especially applicable if our allies don't come through with the necessary cooperation to make conventional warfare a possibility.

Admiral Anderson remarked that some of our allies would never make a realistic contribution comparable to that of the United States until they were again genuinely afraid of the threat to their homelands.

The President reiterated what Prime Minister Macmillan told him about President de Gaulle's attitude2 and the question that it raised; how much in depth must we keep in Europe as we are faced with a decision to draw back and resort to nuclear warfare? Throughout the President's discussion there was emphasis on the gold outflow which must be reduced.

General LeMay said that we might force the Europeans to do more by actually pulling out some of the ground forces.

General Taylor pointed out that Spain might be brought into NATO to assist in this conventional buildup, and General LeMay praised the agreement that we have with the Spanish. The President countered this, stating that the attitude of the Spanish in cashing every dollar they earn for gold and hurting us by this method hardly encourages the advisability of doing much more with Spain. He pointed out that our gold reserve now stands at $15.75 billion, and that there is a $12 billion floor on this gold cache, leaving us a $3.75 billion cushion, which is being eaten up at the rate of $2.5 billion a year. He stated that unless we stop the gold outflow in a hurry we will have reached the floor, and by 1964 we will have to have some new decisions.

The President questioned also the 30% of infrastructure for NATO that we pay. Secretary McNamara pointed out that infrastructure would soon be up for renegotiation. There was mention of a flat statement to NATO that 20% is going to be our new percentage, take it or leave it. The President mentioned that the U.S. is spending a larger percentage of its gross national product on defense than any of our allies, and that we have a larger proportion of men in the armed forces compared to the number of people in our country than any of the other allies. Secretary McNamara said that we would probably just have to pull 50,000 to 70,000 people out in order to reduce the gold costs, and promised that he would submit a plan for the withdrawal of 50,000 to 70,000 men from Europe.

All agreed that we must concentrate on the NATO area in the next few months to see if NATO couldn't solve this problem.

In regard to Nike-Zeus, the President asked if the Army could assure production and deployment on a schedule to be effective in 1967. There followed a lengthy discussion, with General Wheeler leading, on the two-stage deployment problem and the difference in costs between the Army's $19 billion idea and the Department of Defense $16.2 billion idea. In Fiscal 1964 the difference in investment costs would be only $270 million. Secretary McNamara pointed out that we already have $370 million in Nike-Zeus research and development and an additional $100 million for research and development in allied fields which helps Nike-Zeus. This he felt was all that could be afforded. There followed a discussion about whether or not we would ever use Nike-Zeus, the factors involving a Soviet decision to attack either our hard missile sites or our cities, and the number of people that a $19 billion program might save.

The President then turned to General LeMay who opened with a statement that in his five years of budget planning this had been the best with the greatest amount of agreement among the Chiefs and the best feeling of support from their civilian superiors, including the President, that the Joint Chiefs had ever had.

Concerning his misgivings, he feels that the Air Force assault forces are too small, specifically needing four more squadrons of C-130s to meet requirements. This would mean fifteen planes per squadron at $2.5 million each. As far as aircraft replacement is concerned, General LeMay felt that we are “putting off the day” and we are eventually building up trouble for ourselves. General LeMay mentioned the reserve callup and the efficiency of the reserve forces and their reaction to the Cuban situation.

Changing the subject to tactical fighters, he stated that we are now overcommitted and that our modernization is too slow. The Air Force had asked for a second source for the F-4-C, which had been turned down, in spite of the fact that the increase in fighter production from twelve to fifteen a month is still all going to the Navy until Fiscal 1964.

In regard to air defense, General LeMay pointed out that there was not much in the budget for it, and that the F-106 is the newest fighter-interceptor and even that aircraft is out of production; therefore, we should seek a replacement. He stated that the Air Force had asked for a Mach-3, 1200-mile range fighter, with improved radar, a project which had been turned down. He pointed out that the Soviet Union was equipping its bomber force with air-to-ground missiles which could be launched at greater range from our targets and that this new fighter was an essential, in his option.

He also mentioned that as far as the military aspects of space are concerned, we are not going fast enough.

General LeMay emphasized that his biggest worry is in the strategic field and that the trend is bad. He felt that the trend is toward an all-missile force, and he has two or three objections; first, with an all-missile force we were simplifying the Russian program; secondly, we were moving away from the flexibility that we now have in our strategic forces; and third, intelligence estimates indicate that more flexibility is needed, not less. He stated that he had given all these arguments to the Secretary and had been properly heard, but his misgivings were still strong.

The President then questioned the group in regard to the number of Minutemen, Polaris and Titan missiles, and opened a discussion on the Soviet missile capability. All this was discussed at some length and General LeMay pointed out again that our main objective was not to match missile for missile but to deter any war from starting. The basic question to answer is: what will deter the Soviet Union? His own answer was that the flexibility of the mixed force was much more potent in deterrence—especially in deterring the conventional war—than an all-missile force.

The President pointed out that he had two concerns about this budget: transport, both sea and air, and communications.

There was some discussion about the lead time on the C-130. The Chiefs felt that it is roughly eighteen months, but Secretary McNamara believes that it is more like 9-12 months lead time.

General Shoup was asked to comment and he stated that the Marine Corps would spend 2% of the defense budget, and so far as he was concerned, when materials to be procured with 1964 funds are on hand, the Marines were the best they had ever been in peacetime. Their personnel has a small problem as the enlistments ebbed and flowed, but this could be overcome. Further, the Marine Corps reserves were in better shape than they had ever been in and could make a real contribution. General LeMay gave the President one quote: “War is not efficient,” and consequently, its needs and its plans couldn't be run by computer efficiency measurements.

In summarizing, the President pointed out that this Administration had put more money in defense in the past two years than any other previous Administration. He pointed out that we have almost had war in Laos, we had almost had war in Cuba, and we had had an ultimatum in Berlin. We have also been engaged in Soviet Viet-Nam almost constantly for twenty-two months. It was quite apparent to him that more dollars were needed rather than less. He also stated that in the foreseeable future we would have at least as many troubles, and that in Latin America we could anticipate even more problems than we had faced so far. He stated that we had gone from $44 billion up to $49 billion and that we are now at $52 billion, making a more intensive effort in free world defense than had ever been planned.

The President said that he is very interested in what we do in this field and he wants to be sure that we are doing enough. He charged the Joint Chiefs to be constantly mindful of this. He also pointed out that they had to be mindful—although it was not their primary concern—that he was facing a budget with a $9 billion deficit and that this had to enter into the Chiefs' consideration as they surveyed the needs to make sure that we are doing enough.

The President directed that the Chiefs review the transport problem, both sea and air, with Secretary McNamara and give him a report before they lock up this 1964 budget. Admiral Anderson commented that they should immediately put some LSTs on the list and that it would call for a small addition to the Navy budget, but he could get them out of moth balls and man them with a bare minimum of caretaker crews and have them ready to haul the heavy weapons in case we are faced with the possibility of another Cuban situation.

The President also directed that they look once more at the fighter aircraft situation and give him a report on that.

The President pointed out to the Joint Chiefs and Secretary McNamara that although we feel that the present Cuban situation is dormant, we must assume that someday we may have to go into Cuba, and when it happens, we must be prepared to do it as quickly as possible, with a minimum of destruction. Therefore, they must provide for this contingency as they look into one, two, three, or four years ahead.

The President pointed out that he felt this was a possibility in the next few years whether he was President or not, and that they had to plan for this.

Discussion of Cuba followed which included a statement by the President that in any planning we must make sure that our “political work” is well done. If there are defections to our side we must be ready to handle them and exploit them.

The discussion which followed involved the “civil affairs and military government” planning, as well as the special forces planning, in connection with Cuba.

The President then discussed the Cuban Brigade, and the training of Cubans that is now taking place.

An additional note on the budget was raised by Admiral Anderson. He pointed out that our military construction was going to be a problem that would not go away. Even though we are holding it to a minimum at the present, eventually all the Services would need some new facilities.

In summary, the President asked that they look over the situation in Europe, that they review the transport situation, that they maintain their present efforts on communications, and that they search for even other occasions to prevent the balance of payments from getting out of control.

As to Nike-Zeus, the President stated that it was his decision to stay with the budget as it is now proposed.

Finally, the President said that it would almost seem that Europe is getting a “free-ride” and that on both the political and defense side, this situation with our NATO allies had to be changed this year.

General Taylor presented a Joint Chiefs of Staff proposal on testimony before Congressional committees which was approved (copy attached).3

Secretary McNamara indicated that only he, Secretary Gilpatric, and the Chiefs would reveal any Joint Chiefs of Staff decisions or positions as per the memorandum.5

C. V. Clifton6

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, JCS/Kennedy 12/62-1/63. Top Secret. Drafted by Clifton on January 10, 1963. A memorandum for the record by Clifton of the same date is attached to the source text. In the same file are several copies of a draft memorandum of the conference prepared by Clifton on January 2, which bear detailed corrections made by each of the Joint Chiefs. Most of these changes are incorporated in the memorandum printed here. McNamara wrote on his copy of the draft that “the ‘minutes' are not quite in accord with my recollection of the discussion but I see nothing so important as to require change.” A copy of McNamara's handwritten notes of the conference are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Palm Beach Notes on JCS Views. Kennedy's Appointment Book indicates that the President met with the Chiefs only from 10:15 to 10:40 a.m. (Kennedy Library) No record of this conference has been found.

1 Document 115.

2 Not further identified.

3 Not printed.

5 Following this meeting, the President met with McNamara and Gilpatric and decided that no further changes would be made at that time in the sealift and tactical aircraft programs as then reflected in the Department of Defense budget submission for FY 1964 and that 72 additional C-130E transport aircraft would be proposed for funding in FY 1964. (Memorandum for the record by Gilpatric, January 2, 1963; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Chester V. Clifton Series, JCS/Kennedy 12/62-1/63)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

122. Editorial Note 122. Editorial Note

At the meeting of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) on January 3, 1963, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy “emphasized that the President looks upon the Group as having wider responsibilities than the members seem to interpret them to be. He suggested that the members give consideration to what the Group should now be doing.” After U. Alexis Johnson, who had replaced General Taylor as Chairman of the Special Group (CI) following the latter's confirmation as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, remarked that the Group was operating according to its terms of reference in monitoring programs it had helped to establish, Kennedy commented that although these were the terms of reference, he felt that the monitoring of programs was too restrictive, and that “the members should give thought to redefining the Group's responsibilities.” (Memorandum by Thomas W. Davis, Jr., Executive Secretary of the Group; Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI) 11/1/62-12/30/62)

In a memorandum to the Special Group (CI) dated January 22, Johnson wrote that whatever “degree of success the group may have had is due to the fact that it had specific terms of reference in a well-defined field clearly of interdepartmental character,” and that enlarging its role would “adversely impinge” on the work of other interdepartmental mechanisms, including ad hoc working groups as well as the NSC and the NSC Executive Committee. (Ibid., SG(CI) 1/17/63-3/7/63)

In another general discussion of the Special Group (CI) during its meeting on January 24, Taylor opened by saying that it had “a pretty good charter now. He does not think that the committee should be overloaded.” Gilpatric thought the Group was not “following through.” Robert Kennedy agreed and stated that the monitoring of established programs should be done at a lower level. The Group should do “something additional,” such as taking an overall look at countries which might be potential trouble spots, and “figure out solutions and report to the President. Emphasis should be on anticipating trouble.” It was “time to apply the talents of this Group to other countries which do not necessarily have a CI problem.”

AID Director Bell remarked that other interagency committees were in some cases doing for particular areas the job the Attorney General wanted done. Bundy stated: “If the Group develops in this way, it would simply interpose another level between the troops [working level] and the President. Why do this?”

The record of the meeting indicates that after Taylor pointed out that the Group was not in the “command channel,” the meeting ended with a consensus that while “layering” might not be a problem, it would be necessary for the Group to have a permanent staff, possibly with a full time chairman, to perform the surveillance function of identifying trouble spots. The Attorney General agreed to draft a revision of the terms of reference in NSAM No. 124. (Memorandum by Thomas A. Parrott, Jr., January 24, with covering note of same date to Bundy; Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Special Group 7/3/62-5/20/63) No such draft revision has been found.

Additional information on this question is ibid., Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume II 1962-1963. See also Document 139.

123. Editorial Note 123. Editorial Note

In a memorandum dated January 17, 1963, to the holders of NSC 5906/1, Bromley Smith stated that the President had authorized the rescission of NSC 5906/1, to be effective immediately. “For the present, current policy guidance is to be found in existing major statements of the President and Cabinet Officers, both classified and unclassified.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Rescissions of NSC Documents) This action was part of an ongoing program of rescissions of outdated NSC policy papers. Further information on this program is ibid. and ibid., NSC Administration 1961-1965. NSC 5906/1, “Basic National Security Policy,” August 5, 1959, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, volume III, Document 70.

124. Memorandum From Robert Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Kennedy 124. Memorandum From Robert Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President KennedySource

Washington, January 19, 1963.

In your NSC talk next Tuesday,1 could you say a few words about our policy toward the major neutrals? These are words best said privately at this juncture but words which need saying nonetheless. Many officials, some high up, get so annoyed at the words and antics of a Sukarno and a Nasser that they question the underlying rationale of our policy shift.

Yet I am convinced that one of the major potential successes of your Administration may flow from our more flexible policy toward the Nehrus, Nassers, Sukarnos, Ben Bellas, and their ilk. This marks a genuine departure from previous policy (though the last Administration was gradually shifting in this direction). We are still in the early phases of this enterprise and it isn't yet paying great dividends. But if we look on it as a long-term investment, and remain undisturbed by any short-term fluctuations, it will eventually show real capital gains.

To me, the underlying rationale for this policy is that in the game of competitive co-existence, we can hardly afford to let the major neutralists become clients primarily of Moscow. The Soviets have made a major effort in this direction, but with the glittering exception of India, we have only recently begun to compete.

Regrettably, the benefits of such a policy take less the form of visible support for US positions than the largely negative form of refraining from actions which would be most unfavorable to our interests. Yet, if we think Nasser is misbehaving in the Yemen or Sukarno again showing undue territorial appetite, we need merely ask ourselves how much more difficult they would be if they didn't feel a real concern lest they sacrifice actual and prospective aid from us. The trouble is that this is hardly a convincing public rationale for giving aid.

Other problems arise from the simple fact that the policies of Nasser or Sukarno cut across those of many other US friends; hence we are constantly put in the position of being asked to choose between them. It would be simpler, for example, to choose up sides in Yemen than to take the present middle road. Yet to do so would cost us more with one side than we would gain with the other. Similarly, in Southeast Asia, why spend billions containing Communist pressures on the mainland while leaving the Communists a free hand in the rich archipelago behind?

Those who cavil over our Nasser or Sukarno policy also ignore the absence of any realistic alternative. We tried to get rid of Sukarno in 58—and failed. Unless we think we can do so again we simply have to sweat him out. This is not to advocate an exclusively soft approach, but to use the stick without the carrot has failed again and again (as with the Aswan Dam).

It failed because it ran athwart of the strong nationalist attitudes of the new Afro-Asian countries. Yet this very nationalism, which to date has naturally focused on the former colonial powers and their associates, will increasingly bring them into conflict with an expansionist Bloc. This has already happened in India, where it was Peiping's blunder (plus our skill in capitalizing on it) which has led to a shift in India's attitude toward them and us. This will happen elsewhere if we let it mature. Time is on side here.

A few words on this policy would forestall any misreading of your tactical interest in sharp words or actions when needed.2

Bob Komer

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 508th NSC Meeting. Secret.

1 January 22; see Document 125.

2 In a January 21 memorandum to the President suggesting topics for the next day's NSC meeting, Bundy wrote that he agreed with Komer “that we should be strong in our assistance in competing for the neutrals, using both carrot and stick,” and attached Komer's “strong memorandum” to his own. (Kennedy Libarary, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 508th NSC Meeting)

125. Record of the 508th Meeting of the National Security Council 125. Record of the 508th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, January 22, 1963.

There were 57 people attending this meeting, including the Vice President, all of the Joint Chiefs, 7 Department of Defense officials headed by McNamara, 16 Department of State officials led by Rusk, McCone and 3 other CIA officials, Dillon, Kermit Gordon, McGeorge Bundy, Sorensen, Wiesner, and Kaysen. (Kennedy Library, President's Appointment Book)

REMARKS OF PRESIDENT KENNEDY TO THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL MEETING OF JANUARY 22, 1963

The President began his discussion of national security problems by calling attention to the worldwide responsibilities of the United States. While we fully recognize our responsibilities, other states are not carrying their fair share of the burden.

Cuba

The major lesson of the Cuban crisis, the President said, was the paramount importance of timing. Both sides, the United States and the USSR, need sufficient time to consider alternative courses of action. Our objective was and is to protect our national interests while trying to avoid a nuclear exchange which, if it happened, would be a defeat for both sides. In handling crises, it is important that the Russians have enough time to debate their action. If they are forced to react in an hour or two, they may react in a spasm and resort to nuclear war.1 We, too, looking back on the quarantine vs. air strike decision,2 took several days to discuss and understand the advantages and disadvantages of the alternatives. The reason for building up NATO conventional forces is to gain greater control over the timing of a showdown in Europe provoked by the Russians.

The President pointed out that we must always be in a position to threaten Cuba as a possible riposte to Russian pressure against us in Berlin. We must always be ready to move immediately against Cuba in the event we decide such action would be a more effective response to a Soviet initiative than a nuclear response. We can use Cuba to limit Soviet actions in the way the Russians use Berlin to limit our actions.3

Western Europe

Turning to Europe, the President recalled that de Gaulle's current policy is no different than that he has been advocating since 1958 when he first proposed to President Eisenhower a U.S.-U.K.- France directorate giving France, in effect, a veto on our use of nuclear weapons. The suggestion was turned down because it would have broken up NATO. This Administration agrees it was a correct decision. The turndown of de Gaulle's proposal was not, however, the reason why he is behaving as he now is. Even if we had given France nuclear weapons, de Gaulle would have tried to restore France to a predominant position in Europe. For years, in speeches and in his memoirs, de Gaulle has expressed his view that France must be a dominant power speaking to the USSR and the West as an equal, dependent on no one.

In analyzing de Gaulle's present actions, the President said de Gaulle did not question our support of Europe. The proof that he does not fear we would desert him is the deployment of only a small number of French troops opposite the Russians in Germany. He relies on our power to protect him while he launches his policies based solely on the self-interest of France. Having been turned down by the U.S. and U.K. on the directorate, de Gaulle turned to Germany. This helps to keep Germany from looking to the Russians. It does threaten NATO which de Gaulle strongly opposes.

As to the Common Market, the President said that if Great Britain joined, Europe would be strengthened and stabilized. We favor the U.K. joining even though it will cost the U.S. considerable trade. If France keeps Britain out, this will be a setback for us but a more severe setback for the U.K.

Our interest, the President continued, is to strengthen the NATO multilateral force concept, even though de Gaulle is opposed, because a multilateral force will increase our influence in Europe and provide a way to guide NATO and keep it strong. We have to live with de Gaulle. One way to respond is to strengthen NATO and push for a multilateral nuclear force which will weaken de Gaulle's control of the Six.4 We should not be overly distressed because the problems caused by de Gaulle are not crucial in the sense that our problems in Latin America are.

U.S. Trade Negotiations

The President then summarized the guidelines for forthcoming trade negotiations. In the present situation, we must be very careful to protect U.S. interests. Our balance of payments problem is serious, it is not now under control, and it must be righted at the latest by the end of 1964. If we do not do so, there will be pressure against the dollar and Congress will be demanding reductions on our foreign programs.

One effort we must make, the President continued, is to seek to prevent European states from taking actions which make our balance of payments problem worse. For example, we maintain large forces in Germany. We must firmly oppose West Germany if it increases its agricultural production to our detriment. We have not yet reached the point of wheat against troops but we cannot continue to pay for the military protection of Europe while the NATO states are not paying their fair share and living off the “fat of the land.” We have been very generous to Europe and it is now time for us to look out for ourselves, knowing full well that the Europeans will not do anything for us simply because we have in the past helped them. No longer dependent on the U.S. for economic assistance, the European states are less subject to our influence. If the French and other European powers acquire a nuclear capability they would be in a position to be entirely independent and we might be on the outside looking in. We must exploit our military and political position to ensure that our economic interests are protected.

Attitude Toward Neutrals

Referring to criticism by those who say we are treating neutrals as favorably as allies, the President said he did not believe such criticism was sound but we shouldn't be over-confident ourselves. For example, the Pakistanis oppose our giving military assistance to the Indians. Despite the fact that the Pakistanis are our allies, we must recognize the importance of India. If the Indians joined the Chinese, we would have no free South Asia. Our aim is to make the sub-continent of Asia strong. Even under present Indian leadership, we can work with India just as we must use our ally Pakistan to achieve our aim of keeping the sub-continent out of the Communist camp. We cannot permit all those who call themselves neutrals to join the Communist bloc. Therefore, we must keep our ties to Nasser and other neutralists even if we do not like many things they do because, if we lose them, the balance of power could swing against us.

Assistance to Foreign Countries

The President said he wanted to make clear that we are giving aid to foreign countries in order to increase the security of the United States—not primarily for humanitarian reasons. AID programs should be tested against the contribution they make toward improving our national security. Recalling that the military could always get Congress to appropriate funds for military assistance, the President asked that Defense Department officials help sell Congress on economic assistance. Some Congressmen will try to cut the heart out of the AID program. Should they succeed, we would be in real danger. A major effort is required to prevent this. We must make every effort to keep countries out of the Communist bloc. Once a country is in, we know from experience that it is very difficult to get it out. We cannot risk the possibility of four or five countries suddenly turning Communist just because we did not give them economic and military aid. An outside group is now reviewing the existing AID program for the purpose of ensuring that our assistance to foreign countries will best serve our own national interest.5

Domestic Issues

In introducing his remarks on domestic issues, the President emphasized the major effort which has been made to hold down the budget deficit now estimated at about $12 billion. The current budget shows increases only for defense, space and the fixed charge of interest on the national debt.

Our economic growth rate over the past ten years, he continued, has been too slow, particularly in view of the great increase in our population.

We must avoid another recession which would endanger our gold position and have a bad psychological effect on the American people. In comparison with the Russians who are making a major effort to improve their domestic economy, we must not give the impression of just drifting lest other states draw the conclusion that we cannot deal with our domestic economic problems.

An unbalanced budget as such is not worrisome especially when we realize that our present deficit is a reflection of the hot and cold war we have been fighting during the past fifteen years. The new tax bill is very important in this respect because if it is passed by the Congress we will be in much better shape.

It is unnecessary to point out that all these matters, AID, defense, economic growth and the tax program are all related. If we become weaker, economically, our influence abroad will be reduced. If this happens, the entire Free World position weakens. It is basic to our national security to have a strong domestic economy.

Defense Problems

Recalling recent decisions limiting or halting certain military programs, e.g. the B-70, Skybolt, and Nike-Zeus, the President said we are going forward with large defense and space programs. If the necessity develops, we will do even more, but there is a limit to how much we can do.

One of our big tasks is to persuade our colleagues in Europe to increase their defense forces. If we are to keep six divisions in Europe, the European states must do more. Why should we have in Europe supplies adequate to fight for ninety days when the European forces around our troops have only enough supplies to fight for two or three days? Our forces in Europe are further forward than the troops of de Gaulle who, instead of committing his divisions to NATO, is banking on us to defend him by maintaining our present military position in Europe. While recognizing the military interests of the Free World, we should consider very hard the narrower interests of the United States.

Test Ban Negotiations

The President reviewed the background of the current negotiations with the USSR on a test ban treaty. Our primary purpose in trying to get a treaty with Russia is to halt or delay the development of an atomic capability by the Chinese Communists.6 We will have a difficult time protecting the free areas of Asia if the Chinese get nuclear weapons. A test ban including only the USSR, the British, and the U.S. would not be very meaningful except in regard to the Chinese problem which the Russians are believed to be as concerned about as we are. If we get a treaty we think we can live with, all of us must support it in order to overcome Congressional opposition which undoubtedly will develop.

Concluding his remarks, the President thanked the assembled officers for their cooperation, commented on the harmonious relations which exist among the Departments and Agencies, and expressed the hope that during the coming year we could build on the solid foundation which now exists.7

l Security Council) According to Legere's memorandum of the White House staff meeting on January 23, “Bundy called the President's talk a ‘bravura' performance, and the expression ‘mood music' was also applied to specific subjects which the President covered.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, White House Memoranda)

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 508th NSC Meeting. Secret. The source text bears no drafting information but it is on White House stationery. There are four other accounts of this meeting, which was held in the Cabinet Room of the White House. An undated account labeled “Done by CIA rapporteur” is ibid. See the Supplement. Another, also undated and entitled “Mr. Hilsman's Remarks at Director's Meeting,” is in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Hilsman Papers, National Security, Hilsman Summary of President's Views 1/22/63. The other two are cited in footnotes 2 and 3 below. See the Supplement.

1 In a memorandum for the record dated January 22, Taylor summarized the President on this point as follows: “The advantage of taking the second course was the fact that the Soviets had time to consider alternatives and turn back the ships, thus avoiding a spasmodic response which might have initiated nuclear war.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Taylor CJCS Memos)

2 A Department of State memorandum of this meeting, also dated January 22, reads in part: “He pointed out that it was a ‘very close thing' between a U.S. decision to mount an air strike against the Soviet installations and the final decision, the quarantine.” (Department of State, Central Files, 711.5/1-2363)

3 On this point, the Department of State memorandum reads: “Also he said, we should be prepared to move not only in Cuba but perhaps in Berlin simultaneously. We now have a hostage in this hemisphere just as the Russians have had one in Berlin for several years.”

4 Taylor's memorandum summarizes the President as saying at this point: “It is through the multilateral concept that we increase the dependence of the European nations on the United States and tie these nations closer to us. Thus, we thwart de Gaulle who wants to cause a split between Europe and the United States.”

5 Reference is to the Committee To Strengthen the Security of the Free World, headed by retired General Lucius D. Clay. See Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. IX, Document 161.

6 Concerning this point, the Department of State memorandum reads: “He thought a test ban agreement might produce pressure against development of such a [Chinese nuclear] capability. Any negotiations that can hold back the Chinese Communists are most important, he said, because they loom as our major antagonists of the late 60's and beyond.”

7 NSC Action No. 2460, dated January 22, states that the Council: “Noted the President's informal statement on major national security problems.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the Nationa

126. Editorial Note 126. Editorial Note

On January 23, 1963, Secretary Rusk designated the Policy Planning Council as the center within the Department of State for coordinating country planning and for minimizing duplication of planning “on both a Departmental and interdepartmental basis.” This action followed agreement by the Tuesday Planning Group on September 1, 1962, of a series of “Experimental Strategic Country Studies” to be initiated by the Council. (Memorandum entitled “Strategic Country Studies,” attached to letter from U. Alexis Johnson to Nitze, January 23, 1963; Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Policy Planning 1963) The Tuesday Planning Group was an interagency subcabinet planning mechanism chaired by Walt Rostow, with White House, Defense, Treasury, USIA, and CIA membership, generally at the rank of Assistant Secretary or equivalent.

On February 28, Rusk sent to the President a memorandum drafted by Walt Rostow entitled “Critical Planning Tasks.” The memorandum described the status of some 32 Basic National Planning Tasks (see Documents 70 and 83), 8 Strategic Studies on individual countries, all in Latin America and Africa, and 13 Political Contingency Plans. Rusk requested that the President “meet soon with a few of your key advisers to review the state of national security planning and, especially, to isolate those planning tasks you personally regard as critical.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, BNSP 1963)

Although Legere reported, in his memorandum of the White House daily staff meeting on March 1, that “both Bundy and Komer felt that such a diffuse paper would not get very far with the President,” Bundy on April 12 forwarded the memorandum to the President with the suggestion that he meet the next week with Rostow, Rusk, and “a very few others.” Bundy's “own guess” was that Rostow needed “a real sense of your own interest and some sense of priorities,” and he concluded that perhaps some long-range problems could be considered in the new Standing Committee (see Document 131). (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chron File, and Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Standing Group Meetings General 4/63-5/63, respectively) No record has been found of any such meeting as Bundy proposed.

For additional information on this topic, see Document 135.

127. Editorial Note 127. Editorial Note

In a memorandum for the record of the White House daily staff meeting on February 4, 1963, Legere wrote:

“If the meeting this morning had any significance, and I think it did, it was less due to anything specific that was said than it was due to an expression of general opinion among the group, particularly Bundy and Kaysen. In a discussion which began by focusing on General de Gaulle once again, Bundy said in the most serious way that he felt there was really no logic whatever to ‘nuclear policy.' What he meant by this was that the military planners who calculate that we will win if only we can kill 100 million Russians while they are killing 30 million Americans are living in total dreamland. He said that ‘the President is certainly not going to win the next election on this issue'; I am not sure what that means either, but believe that Bundy meant to say that the President considers a nuclear Armageddon totally unrealistic.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, White House Memoranda)

128. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) (Johnson) to President Kennedy 128. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency) (Johnson) to President KennedySource

Washington, March 14, 1963.

SUBJECT

Progress in the Counter-Insurgency Program

The last progress report on counter-insurgency activities of the United States Government was presented to you on July 30, 1962,1 and included both a review of Special Group (CI) activities and a full report from each department and agency on their respective achievements in this area since January, 1961. Since then, the Group has continued to encourage establishment of new programs by the departments and agencies, as appropriate, to monitor implementation of Internal Defense Plans for those countries specifically assigned to the Group, to keep under review the senior counter-insurgency training programs, to encourage expansion of civic action programs, and to push police support programs, both in Washington and abroad.

The Group continues to function as a high-level committee whose purpose is to maintain global surveillance of the Communist insurgency threat and to insure that immediate action is taken to counter the threat. Implementation of the Group's decisions continues to be the responsibility of the departments and agencies whose heads are represented on the Group. To avoid bureaucratization, and the proliferation of paper work, the Group has no institutional substructure except for a Subcommittee on Training, whose duty is to keep the broad interdepartmental training effort in counter-insurgency under continuous review, and the Special Group Assistants, who are senior departmental officers responsible for staffing the principals of the Group. It is the latter which is responsible for rapid implementation of policy, as exemplified in the emergency program of riot control and internal security assistance to Latin American countries during the Cuban crisis.

The following paragraphs are intended to supply you with current information relating to the major efforts of the counter-insurgency program.

a. Doctrine. During the summer the Group approved a national doctrine for counter-insurgency entitled “U.S. Overseas Internal Defense Policy.” It was subsequently issued under a National Security Action Memorandum as national policy2 and was disseminated to all diplomatic and consular posts abroad, to major military commands and within the Government's school system. Its purpose is to furnish policy and doctrinal guidance to all United States activities concerned with internal defense of less developed countries.

b. Internal Defense Plans. In order better to organize United States Government operations in the field for the purpose of countering the insurgency threat, Internal Defense Plans have been prepared for all the countries you have assigned to the Group (Bolivia, Cambodia, Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Iran, Laos, Thailand, Venezuela, and Viet-Nam) with the exception of Laos, where, owing to the unique situation, an Internal Defense Plan is not considered to be useful at this time. In addition, a number of other posts have voluntarily initiated Internal Defense Plans in response to the above-mentioned policy paper.

c. Training. In response to your wishes expressed in NSAM 131,3 training programs on counter-insurgency have been established by each department and agency concerned with foreign activities abroad. Under these programs instruction has been given to over 22,150 military and civilian officers since the July progress report.

State—6,176

Defense—12,700

AID—1,594

CIA—963

USIA—721

In addition, within the military services alone, it is planned that counter-insurgency training will reach over 24,000 officers during the next four months. In general, the training program has been carried out through the inclusion of counter-insurgency instruction within the context of regular career courses.

In addition, counter-insurgency training has been included in over twenty-seven major military exercises which have taken place during the last six months. Military mobile counter-insurgency training teams have been deployed to forty countries, representing an increase from seventy-nine to one hundred fourteen teams.

Police training was provided to foreign police officers from twenty-nine countries through training programs in the United States, and at the Inter-American Police Academy in Panama. One hundred twenty-one Latin American police officers received instruction at the Academy, while two hundred seventy-two trainees from various parts of the world received instruction in the United States.

At the senior level, the new Interdepartmental Seminar on Problems of Development and Internal Defense was established at the Foreign Service Institute last June to provide training for senior personnel going abroad to responsible positions in crisis areas. The Seminar will offer five sessions of five weeks each during 1963. Two hundred seventy-eight personnel from State, Defense, AID, USIA, and CIA have graduated from the Seminar to date.

d. Review of Paramilitary Assets. As you are aware, in June, 1961 it was decided to make a review of the paramilitary assets of the United States and of the likely requirements for their use. The completed report indicated that in some cases our resources are inadequate. Action is being taken by the responsible departments and agencies to overcome the deficiencies. A six-months study to identify research and development areas in need of emphasis was completed in December. A report will shortly be submitted to the Group, setting forth what has been done by the two agencies concerned to overcome the deficiencies noted in the study.

e. Civic Action. In the field of civic action the Group has continued to encourage expansion, both within the areas of large scale activities such as Latin America and Southeast Asia, and in the yet untapped areas of the Near East and Africa. In Africa civic action programs are planned for Senegal and Liberia. In the Near East programs are under way in Jordan, Iran, and Pakistan. In Southeast Asia a significant program has recently been initiated in Indonesia, where it is believed that the planned civic action program can make a significant contribution to the economic development of the country and the productive employment of the military forces. In all, civic action programs currently being funded total over $72 million, of which $40 million are for South Viet-Nam.

f. Police Assistance. An expanded and reinvigorated program of police assistance to underdeveloped countries has been initiated during the past six months. The worldwide level of this program has increased from about $14 million in FY 1962 to about $30 million in FY 1963. We currently provide advice, assistance, and equipment through police advisory missions to thirty countries and have centralized the administration of the program in a new Office of Public Safety located within AID. New missions are being planned for eight other countries.

Summary. Recognition has been obtained throughout the United States Government that subversive insurgency is a major form of politico/military conflict. Necessary adjustments have been made within the organizations of the several departments and agencies. Counter-insurgency doctrine has been developed, and issued as national policy. Emphasis has been given to counter-insurgency throughout the Government's school systems concerned with foreign affairs. Research and development activities of the military and intelligence services have been reviewed and adjusted to counter-insurgency needs. Paramilitary resources, civic action programs, and police support programs have all been expanded. Internal Defense Plans have been prepared for the countries assigned to the Group.4

U. Alexis Johnson5

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Special Group 7/3/62-5/20/63. Secret. Drafted by Thomas W. Davis of the White House Staff and Charles W. Maechling, Jr., Director for Internal Defense in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State. NSAM No. 204, November 7, 1962, designated U. Alexis Johnson as Chairman of the Special Group (CI). (Ibid., NSAM 204)

1 Document 102.a

2 See Document 105 and footnote 2 thereto.

3 In NSAM No. 131, dated March 13, 1962, and signed by McGeorge Bundy, the President directed several measures to increase government-wide training objectives for counter-insurgency. (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 131)

4 A June 25 memorandum, signed for Taylor by Goodpaster, reports on military counterinsurgency programs (including civic action) from December 1962 to June 1963. (Ibid., Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 451, SG(CI) 6/20/63-8/1/63)

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Johnson signed the original.

129. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant (Yarmolinsky) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 129. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense's Special Assistant (Yarmolinsky) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, March 15, 1963.

This is in response to your request for an addendum to our “Missile Gap” memorandum to the President.1 You asked that we focus on precisely what happened in January-February 1961 which led to Mr. McNamara's background remarks on the non-existence of a missile gap.2 In terms of additional intelligence or a reappraisal of Soviet or U.S. strength, the fact is that nothing happened. As noted in our previous memorandum, the term “missile gap” was an extremely fuzzy one, and it was almost impossible to discuss the subject without saying something which was misleading, or at least sure to be interpreted in a misleading way. In short, there was, and was not, a missile gap in early 1961, depending on whether you included Polaris or not; whether you were worried that the Air Force estimate might be right or not; whether you were thinking of a strategically significant gap or merely a comparison of raw numbers, regardless of the practical significance; and whether you were talking about something now or something we feared was coming. It was under these circumstances that reporters came away from Mr. McNamara's background briefing with the impression that he had said there was no gap.3

Given the disinclination of the Secretary of Defense to say anything to imply that the U.S. was no longer confident it could defend its vital interests, and taking into account the stories by responsible observers suggesting the contrary, it is not surprising that the Secretary took this line. (See, for example, Richard Rovere's Letter from Washington for 11 January 1961, which is attached.)4 For, given the confusions in which the whole “missile gap” controversy was immersed, the Secretary could not say anything without being misleading, and he naturally preferred to lean towards the chance of being misinterpreted on the side of confidence in U.S. ability to defend itself.

If we are asked, in a political context, what was the difference between Mr. McNamara denying there was a gap and the Eisenhower Administration saying the same thing, the answer is this: Under Eisenhower, the denial that there was no gap was accompanied by a belief, at the highest levels, that our defense posture was adequate; under the new Administration, the denial was accompanied by an intense awareness that although we were not in immediate great danger, urgent immediate steps were nevertheless needed to improve our defense position. Thus, although there was little difference in what Defense officials said about the missile gap before and after January 1961, there were major differences in what was done about the missile gap and the whole range of defense deficiencies which this term had come to symbolize.5

Adam

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Subjects Series, Missile Gap 2/63-5/63. Secret. Marked “weekend reading.”

1 In a March 4 memorandum to the President, McNamara described the missile gap controversy from 1956 onwards. He stated that comparison of the high side of estimates from NIEs in the fall of 1960 with projected ICBM inventories still indicated a possible 1962 missile gap; that by June 1961 it was “apparent that Soviet ICBM deployment had not proceeded as rapidly as was previously estimated” and that the “most dramatic downward revision in estimates” took place in September 1961. (Ibid.) For the forecasts made in June and September 1961, see Documents 29 and 45. For a formal estimate of Soviet ICBM activity, which was not revised for the remainder of 1960, see NIE 11-8-60, August 1, 1960, in Foreign Relations, 1958-1960, vol. III, Document 111.

2 Bundy made his request during a telephone call to Yarmolinsky on March 4: “I called him March 4 to say that we wanted more on the immediate period when we said there was no missile gap—Dec 60-Feb 61.” (Handwritten note on memorandum from Yarmolinsky to Bundy enclosing McNamara's March 4 memorandum cited in footnote 2 above)

3 See Document 14.

4 Not attached. The article was published in The New Yorker, January 11, 1961.

5 In a May 15 memorandum to Bundy, President Kennedy wrote in part: “The report that we got was too superficial. I want to be able to demonstrate that there was a military and intelligence lag in the previous administration that started the missile gap.” (Kennedy Library, President's Office Files, McGeorge Bundy 1962-1963) A May 31 memorandum from Nitze to Bundy encloses a 24-page memorandum by Lawrence McQuade, Special Assistant to Nitze, entitled “Where Did the Missile Gap Go?” With another memorandum to Bundy, dated June 17, Nitze enclosed a 20-page study on public statements made by various participants in the missile-gap controversy. (Both ibid., National Security Files, Subject Series, Missile Gap 6/63-7/63)

130. National Intelligence Estimate 130. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, March 22, 1963.

NIE 11-4-63

SOVIET MILITARY CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1962-1967

The Problem

To review significant developments in Soviet military thinking, policy, and programs, to assess the current Soviet military posture, and to estimate main trends in Soviet military capabilities and policies over the next five years.

Scope Note

This estimate presents our main conclusions on the broad range of major Soviet military problems. It includes, inter alia, summary versions of recent National Intelligence Estimates, updated as appropriate, devoted to individual military missions and other related questions.

Summary and Conclusions

Basic Views on War

A. The Soviets see military power as serving two basic purposes: defense of their system and support for its expansion. Thus, one of the most important objectives of Soviet military policy is to deter general war while the USSR prosecutes its foreign policies by means short of actual hostilities involving Soviet forces. The Soviets recognize that their deterrent must be credible in the sense that it rests upon powerful military forces. They also recognize that deterrence may fail in some key confrontation in which either they or their opponents come to feel that vital interests are under challenge. Against this contingency they wish to have a combination of offensive and defensive capabilities which will enable them to seize the initiative if possible, to survive enemy nuclear attack, and to go on to prosecute the war. We do not believe, however, that the Soviets base their military planning or their general policy upon the expectation that they will be able to achieve, within the foreseeable future, a military posture which would make rational the deliberate initiation of general war or conscious acceptance of grave risks of such a war. (Paras. 1-3)

B. A number of Soviet statements in recent years have expressed the view that limited war involving the major nuclear powers would inevitably escalate into general war. While such statements are intended in part to deter the West from local use of force, this official view also reflects a genuine Soviet fear of the consequences of becoming directly engaged in limited war involving Soviet and US forces. This probably also extends to involvement of Soviet forces with certain Allied forces in highly critical areas, notably Western forces in the European area. Nevertheless, they might employ their own forces to achieve local gains in some area adjacent to Bloc territory if they judged that the West, either because it was deterred by Soviet nuclear power or for some other reason, would not make an effective military response. They would probably employ Soviet forces as necessary if some Western military action on the periphery of the Bloc threatened the integrity of the Bloc itself. Should the USSR become directly involved in a limited war with US or Allied forces, we believe that the Soviets would not necessarily expand it immediately into general war, but that they would probably employ only that force which they thought necessary to achieve their local objectives. They would also seek to prevent escalation by political means. (Paras. 4-5)

C. The Soviets recognize another type of limited military conflict, termed a “war of national liberation,” in which pro-Soviet or anti-Western forces challenge colonial or pro-Western regimes in a primarily internal struggle. The Soviets have rendered active assistance in some such conflicts, and little or none in others, depending upon such practical factors as accessibility, the risk of defeat, and the attitude of other powers involved. In addition, the USSR has given military assistance to friendly, non-Bloc regimes. As new and favorable opportunities arise, the Soviets will continue to offer these various kinds of assistance. We believe, however, that they will remain chary of any great commitment of prestige to the support of belligerents over whom they do not exercise substantial control or in circumstances in which they feel that winning is unlikely, and they will seek to avoid risk of widened hostilities which might result from “wars of national liberation.” (Paras. 6-8)

General Trends in Military Doctrine and Policy

D. Current Soviet military policy stems from Khrushchev's plan, announced in January 1960, to cut back the size of the armed forces and to place main reliance on nuclear and missile forces. The plan reflected his view that a general war is almost certain to be short, with victory decided in the strategic nuclear exchange, and with conventional arms playing a quite secondary role. Khrushchev's plan was accepted only reluctantly by the military leadership; both the plan and its strategic justification have since undergone substantial modification. Present Soviet military doctrine holds that a general war will inevitably involve the massive use of nuclear weapons; it will begin with a strategic exchange, and its course and outcome may well be decided in its initial phase. Hence, doctrinal discussion emphasizes the importance of seizing the initiative by pre-emptive attack if, in the Soviet view, general war becomes imminent and unavoidable. However, the current doctrine holds that such a conflict will not necessarily be short, and it supports both the building of strategic attack and defense capabilities and the maintenance of large theater and naval forces. (Paras. 13-16)

E. The Soviet leaders evidently believe that the present overall military relationship, in which each side can exert a strong deterrent upon the other, will probably continue for some time to come. However, they almost certainly regard the present strategic posture of the USSR as inferior to that of the US, and they are aware of the continuing buildup of US forces for intercontinental attack programmed for the next few years. In this situation, they probably do not expect to be able to obtain a clear strategic superiority over the US, but we believe that the Soviets are far from willing to accept a position of strategic inferiority. Our evidence does not indicate that the Soviets are attempting to outstrip or even match the US in numbers of weapons for intercontinental attack; we believe, however, that they will attempt to offset US superiority by other means.1 (Paras. 21-26)

F. The Soviets may see a possible solution to their strategic confrontation with the US in a combination of antimissile defenses plus very effective though numerically inferior intercontinental striking forces. We believe that deployment of antimissile defenses may be the largest new Soviet military program in the period of this estimate. Hardened ICBM's and submerged-launch submarine missiles will contribute to Soviet strategic capabilities. In addition, over the next few years the Soviet arsenal will probably come to include new large ICBMs, armed with very high-yield warheads or capable of global ranges. Moreover, the USSR is almost certainly investigating the feasibility of space systems for military support and offensive and defensive weapons. (Paras. 27-28)

G. Official statements and military writings suggest that the Soviet leaders see in technological achievements the means by which they may improve their total strategic position relative to that of the US. They have made scientific military research and the development of new weapons matters of high urgency, and they have a demonstrated ability to concentrate human and material resources on priority objectives. If they develop new concepts or new weapons which give promise of military and political advantages, they will seek to add them rapidly to their arsenal and to gain maximum benefit from them. Thus, during the next five years, we expect the Soviets to be working on even more advanced weapons with which they may hope to enhance their strategic capabilities at a later date.2 (Para. 30)

H. The USSR's military programs and space efforts impose costly demands upon Soviet resources. The effort to modernize and strengthen all arms of the Soviet forces simultaneously squeezes hard on resources available for investment and consumption goals to which the leadership is strongly committed. Thus, Khrushchev may once again seek a reduction in resources devoted to theater forces on the grounds that growing nuclear capabilities will permit this cutback without endangering Soviet security. But while such a reduction would reduce expenditures for military pay and release manpower to the economy, it would not significantly reduce the demands of the defense establishment on critically scarce, high quality resources and highly skilled manpower. (Paras. 40-46)

I. Despite the possibility of a future reduction in theater forces, Khrushchev's 27 February speech indicates that the Soviet leadership has recently taken economic decisions which reaffirm military priorities at the expense of consumer aspirations; beyond this it may reflect a decision to increase military spending above previously planned levels. The Soviet economy is capable of bearing a heavier military burden, but not without sacrifices in the program to raise living standards and perhaps also reductions in the future rate of industrial growth. For the present, the Soviets appear to have chosen to risk these consequences, but we believe that the problem of resource allocation will continue to plague the Soviet leadership. (Para. 47)

J. Soviet military policy will continue to be shaped, not only by a variety of strategic, technical, economic, and political factors, but also by differing views about the relative importance of these factors, and shifting compromises among these views. As a result, we believe that the numerous aspects of this policy will not always be wholly consistent with each other, and that force structure and future programming will reflect neither a fully-integrated strategic doctrine nor a firm timetable for achieving specific force levels. We do not believe that the Soviets conceive of existing weapon systems as the answer to their military problem, or that they have fixed and inflexible plans for their force structure in the period five to 10 years from now. Barring some major technical advance in weaponry, we believe that Soviet military policy is likely to continue along current lines, and that for at least the next few years large standing forces of all types will be maintained. Even in the absence of such an advance, however, we cannot exclude the possibility of new departures in military policy, perhaps resulting in major changes in the composition of the Soviet military establishment and in the relative emphasis given to forces designed to accomplish the major military missions. (Paras. 29-30)

Forces for Long Range Attack

K. Although missile forces for attack on Eurasia continue to grow, major emphasis in the building of long-range striking forces has evidently shifted to forces for intercontinental attack, primarily ICBMs. We estimate Soviet ICBM strength at the end of 1962 at 80-85 operational launchers, including a few silo-type hardened launchers. By mid-1964, the force will probably have reached 250-325, including 75-100 silos. The Soviet ICBM force estimated for the next two years will consist primarily of missiles equipped with warheads in the low megaton range; it could include a few missiles with very high-yield warheads. We believe that the major trends in this force to 1967 will be: growth of the force to some hundreds of launchers; hardening of a significant portion of the force; and availability of some missiles capable of delivering very high-yield warheads (up to 100 MT).3 ,4 (Paras. 48-57)

[Here follows a table that shows estimates of approximate totals of 175-225 operational ICBM launchers, including 30-50 hard launchers, by mid-1964.] [Footnote in the source text.]

[Here follows a table that shows estimates of approximate totals of 300-450 operational ICBM launchers, including 100-150 hard launchers, by mid-1964.] [Footnote in the source text.]

L. The Soviets now have operational about 45 ballistic missile submarines—nine of them nuclear-powered—which carry a combined total of about 125 short-range (350 n.m.) missiles designed for surfaced launching. The USSR is developing longer range missiles for launching from submerged submarines. In addition, the Soviets have developed submarine-launched cruise missiles, which are probably designed primarily for use against ships but could be employed against land targets. In mid-1967, the Soviets will probably have more than two dozen nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines, and about 20 nuclear-powered cruise missile submarines. By that time, they will probably have initiated routine submarine patrols within missile range of the US. (Paras. 64-68)

M. Soviet Long Range Aviation, by reason of its equipment, basing and deployment, is much better suited for Eurasian operations than for intercontinental attack. However, the Soviets have given considerable emphasis to aerial refueling and to Arctic training. Excluding combat attrition, we estimate that the Soviets could put about 200 aircraft over North America on two-way missions; of these, about half would be heavy bombers. Long Range Aviation now comprises about 170-200 heavy bombers and tankers and about 950 jet medium bombers and tankers. We continue to estimate a gradual decline in numerical strength. A portion of the Badger medium bomber force will be replaced by the new supersonic Blinder, already in units, but our evidence does not indicate that any new heavy bomber is being developed for operational use. By mid-1967, Long Range Aviation will probably comprise some 110-140 heavy bombers and about 750 mediums.5 (Paras. 69-75)

The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, further estimates that a follow-on heavy bomber will probably be introduced in about 1964. The continued development of large aircraft capable of supersonic speed, and research in applicable materials, structures, and other components substantiate the Soviets interest in large supersonic vehicles and suggest an intent to increase their strategic attack capability by such means. The Bounder probably has served a most useful purpose as a test bed for many components, aerodynamic advancements, and a structural design which are directly applicable to a follow-on heavy bomber capable of supersonic speeds. He estimates the total Soviet heavy bomber and tanker strength will remain at approximately 200 aircraft throughout the period of this estimate, present strength levels being maintained by the introduction of modest numbers of a new heavy bomber. [Footnote in the source text.]

N. We estimate that the Soviet MRBM and IRBM force now comprises about 600 completed launch positions, deployed for the most part in western USSR within range of NATO targets in Europe. The bulk of these launch positions are soft, but a few silo-type hardened sites are probably operational. We believe that deployment of soft sites will have been virtually completed early this year, leveling off at about 600 launch positions; the hardened component of the force will continue to grow, probably reaching about 100-150 launchers in mid-1964. It is possible that as many as half of the soft launch positions are alternates, in which case the first salvo capability of the force would be considerably smaller, although still large enough to devastate Western Europe. (Paras. 58-63)

O. In the event of general war in the period of this estimate, the USSR would almost certainly employ against the US a mixed force of ICBMs, missile submarines, and bomber aircraft. By the mid-1960's, the USSR will have acquired a substantially increased ICBM and submarine-launched missile capability to deliver nuclear weapons against the US, in addition to its already formidable forces for strikes in Eurasia. Significant portions of these forces will be relatively invulnerable to attack. The Soviets will be in a position to strike pre-emptively at the fixed bases of an important segment of the US nuclear delivery force, and they will have some prospect that a portion of their own force could survive an initial US attack and retaliate with high-yield weapons. With the forces which we estimate, however, the Soviets could still not expect to destroy the growing force of US hardened, airborne, seaborne, and fast reaction nuclear delivery vehicles. (Paras. 78-81)

Air and Missile Defense Forces

P. The significant improvements in the Soviet air defense system noted during recent years will be extended during the next few years, and successful penetration by manned bombers will therefore require increasingly sophisticated forms of attack. The Soviet air defense capability can be degraded by the increasingly complex forms of attack which the West will be able to employ, including air-launched missiles of present and more advanced types, penetration tactics, and electronic countermeasures. Even in such circumstances, the Soviets would probably expect to destroy a number of the attackers. We doubt, however, that they would be confident that they could reduce the weight of attack to a point where the resulting da the USSR would be acceptable. Unless and until the USSR is able to deploy a substantial number of advanced ABM defenses, the USSR's air and missile defense deficiencies and uncertainties will sharply increase as ballistic missiles assume a larger proportion of the West's total nuclear delivery capability. (Paras. 82, 89-105)

Q. The major development which we foresee in Soviet defense is the advent of a capability against ballistic missiles. For more than five years, the Soviets have been conducting a high priority and extensive program to develop antimissile defenses, and we estimate that several different ABM systems are under development. We believe that in 1963 the Soviets will achieve some operational capability with an ABM system now being deployed around Leningrad. We have no basis for determining its effectiveness, but doubt that it would be effective against missiles employing decoys or other countermeasures. The USSR is probably also developing an antisatellite system. (Paras. 83-84, 88)

R. To counter the more complex long-range ballistic missile threat of the mid-1960's, the Soviets may seek to improve the Leningrad system, or may develop a more advanced system, or both. In any case, the USSR is likely to defer additional ABM deployment until a better system is available. If the Soviets develop an ABM system which they regard as reasonably effective against long-range missiles, a vigorous deployment program will probably be undertaken. We believe that such a program would contemplate the defense of some 20-25 principal Soviet cities and would require some five or six years to complete. We have no basis for judging whether or when the Soviets would consider their ABM system effective enough to warrant the initiation of such a program. (Paras. 85-86)

Theater Forces

S. The longstanding Soviet concern with concepts and forces for campaigns in adjoining theaters, especially in Europe, has resulted in a formidable theater force, strong in armor, battlefield mobility, and units in being. The tactical nuclear delivery capabilities of these forces are still limited, but they have been improved markedly over the past few years. In offensive operations, rapidly advancing theater forces would be in constant danger of outrunning their logistical tail, which is heavily dependent on railroads. Finally, the Soviets have traditionally exercised very strict supervision over the actions of their subordinates, but existing command and control systems do not permit this strict supervision over the widely extended deployment required on the nuclear battlefield or under the threat of use of nuclear weapons. (Paras. 106-124)

Naval Forces

T. The USSR's capabilities to conduct naval warfare in the open seas rest primarily upon the submarine force, which is capable of mounting a large-scale torpedo attack and mining campaign against Allied naval targets and sea communications in the eastern North Atlantic and northwestern Pacific. Its capabilities for operations near the continental US are more limited, but are growing. Capabilities against carrier task forces have been improved by the conversion of jet bombers to employ anti-ship missiles, by the introduction of submarines equipped with cruise-type missiles, and by increased air reconnaissance of open ocean areas by Long Range and Naval Aviation. The Soviets have also placed increasing emphasis on improvement of ASW forces in coastal areas and in the open seas. We believe the Soviet Navy is capable of carrying out fairly effective ASW operations in coastal areas, but that it has a negligible ASW capability in the open seas. Despite the effort which they almost certainly are devoting to this problem, we believe that over the next five years, the USSR will be able to achieve only a limited capability to detect, identify, localize, and maintain surveillance on submarines operating in the open seas.6 (Paras. 125-147)

While over the next five years, it is probable that the USSR will have only a limited ASW capability in the open seas, it must be recognized that the effort being applied by the USSR toward solution of the ASW problem will reduce current deficiencies and possibly could result in marked improvement in Soviet open seas capabilities. [Footnote in the source text.]

[Here follows the “Discussion” section, 45 pages of text. See the Supplement.]

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, National Intelligence Estimates. Top Secret; Limited Distribution; Controlled Dissemination. A table of contents and Annexes A, B, and C (30 pages of tables) are not printed. See the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, agrees that the Soviets probably do not expect to be able to achieve a position of clear strategic superiority over the US during the time period of this estimate and that they are far from willing to accept a position of strategic inferiority. However, he believes that the USSR is pursuing an intensive research and development effort in the hope of attaining technological breakthroughs which, when translated into weapon systems, will result in a clear strategic superiority at a later date. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 See the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, footnote to Conclusion E. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, dissents to this projection of force levels. Since the Soviet ICBM launcher construction program for second generation systems has been under way for nearly three years and has resulted in only some 80 operational launchers, it appears most unrealistic to him to estimate that from 175 to 250 operational launchers will become operational during the next 16 to 17 months. He therefore estimates as follows:

4 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believes that available intelligence, collected over a long period of time, provides a basis for differing interpretations of the magnitude of the Soviet ICBM program and the approximate time required for site construction. Experience has shown that even with the best available intelligence, and where evidence appeared to be complete, continuing analysis had indicated that ICBM launch sites exist which were not initially identified. Because of the history of expanding ICBM locations and the absence of complete, up-to-date intelligence, he believes that undetected launchers in varying degrees of construction, now exist at the confirmed complexes. Further, he also believes there are additional complexes mostly under construction at yet unidentified locations. He would therefore estimate the number of operational ICBM launchers, including those at the Tyuratam test range, through mid-1964 as follows:

5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, does not consider that this paragraph accurately reflects the capability of the USSR to put aircraft over North America on two-way missions. He believes that with due consideration of all relevant factors, such as number of aircraft in Long Range Aviation, numbers of aircraft tanker configured and peak availability rate, the Soviets could commit about 750 aircraft to initial two-way attacks on North America. From this number committed, about 300 bombers could reach North American targets.

6 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, would delete the last sentence and substitute the following:

131. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Kennedy 131. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President KennedySource

Washington, April 2, 1963.

SUBJECT

A Standing Committee of the National Security Council1

As you know, there has been considerable discussion in recent months of the need for strengthening interdepartmental planning and coordination on major national security issues. We made a major step forward at the time of the October crisis when you established a working senior committee of advisers, first by your de facto choice of individuals for the work of the first week, and then by formally establishing the Executive Committee of the NSC on October 22.2 The Executive Committee, with you and the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense on hand, is a good instrument for major interdepartmental decision. It is not so good for lesser matters of coordination, and it has not proved effective at all, except during the extraordinary week of October 16-22, in the process of forward planning.

I have talked at some length with the Secretary of State, the Attorney General, Averell Harriman, and others, in an effort to find a new pattern which would help in both planning and operations. I have come out with the following guidelines: 1. One new committee should be responsible for planning and operations at the level short of your own controlling judgment. We have done well in this Administration not to let planning get separated from the responsibility for action, and vice versa. We should not abandon this principle now.

2. The committee should be established at a sufficiently senior level so that it is not merely a staff exercise. In my judgment, this means that with four exceptions its membership should be parallel to that of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council. It should include such men as the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, Ed Murrow, John McCone, and probably Max Taylor. The people it should not include, in my judgment, are the President and Vice President, and the two Cabinet officers with a final responsibility for policy advice to you, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense. Neither of these two Cabinet officers can speak in committee without engaging the whole weight of a great advisory department, and both of them have preferred not to be pinned to any procedure in which their direct responsibilities to you might somehow be absorbed in a committee process.

3. The Plans and Operations Committee should be chaired from the White House, presumably by me, but it should rely mainly upon State, Defense, and CIA for staff work. For this reason, it is of the greatest importance that the State representative be a man with a broad and continuous operational responsibility, but also with time and energy for this particular assignment. I think it clear that the right man, on these grounds, is Averell Harriman, using the Policy Planning Council for plans and the several bureaus for operational problems. Of course, nothing should prevent the presence at relevant sessions of any officer of the State Department (on a number of problems George Ball would probably wish to come and on some the Secretary might want to break his own rule), but it is critical to the success of such a committee that there be a single senior member of the State Department to whom I can turn for daily business, and on this basis, Averell is the logical man in the logical job.

4. The committee should meet weekly, and it should have as little continuing infrastructure as possible. Except for State, Defense, and CIA—its members should attend as individuals and not as representatives of agencies. If a man cannot come, in other words, no one automatically comes in his place—except in the case of State, Defense, and CIA, where the departments simply have to be included.

In sum, what I recommend is that you establish a Plans and Operations Committee on this general basis. My recommendation is that its initial composition should be as follows:

The Political Under Secretary, the Deputy Secretary, and the Director, for State, Defense, and CIA, respectively; the following as members by your personal appointment: Douglas Dillon, Robert Kennedy, Edward Murrow, Dave Bell, Maxwell Taylor (subject to his agreement—he is terribly stretched), Theodore Sorensen, and Llewellyn Thompson.3 The chairman of this committee should be myself, and its administrative support should be provided by Mr. Bromley Smith.

5. The Plans and Operations Committee should not occupy itself with business better handled through other channels. In particular it should not try to get on the cables or to replace the manifold arrangements through which your own executive business is now conducted. Still less should it be concerned with matters of daily Departmental operation. It should, instead, be alert to planning problems that are a little less ripe than today's required decisions: like Cuba a year from now—or China in 1965. It should serve as a ready medium for review of ongoing programs with strongly interdepartmental aspects: I think of overseas base planning, of counter-insurgency support, and of information policy as examples. It should be used for the occasional discursive review of drastic alternatives to existing policy, and its members should be encouraged to table unorthodox ideas for such review. It would be a logical plan [place?] for occasional review of Intelligence estimates in progress, from the point of view of their relevance to Plans and Operations.

6. If you approve of this general proposal, I shall work out a formal memorandum for your signature after checking again with those most closely concerned.4

McG. B.5

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Standing Group Meetings, General 4/63-5/63. Secret.

1 On the source text the word “Standing” in Bundy's handwriting replaces the typed phrase “Plans and Operations.” The proposed committee is referred to throughout the memorandum as the Plans and Operations Committee.

2 The formal instrument for establishing the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, known also as EXCOM, was NSAM No. 196, dated October 22. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, NSAM 196) The 42 meetings of the Executive Committee were held through March 29, 1963, and were largely, although not exclusively, devoted to Cuba.

3 On the source text Llewellyn Thompson's name is crossed out. Bundy's marginal note reads: “ad hoc”.

4 No memorandum has been found. All the people suggested by Bundy except Thompson and Dillon became members of the new Standing Group, which held its first meeting on March 29. Henry H. Fowler, Under Secretary of the Treasury, became a member in Dillon's place. Of the 14 meetings held through October 1, 10 concerned Cuba in whole or in part. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Standing Group Meetings 1963) A previous, smaller Standing Group, consisting of U. Alexis Johnson as Chairman, Roswell Gilpatric, John McCone, and McGeorge Bundy, held 15 meetings on a wide variety of topics from January 5 through August 3, 1962. (Ibid., Standing Group Meetings 1962)

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

132. Memorandum From the JCS Chairman's Special Assistant (Goodpaster) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze) 132. Memorandum From the JCS Chairman's Special Assistant (Goodpaster) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Nitze)Source

Washington, April 20, 1963.

SUBJECT

Major Military Issues in Basic National Security Policy

1. Attached is the document that I believe should be distributed for the discussions between the Secretary and the Joint Chiefs of Staff on basic national security policy. The document consists of three parts: a. A brief covering memorandum explaining the procedures used in developing the material.

b. A summary of the six major issues.

c. A three-column (State, JCS, OSD/ISA) tabulation of the issues as extracted from the appropriate draft BNSP documents.1

2. With your concurrence I will have the document circulated to the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

A. J. Goodpaster2
Major General, USA

Attachment

3 Washington, April 20, 1963.

DRAFT

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE4

SUBJECT

Major Military Issues in Basic National Security Policy

1. Attached are six major issues with military implications extracted from various draft BNSP documents. In three columns are shown the view of: a. The State Department (from their 2 August 1962 draft of BNSP);5

b. The Joint Chiefs of Staff (from the 7 December 1962 JCS comments on the State Department draft BNSP);6 and

c. OSD/ISA (from the 25 March 1963 ISA revision of the State Department draft, taking into consideration the JCS comments of December 1962).7

Covering the detailed views is a brief summation of the State Department, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and OSD/ISA positions on these issues. The Office of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, prepared the materials in coordination with OSD/ISA.

2. The issues in the attachments cover selected major divergencies in the present draft versions of the BNSP. Other points of issue would undoubtedly arise in the consideration of any complete document.

3. This memorandum and its attachments will be used as the basis for discussion of basic policy issues at the forthcoming meeting of the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to be scheduled when the Chairman returns.8

Attachment

9 DRAFT

SELECTED ISSUES IN BASIC NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY

Summary

Attachment 1: Strategic Retaliatory Forces

Neither the State Department nor OSD/ISA believe a first strike against substantially all Soviet nuclear delivery systems appears practical; hence, they do not think it desirable as a policy directive, and would not increase strategic forces for attainment of this goal. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the other hand, believe a first strike capability is both feasible and desirable, both for deterrence and to lessen the probability of defeat should general war occur. They recognize that the degree of success will depend upon US force levels and on US reaction to changing Soviet capabilities.

Attachment 2: General Purpose Forces

The Joint Chiefs of Staff would give essential non-nuclear and nuclear requirements equal priority, emphasize the dual capability of these forces, and thus would not attempt to have general purpose forces large enough to defeat a major Soviet conventional assault with conventional forces only. Rather, they would have Allied forces equipped with tactical nuclear weapons for deterrence and for use if necessary. The State Department would give priority to conventional forces build-up, and would defer on a doctrine for the use of tactical nuclear weapons pending completion of studies on the subject. The State Department would not now plan to defeat a major Soviet assault with conventional weapons but would set this as a desirable goal in the future.OSD/ISA agrees with State on giving priority to conventional forces and the limited value of tactical nuclear weapons. ISA would establish interim conventional force goals at the MC 26/4 level.

Attachment 3: NATO Policy

The divergent views on the role and size of conventional and tactical nuclear forces outlined in the issue above on General Purpose forces are highlighted again in the NATO section. The State Department and OSD/ISA believe the Soviet conventional threat in Europe is somewhat less than do the Joint Chiefs of Staff. In addition, the State Department and OSD/ISA would have the US adopt as basic policy endorsement of a sea based, multilateral mix-manned MRBM for NATO. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, while recognizing the national decision on this point, would not write the decision in the basic policy document because of the evolving nature of this problem.

Attachment 4: Arms Control and Disarmament

The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that arms control agreements should include all major powers. OSD/ISA and the State Department believe in partial agreements. In addition, the Joint Chiefs of Staff would link arms control and disarmament agreements, and their implementation, more explicitly to military security implications, the possible consequences of Soviet sudden abrogation, and our treaty commitments than would either OSD/ISA or the State Department. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would thus move more cautiously in this field.

Attachment 5: Communist China

The State Department and OSD/ISA would adopt a “two China” policy. The Joint Chiefs of Staff oppose adoption of such a policy without a thorough analysis of its implications.

Attachment 6: Research and Development

The State Department and OSD/ISA advocate that the US seek a selective superiority in military technology, with especial emphasis on conventional weapons. Neither would stress military space research. OSD/ISA would recognize the need to increase the means to reduce damage to the US in general war but emphasizes the difficulties attendant to, and the questionable value of, current AICBM programs and other advanced research programs. The Joint Chiefs of Staff would have the US seek across-the-board military technological superiority.

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, BNSP. Top Secret. Attached to a covering note from Major Smith to Nitze.

1 Not found attached.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Goodpaster signed the original.

3 Top Secret.

4 In his memoirs, Nitze wrote that he sent a “memorandum” summarizing six issues to McNamara “in the spring of 1963 and asked him to resolve them. He refused and sent it back with the comment that he didn't believe there was anything to be gained by the formulation of such a document. He suggested that a reading of the President's and his (McNamara's) public statements was sufficient to delineate our national security policy.” (Paul H. Nitze, From Hiroshima to Glasnost: At the Center of Decision: A Memoir (New York: Grove Weidenfeld, 1989), p. 252)

5 See the source note, Document 93.

6 Document 119.

7 Not printed. Copies are in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Drafts, and ibid., S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Basic National Security Policy.

8 Concerning a meeting between McNamara and the Joint Chiefs on this issue, see Document 136.

9 Top Secret.

133. Editorial Note 133. Editorial Note

In a memorandum to Secretary McNamara dated July 15, 1963, President Kennedy wrote that he was “tremendously impressed with the Special Forces Unit in West Germany. However, I am wondering if we are making the best use of this unit?” Kennedy believed that it was a “wasted effort” to keep this unit “where prospects of guerilla action are very slight.” Instead “they could be demonstrating and training all over the underdeveloped world where the guerilla actions are rising in intensity.” A July 24 memorandum from Taylor to Kennedy noted that some of the six existing Special Forces Units were already operating along the lines suggested by Kennedy. One in Panama had “dispatched Spanish speaking mobile training teams” to nine Central and South American countries, and detachments from the one in Okinawa had conducted demonstrations or counterinsurgency training in six Asian countries. Taylor concluded that “it would appear that the worldwide program for the employment of Army Special Forces is generally consistent with the desires which you have expressed in your memorandum of July 15,” but that it was “probable more can be done and the Joint Chiefs of Staff will keep under review the adequacy and employment of the Army Special Forces as well as Air Force Commando and Navy Units.”

On July 26, Kennedy sent a memorandum to Rusk stating that he had “been very much impressed by the appearance and demeanor of the special forces I have seen and believe that their presence in other countries can project a U.S. image which will be a very useful political influence. To do so it is important that the size of the cadres be sufficiently large to have an impact. Since the judgment of our Ambassadors in the countries concerned will be dominant in both the decision to introduce the forces and the decision as to their size, I believe that you should send a letter to those Ambassadors in countries where the forces are likely to be employed, calling attention to the importance of these points.”

(On March 8, 1962, circular airgram CA-2108, sent to all diplomatic posts, had described U.S. Special Warfare capabilities, and invited addressees to comment “on desirability and political feasibility utilizing these US capabilities to supplement functions of present MAAG/Missions or (where no MAAG/Mission exists) Embassy.”)

Circular airgram CA-1507, August 5, drafted jointly in G/PM and OSD and approved by U. Alexis Johnson, was sent to a large number of Latin American, Near Eastern, African, and Asian posts. It stated that the President had “directed that appropriate Country Teams examine the possibility of increased use of U.S. Military Mobile Training Teams (MMTs) which have proved so successful in many areas of the world in preventing and combating subversive insurgency.” Additional suggestions by Ambassadors for such training were “invited where applicable and practicable” and where requested by the host government.

In a memorandum for the record dated September 3, Clifton noted that the President had said that CA-1507 “would not get anyone steamed up. It is not a sales job, and he feels it is really a very routine response to what he really wants to do.” He “wants a real sales job on why it is going to be so helpful to them, what a good face forces can put on our nation, and how inspiring they are.” Clifton suggested that a White House staffer “draft the kind of message that should be sent to the Ambassador and then sell it to State and Defense to send, or else the President might send it.” (All these memoranda and cables are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense, Special Warfare Volume II 1962-1963)

Circular airgram CA-5661, dated December 2 and addressed to the same posts as CA-1507, was drafted jointly in S/S and the JCS and cleared throughout the government, including Michael Forrestal at the NSC. It opened by quoting much of Kennedy's July 26 memorandum to Rusk, continued with a detailed description of special warfare units of all the services, and directed all action addressees to comment by January 15, 1964, on the potential appropriateness, with host government approval, of these units for demonstrations, training, or civic action in their countries. (Department of State, Special Group (CI) Files: Lot 68 D 458, SG(CI) General 1963)

134. National Intelligence Estimate 134. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 15, 1963.

NIE 11-9-63

A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND INTENTIONS TO ORBIT NUCLEAR WEAPONS

The Problem

To examine Soviet capabilities and intentions to orbit nuclear weapons, probable Free World reactions to such a development, and Soviet reactions to various US responses.1

Conclusions

A. We have thus far acquired no evidence that the USSR plans to orbit a nuclear-armed satellite in the near term, or that a program to establish an orbital bombardment capability is at present seriously contemplated by the Soviet leadership. However, the USSR does have the capability of orbiting one or possibly a few nuclear-armed satellites at any time, and at comparatively small cost. (Paras. 1-3, 15-16)

B. The limitations of existing hardware and facilities are such that the nuclear weapons which the Soviets could orbit during 1963-1964 would not add significantly to their military capabilities. Currently operational Soviet ICBMs would be capable of delivering comparable payloads with greater effectiveness. (Paras. 4-14)

C. A variety of political motives, such as the desire to restore the image of the USSR as the preeminent world military power, might nevertheless impel the Soviets to orbit a nuclear weapon in the near term for demonstrative purposes. Such a move would be more likely if the Soviets were already committed to the eventual establishment of an orbital bombardment force, or if convinced that the US was so committed. However, in seeking to impress world opinion, they would also encounter a variety of adverse reactions. Awe and alarm would be accompanied by resentment and dismay, and it would be charged in many quarters that the Soviets had extended the nuclear arms race into a new, more dangerous area. The Soviets would have to consider whether it would serve their interests to risk strong US countermoves, including an ambitious US military space program, and a general intensification of the cold war. (Paras. 17-23)

D. On balance, it appears to us that the disadvantages would outweigh the advantages, and we therefore believe that there is less than an even chance that the USSR will orbit a nuclear weapon in the near term. Nevertheless, the Soviets may weigh the balance differently than we do, and it remains possible that they will exercise their technical capability at any time. (Para. 24)

E. If the USSR should orbit a nuclear weapon for demonstrative purposes, it would almost certainly anticipate some form of US reaction. The Soviets would have to consider the possibility of a US attempt to destroy their satellite, and if the US threatened to do so, they would probably threaten retaliation against US satellites. They would be wary, however, of the risks involved in direct retaliation, including a possible “open war” on all satellites and the accompanying dangers of escalation. Official and popular opinion in most states allied with the US would expect and support US measures to counter the Soviet action. Opinion in the nonaligned states would favor some form of UN “solution.” The Soviets themselves might use the UN in an effort to deter US countermoves and to delay or forestall any US military program in space. (Paras. 25-30)

Prospects for 1965-1970

F. Based solely on considerations of cost and effectiveness as we now understand them, it would appear unlikely that the Soviets will during this decade deploy advanced orbital bombardment systems of military significance. We recognize, however, that the Soviets might reach different conclusions as to cost and effectiveness, or that other factors might be more weighty. Moreover, considering the pace of developments in the weapons field in general, it is extremely hazardous to estimate Soviet decisions for a period many years ahead. For these reasons, a firm estimate as to whether the Soviets will deploy an advanced orbital bombardment system within the 1965-1970 period cannot be made at this time. (Paras. 31-34, 45-49)

G. If the Soviets do proceed with an advanced orbital system, we believe that they are more likely to seek a small force of limited effectiveness than a very large and sophisticated one. The weapons of a small force could be maintained continually in orbit or could be held on standby on the ground for deployment as required. In any case, developmental testing of an orbital bombardment system should be observable to us at least a year or two prior to attainment of an accurate, reliable system. (Paras. 35-44, 50)

[Here follows the “Discussion” section. See the Supplement.]

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, National Intelligence Estimates. Secret; Restricted Data; Limited Distribution. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement.

1 In this estimate, we concentrate primarily on multiorbit bombardment satellite systems, i.e., those designed to complete one or more revolutions of the earth prior to being detonated. We also have included, though at much abbreviated length, consideration of fractional orbit system, i.e., those designed to make less than one revolution of the earth before detonation. Although they do not follow a ballistic trajectory, fractional orbit systems are employed in a manner more closely related to that of an ICBM, and are therefore not germane to most aspects of the problem. [Footnote in the source text.]

135. Editorial Note 135. Editorial Note

According to a memorandum by William Smith, the entire White House daily staff meeting on July 19, 1963, was devoted to Walt Rostow's presentation “of State Department plans for using strategic studies of various countries as a basis for policy making and programming.” Such studies would emphasize especially the smooth coordination of economic and military aid. Two such studies were almost complete, but it was “not clear at this point who would approve them. State would like to have them approved either by some interdepartmental group” or by the President.

Smith wrote that the “economists and budgeteers of the group seemed more interested than the political experts, with the exception of Forrestal.” Bundy “questioned the idea most sharply by saying he did not believe that a country-by-country approach was the right way to turn around our aid program. We would be well into Teddy's Administration before the task was completed. He also commented that a paper itself would be of no use unless it was approved as a basis for action, and that its chances for approval depended in part upon its intrinsic merit.” Bundy “admitted that analyses of the type suggested would produce information which would be available in time of a crisis and might facilitate action then.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman's Staff Group, July 1963)

In a September 23 memorandum to Bundy, Komer stated that he felt that Rostow's effort's were hampered by “trying to kill two birds with one stone.” Rostow had started with the idea of the strategic study as an “imaginative reexamination of old shibboleths which could provide a new base for sensible policies,” but this objective suffered when Rostow “took on Rusk's mandate to bring under control the variety of overlapping studies” being done by other agencies. “It is just too much to expect that you can at one and the same time (a) produce a penetrating long-range policy analysis; (b) translate it into detailed interagency operational guidance; and (c) get all concerned to sign on.” The Policy Planning Council hadn't “the leverage to accomplish what the NSC and OCB couldn't.” Despite Rostow's optimism, the agencies were not “going to buy.” (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, Robert Komer 6/63-11/63)

136. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 136. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, July 23, 1963.

SUBJECT

BNSP

I should report to you the state of the BNSP in the Pentagon.

You will recall that, at Secretary McNamara's request,1 you referred the draft BNSP back for another round of work which would give the JCS a chance to thrash out its views with DOD. After that work had gone forward nearly to resolution2 Secretary McNamara shifted his earlier favorable view to a judgment that the BNSP was not necessary for the conduct of his business.

Henry Rowen reported to me today that there was a discussion between Secretary McNamara and the JCS in which, after expressing his skepticism, Secretary McNamara put the question: “On what problems do you need high level guidance?” Six issues emerged from the JCS;3 and Secretary McNamara set in motion work within the Pentagon to generate required guidance.4

Thus, so far as the Pentagon is now concerned the BNSP is dead.

As you know in this matter, as opposed to the conduct of specific planning operations, I do not feel a sense of personal responsibility for pressing the BNSP forward. I do believe, however, that you and the President should consider seriously the following aspect of the matter: the BNSP was first developed in the Truman Administration and was carried forward in several editions in the Eisenhower Administration. Whatever the limitations inherent in any such document, I doubt that it will redound to the credit of our Administration that we failed to thrash out any successor document. A BNSP obviously cannot substitute for specific policy judgments; and it should not tie the President's hands. But it can provide an occasion for debating and defining the bone structure of policy and communicating it to the troops who never see the four star generals.

My first recommendation is, therefore, that you consider with the President whether or not you wish to consider the BNSP exercise as finished.

If you wish to keep the matter open, we might consider what forms such a document might take in the light of Secretary McNamara's views and the passage of time.

If you decide that we should abandon the exercise, you may wish to consider what form a decent and unobtrusive burial might take; e.g., simply letting it drift off; a NSAM ordering suspension in the light of fast-moving world events; etc.

But before accepting some form of the latter alternatives, I do urge you and the President to pause for a moment on the prior question.5

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Basic National Security Policy. Secret.

1 No record of this request has been found.

2 Information on work done during the winter and spring of 1963 by DOD/ISA on a basic national security policy paper is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Basic National Security Policy and in National Defense University, Taylor Papers, BNSP. See also Document 132.

3 The issues were: targeting capability of strategic retaliatory forces; number of concurrent capabilities to be programmed for conventional forces; amount of capability NATO forces needed to attempt to reach a standoff in a potential theater conflict by non-nuclear means; what, if any, provision was to be made for supporting a satellite revolt; the level of military presence adequate for the United States in the area between Suez and Thailand; and whether U.S. military planners should assume that the United States would not wage large-scale ground operations on the Asian mainland. (Walter S. Poole, The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff: The Joint Chiefs of Staff and National Policy, Vol. VIII: 1961-1964 Part I, The Structure of National Defense, p. 18; Joint Chiefs of Staff, Historical Division, Joint Secretariat)

4 The Joint Chiefs tasked J-5 and the NESC to provide draft answers to the six questions, with the intention of sending the whole package to McNamara. When the drafts reached the JCS in late August, however, the Chiefs decided to “note” the replies and not forward them to McNamara, apparently on the ground that it would be preferable to consider the six issues within the context of the complete JSOP. (Ibid., p.19)

5 Rostow and Rusk met and discussed this memorandum some time before July 30. Rostow later wrote that Rusk agreed to the undertaking of another draft of basic national security policy, which would be discussed with the President and McNamara. According to Rostow, Rusk “mentioned” that if the President did not wish to “promulgate” the paper, he (Rusk) “might table with the NSC for the information of its members your concept of an appropriate policy statement of this kind.” (Memorandum from Rostow to Rusk, November 15; Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, BNSP 1963) A draft BNSP dated August 14 is ibid., S/P Files: Lot 69 D 121, BNSP Drafts 1963. Additional information on this topic is in Document 146.

137. Memorandum of Conference With President Kennedy 137. Memorandum of Conference With President KennedySource

Washington, July 24, 1963, 10 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Taylor

General Wheeler

Admiral Anderson

General LeMay

General Shoup

Captain Shepard

General McHugh

SIOP

The Chairman presented to the President a new book1 which contains a complete summary of the SIOP,2 highlighting decisions required for its implementation. The President asked a number of questions and all the Chiefs participated in the discussion. The Chairman emphasized the extreme sensitivity of this document, stating there were only eight copies in existence.

Army Special Forces

General Wheeler presented to the President the reply to a memorandum which the President had written to the Secretary of Defense on the employment of Army Special Forces.3 The President stated he thought that the size of the groups being sent was too small to take maximum advantage of the favorable impression they create. General Wheeler stated that the limiting factor on the number of forces employed was often the opposition of the U.S. Ambassador concerned. The President stated that he should communicate with the Ambassadors. (A copy of the President's memorandum on this subject to the Secretary of State is attached.)5

General LeMay stated that he and the Chiefs of Staffs of Latin American Air Forces favor bringing their personnel to the U.S. for training. He also stated that there is a general consensus on the need for increased inter-American planning. He stated that the Inter-American Defense Board is unsatisfactory for this purpose. To make it effective, it should be placed under the OAS, and its personnel changed.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

Tazewell Shepard

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Clifton Series, Conferences with the President, Volume II, 2/28/63-9/9/63. Top Secret.

1 Not identified.

2 Apparent reference to SIOP-63 (see Document 92). Differences between SIOP-63 and SIOP- 64, formally approved by the JCS in October 1963 with an effective date of January 1, 1964, are indicated in a memorandum from the JCS to McNamara dated November 14, 1962, JCS 2057/360, and Appendix A to Enclosure F to JCS 2956/400, October 16, 1963; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 3105 (22 Jun 62) Sec. 1.

3 Reference is to the July 15 memorandum; see Document 133.

5 Not attached. It is an earlier version of the President's July 26 memorandum described in Document 133.

138. Special National Intelligence Estimate 138. Special National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, July 24, 1963.

SNIE 13-2-63

COMMUNIST CHINA'S ADVANCED WEAPONS PROGRAM

The Problem

To assess Communist China's progress toward acquisition of a nuclear weapons and missile capability and to estimate the effects of such a development on Chinese policy.

Note to Readers

Since our most recent estimate on Communist China's advanced weapons program1 we have received a considerable amount of new information, mainly from photography. This evidence leads us to believe that the Chinese, with Soviet assistance, had embarked in the latter 1950s on a more ambitious advanced weapons program than we had earlier thought likely. We further believe that they are still working on that program though forced to slow its pace materially since 1960. Nevertheless, the gaps in our information remain substantial and we are therefore not able to judge the present state or to project the future development of the Chinese program as a whole with any very high degree of confidence. Specific judgments given below about the stage likely to be reached by the Chinese program at particular dates should be read in the light of this general caution.

Conclusions

A. Peiping has given high priority to the development of nuclear weapons and missiles. Recent aerial photography has revealed a number of developmental facilities indicating a broad program which diverts Communist China's limited scientific and technological resources from other parts of the economy. (Paras. 2-15 and 19)

B. We have found what we believe to be a plutonium production reactor in China, located at Pao-t'ou. This reactor probably could not have reached criticality before early 1962. If it did go critical at that time, the earliest a first device could be tested, based on plutonium from this reactor alone, would be early 1964. If the Chinese run into even a normal number of difficulties, this date would be postponed to late 1964 or 1965. If the reactor reached criticality later than early 1962—or has not yet done so—the detonation would be even further delayed. Beginning the year after a first detonation the reactor could produce enough material for only one or two crude weapons a year. The Chinese have a few bombers which could carry bulky weapons of early design. (Paras. 4-6 and 17)

C. We believe that the eventual Chinese program calls for nuclear weapons containing both U-235 and plutonium. Such a program would require more plutonium production facilities than the one reactor that has been identified. Neither photographic coverage nor other significant evidence have disclosed another production reactor in China. The possible existence of another reactor cannot be ignored however, nor the possibility that one may be in production. We therefore cannot exclude the possibility that the Chinese could achieve a first detonation at any time. (Para. 7)

D. The gaseous diffusion plant at Lanchou will probably not be able, under the most advantageous circumstances, to produce weapon-grade U-235 before 1966. Considering the great technical difficulties involved and the large amount of additional construction needed, a more likely date for such production is 1968-1969. (Paras. 2 and 3)

E. Peiping is probably concentrating initially on a medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM) system of basically Soviet design, either the 630 mile SS-3 or the 1,020 mile SS-4. We do not believe that missiles would be ready for deployment before 1967. Because of the time and difficulties involved in producing a missile-compatible warhead, we believe China is not likely to develop such a warhead until 3 or 4 years after a first detonation. (Paras. 16 and 18)

F. The detonation of a nuclear device would boost domestic morale. Although it is possible that the leadership would experience a dangerous degree of overconfidence, we think it more likely that Peiping will concentrate on furthering its established policies to: (1) force its way into world disarmament discussions and other world councils; (2) overawe its neighbors and soften them for Peiping-directed Communist subversion; and (3) tout Chinese-style communism as the best route for an underdeveloped nation to achieve industrial and scientific modernity. In pursuing its policies, Peiping's increased confidence would doubtless be reflected in its approach to conflicts on its periphery.2 (Paras. 20-27)

[Here follow the “Discussion” section, 8 single-spaced pages, and a map. See the Supplement.]

* Source: Department of State, INR/EAP Files: Lot 90 D 99. Secret. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 NIE 13-2-62, “Chinese Communist Advanced Weapons Capabilities,” dated 25 April 1962. (Top Secret) [Footnote in the source text. See Document 81.]

2 The Acting Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, believes that China's leaders would recognize their limited capabilities had not altered the real power balance among the major states and could not do so in the future. In particular, they would recognize that they remained unable either to remove or neutralize the US presence in Asia and would not become willing to take significantly greater military risks. [Footnote in the source text.]

139. Memorandum From the Director for Internal Defense in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs (Maechling) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) 139. Memorandum From the Director for Internal Defense in the Office of Politico-Military Affairs (Maechling) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)Source

Washington, July 29, 1963.

SUBJECT

Future of Special Group (CI)

I assume that after Mike Forrestal returns from vacation you, he, and McGeorge Bundy may get together for your discussion on the scope and terms of reference of the Special Group (CI). I therefore thought it might be helpful for you if I set down some views on the subject, based on my experience with the Group. First, some general comments:

1. The primary utility of the Group rests in its ability to obtain from its members high-level policy decisions on our counter-insurgency effort in the underdeveloped world and to do so rapidly and with a minimum of formality.

2. The Group is also effective in overcoming bureaucratic roadblocks affecting high-priority projects in the MAP and AID programs, and in resolving interdepartmental policy differences without involving the institutional prestige of the departments or agencies represented on the Group.

3. The Group has also been successful in stimulating, developing, and monitoring programs that either cut across departmental lines of responsibility or require interdepartmental collaboration. Training for counter-insurgency, civic action, and police assistance are examples of this type of activity.

4. The weekly meetings of the Group provide a means for exercising close and continuing control over policies and programs in nine or ten “crisis countries” of the underdeveloped world.

5. The Special Group (CI) has developed an institutional character and some measure of continuity, based on (a) regular meetings; (b) forward planning of agendas; (c) dissemination of minutes; and (d) systematic implementation of decisions. The quarterly reviews of country Internal Defense Plans, together with periodic status reports on training, civic action, police, etc., constitute the backbone of its agendas.

With these considerations in mind, it is evident that the Group exercises a function quite different from other high-level interdepartmental committees, such as the NSC Standing Group. It covers a narrower range of subject matter but does so in greater depth and with more continuity. The question that arises is whether the Group's activities are useful and productive, or whether its work is becoming routine and sterile. In my opinion, there is some indication that we are approaching a period of diminishing returns.

First, the counter-insurgency or internal defense label applies in its literal sense to a very small list of countries. Of the countries under cognizance of the Group, there is an active left-wing insurgency threat only in Vietnam, Laos, and Venezuela. Its application to other countries—both on the Group's critical list and off it—represents in greater or lesser degree a distortion of the concept. Colombia suffers from rural banditry; Ecuador, Guatemala, and Boliva from chronic instability; the threat in Iran will most likely take the form of an attempted coup; while in Thailand the threat is from external infiltration as much as internal.

One consequence of rigid adherence to the counter-insurgency concept is that the list of countries under the cognizance of the Group has remained virtually frozen for eighteen months. This may be justifiable in Southeast Asia, but in Latin America during the past year there have been revolutions, coups, abortive coups, and serious internal upheavals in several Latin American countries not under the Group's cognizance. In other geographic areas, there are serious situations of unrest and violence that merit high-level interdepartmental attention, if only on an ad hoc basis, but have not received it because they are not “insurgency” situations. For example, there is not now any high-level Government committee charged with coordinating our policies and programs in certain key African and Middle Eastern countries where the important factor is the political orientation of the government rather than an insurgent or guerrilla threat. In ex-French Africa our military and police assistance programs, which have been the subject of virtually continual policy differences during the past year, could stand some high-level interdepartmental attention. In the Middle East, the development of interdepartmentally coordinated policies and programs for Syria and Iraq is surely as important as continued surveillance over Guatemala, where the insurgency threat has largely receded.

Another consequence of the counter-insurgency approach is that we have been attacking such important programs as youth, labor, civic action and psychological strategy through the back door. This is better than not attacking it at all, but it distorts the true nature of the problem and may cause us to focus on lower priority situations.

Secondly, this rather doctrinaire counter-insurgency approach to the problems of underdeveloped countries has periodically created a feeling of uneasiness on the part of Mike Forrestal, the Attorney General (and perhaps the President too) that the Group is not coming to grips with the really important issues. As you know, the President has on occasion asked why the Group has not looked into such countries as Brazil. This feeling is likely to be intensified if we are entering an era in which the nature of the Soviet threat shifts to less aggressive but just as deadly forms of cultural and economic penetration.

Accordingly, I believe that the Special Group (CI) must develop a greater degree of flexibility if it is to continue as an effective instrument of government. It must focus on problems that require high-level attention. It should not go on indefinitely monitoring the internal security programs of eight or ten countries. Nor should it distort the complex problem of applying broad policies and programs in youth, labor, information, etc. to crisis areas by labeling them “counter-insurgency”.

What I believe we need to do is gradually convert the Special Group (CI) to a “Special Group (Critical Areas)” with terms of reference more flexible than we have now. As I see it, the Group would then perform the following functions: 1. Continue monitoring interdepartmental counter-insurgency programs such as training, civic action, police assistance, etc.

2. Limit its continuing surveillance functions to those countries that face an immediate external or internal insurgency threat—Vietnam, Venezuela, Thailand, and possibly Iran. (Drop Colombia, Guatemala, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Laos.)

3. Establish a system of periodic spot surveillance over a wider range of underdeveloped countries, concentrating on those where severe unrest or Soviet penetration poses a critical threat to U.S. interests. These countries would be placed under the Group's cognizance for temporary periods as circumstances require, and kept there only long enough to assure that U.S. policies and programs are being carried out in a coordinated and effective manner.

4. Broaden the functional scope of the Group to cover such programs as youth, labor, psychological strategy, and economic counter-measures, as they apply to all critical areas of the underdeveloped world, not just those that have an insurgency threat.

If so broadened in purpose, a “Special Group (Critical Areas)” should operate in much the same way that it does now. A small White House staff of one or two officers would continue to be essential—not to recreate an OCB or generate paperwork, but to assist State in the forward planning of agendas and to flush out the problems that need high-level exposure. (No single department or agency can accomplish the latter.) As before, the primary purpose of the Group would be to expose program deficiencies, overcome bureaucratic obstacles, and force decisions on critical issues.

In writing the above I don't mean to imply that our counter-insurgency effort has become “passe”. I do, however, think that the Group's efforts will become less productive unless it recognizes that the Soviet threat in the underdeveloped world may increasingly assume forms other than insurgency.

Charles Maechling, Jr.1

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Internal Defense. Confidential. Attached to a covering note from Kitchens to Rostow and all the geographic Assistant Secretaries. A copy was sent to U. Alexis Johnson.

1 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

140. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 140. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, August 28, 1963.

Last November at Hyannis Port1 I informed you that we would restudy Titan III to see whether, despite its overlap with Saturn C1/C1B in payload capacity, it seemed desirable to proceed. You will recall that the Titan III program was justified, in part, on the grounds that the cost per Titan launch would be so much less than per Saturn launch that the savings over the life of the program would approximately offset the development costs. The study of the costs and of the other elements of the program has been carried out by the Air Force. At the same time, preliminary development work has continued.

Since last Fall the contracts for Titan III have been finalized. Ninety-five percent of the cost of the development program which has been negotiated is represented by incentive contracts. This should be, and indeed is, a strong influence in keeping the development cost close to the estimated total of $875 million. Firing of 120“ rockets which in modified form will be used for the strap on boosters has been carried out. Development of the other components of the system has continued on schedule. We anticipate the first test flight of the core (this includes the two stages based on the Titan II ICBM and the transtage) in August 1964 and of the full Titan III C in April 1965.

With respect to the desirability of Titan III, I conclude that, on the basis of the best estimates that can be made of its development cost, production and launch cost, and reliability as compared to those of Saturn, and the expected number of payloads in the 1966-75 period, Titan III will probably very much more than pay for its development. Recognizing the uncertainties in all of these factors, we have also examined the situation with some assumptions less favorable to Titan III. Under these circumstances we conclude that Titan III will nevertheless roughly pay for itself. I know that others have made still more pessimistic estimates. However, even with some slight economic deficiency, I believe the insurance that we purchase by the Titan III development makes it a desirable investment. This insurance is the capability to launch space payloads on very short notice or into narrow time windows, and the possibility of converting Titan III into a weapon system of large payload capacity, both of which are offered by its combination of storable and solid fuels. Therefore the Department of Defense plans to proceed with the development of the Titan III.2

Robert S. McNamara

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Volume V, July-November 1963. Secret.

1 The President was in Hyannis Port for the Thanksgiving weekend, November 21-25, 1962. See Document 113.

2 An attached note from Spurgeon Keeny to Bundy stated that Jerome Wiesner “still questions the necessity of undertaking the project at all and the wisdom of the specific forum of the proposal if the project is undertaken,” but added that Wiesner did not plan further opposition since McNamara had taken his objections into account in making his decision. Wiesner set forth his views at length in a July 8 memorandum to Harold Brown. (Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Departments and Agencies Series, Department of Defense Volume V, July-November 1963)

141. Summary Record of the 517th Meeting of the National Security Council 141. Summary Record of the 517th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, September 12, 1963, 11 a.m.

Report of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee

General Taylor presented the Net Evaluation Subcommittee report1 and introduced General Leon Johnson, with the suggestion that the President might wish to question him about the report.

The President asked whether, even if we attack the USSR first, the loss to the U.S. would be unacceptable to political leaders. General Johnson replied that it would be, i.e. even if we preempt, surviving Soviet capability is sufficient to produce an unacceptable loss in the U.S.

The President asked whether then in fact we are in a period of nuclear stalemate. General Johnson replied that we are.

Referring to a statement of the Air Force Association which appeared in this morning's Washington Post,2 the President asked how we could obtain nuclear superiority as recommended by the Air Force Association. General Johnson said this was a very difficult question to answer. He acknowledged that there is no way, no matter what we do, to avoid unacceptable damage in the U.S. if nuclear war breaks out. He later acknowledged that it would be impossible for us to achieve nuclear superiority.

Secretary McNamara said that Defense Department studies showed that even if we spend $80 billion more than we are now spending, we would still have 30 million fatalities in the U.S. in the 1968 time period, even if we made the first strike against the USSR.

The President said these fatality figures were much higher than those he had heard recently in Omaha.3 As he recalled it, SAC estimated 12 million casualties.

General Taylor said these were higher casualty figures than the President had ever seen. Today's figures include two new factors: 1. Soviet weapons were targeted on U.S. cities.

2. The use by the Soviets of huge megaton weapons was included in the computations for the first time.

The President said that de Gaulle believed that even the small nuclear force he is planning will be big enough to cause unacceptable damage to the USSR. He asked why we need to have as much defense as we have if, as it appears, the strategy is based on the assumption that even if we strike first we cannot protect the security of the U.S. in nuclear warfare.

General Johnson replied that no matter what we do we can't get below 51 million casualties in the event of a nuclear exchange. We can, however, bring down this number by undertaking additional weapons programs.

The President asked if this doesn't get us into the overkill business. General Johnson replied in the negative. We can cut down U.S. losses if we knock out more Soviet missiles by having more U.S. missiles and more accurate U.S. missiles. We estimate that we can save 20% in megatonnage down in the U.S. if we can achieve more accurate missiles. The more Soviet missiles we can destroy the less the loss to us. There is no question but that we can increase the accuracy of our missiles. The Soviets are not competing with us on numbers of missiles. They need, according to our calculation, only 1200 weapons. They, of course, can increase the megatonnage by enlarging the size of their weapons.

General Johnson said that his personal conclusions from this study were three: 1. We have to get better weapons, especially anti-ballistic missile weapons, to increase the number of Soviet missiles that we keep from landing in the U.S.

2. We must perfect ways of stopping missiles fired by Soviet submarines.

3. We must pay greater attention to chemical and biological warfare weapons. The problem with such weapons to date has been that the incubation period is three days, but conceivably could be brought down to one day.

General Johnson pointed out that each of the strategies used against the USSR resulted in at least 140 million fatalities in the USSR. Our problem is how to catch more of the Soviet missiles before they are launched and how to destroy more of the missiles in the air over the U.S.

Secretary McNamara said there was no way of launching a no-alert attack against the USSR which would be acceptable. No such attack, according to the calculations, could be carried out without 30 million U.S. fatalities—an obviously unacceptable number. Under conditions existing in 1968 with our forces on the alert, only 300 warheads are used to produce the casualties in the Soviet Union. Ninety-five percent of our force is for non-fatality purposes. Thus, preemption today or in 1968 is not an acceptable course of action.

Secretary McNamara said the President deserved an answer to his question as to why we have to have so large a force. The answer lies in the fact that there are many uncertainties in the equations presented in today's report. The factors included in the report are probable, but they do not represent the entire range of possibilities. By introducing pessimistic factors, the estimates given today are drastically changed. He said the Defense Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff are studying our current force level and they would be recommending a force level to meet a reasonable anticipated situation. The Chiefs are now considering the range of our weapons in relation to the range of anticipated factors.

General Johnson said he had concluded from the calculations that we could fight a limited war using nuclear weapons without fear that the Soviets would reply by going to all-out war. He said that the Russians have obviously made similar calculations, and, seeing the unsatisfactory estimated results of an all-out nuclear war, would not escalate a limited war even if we used tactical nuclear weapons.

Secretary Rusk called attention to the deep schizophrenia involved in the present nuclear situation. If Congress knew the conclusions presented in the report, the Administration could get funds for aid and information programs which are the resources we must rely on in our effort to prevent all-out nuclear war.

Mr. Bundy called attention to the fact that this study and the existence of the sub-committee itself had been one of the few government projects which had been kept secret.

Mr. McCone asked General Johnson what he thought would happen to our capability, if, in an arms agreement, we accepted a percentage reduction in the number of our weapons. He doubted such a percentage cut would have much effect. Secretary Rusk agreed that we would have to go very deep in an arms cut to have a substantial effect on our capability. General Taylor said: “That is, if the Russians honestly carry out a comparable cut.”

The President said he concluded from the report that the forces which will be used under present circumstances are conventional, limited and tactical. General Johnson agreed, adding that nuclear war is impossible if rational men control governments.

Secretary Rusk said he agreed, but he did not get much comfort from this fact because, if both sides believed that neither side would use nuclear weapons, one side or the other would be tempted to act in a way which would push the other side beyond its tolerance level. He added that a response to pressure might be suicidal, being prompted by a desire to get it over with. He referred to the current situation as “This God Damn poker game.”

General Taylor agreed that the conclusions of the report did mean that there was a low possibility of escalation. Secretary Rusk repeated his view that we can't assume that nuclear war won't happen and referred again to suicidal tendencies. He wondered who else could be exposed to the conclusions of the sub-committee.

The President again said that preemption was not possible for us and that that was a valuable conclusion growing out of an excellent report.

Secretary Dillon returned to the subject of publicizing the conclusions of the report. He recalled that a similar report three years ago indicated that we would be doing much more damage to the Soviet Union than they would do to us. Today's report indicated damage would be more nearly equal. Consequently, he thought that it would be easier for us to make public the conclusions of this report.

Secretary Rusk said we could get out the basic facts of the report without identifying it. Some of the information was already in the public domain.

General Taylor suggested that the intelligence community should review the report before any decision is made about making it public. He thought that the war game held on SIOP was better to use as a basis of judgment because this war game dealt with an actual situation in the current year.

The President thought that at some time we might consider making some of the report available to some of the Congressional leaders.4

(Attached is a copy of notes taken by the sub-committee members of the National Security Council discussion.)

Bromley Smith5

Attachment6

RESUME OF DISCUSSION DURING NESC BRIEFING OF 12 SEPTEMBER 1963

Speaker—President—Is the level of damage we receive after we pre-empt against the Russians unacceptable?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Yes (followed by a description of the range of US fatalities resulting from the study through the years 1964 through 1968).

Speaker—President—I have read the statement in this morning's paper by the Air Force Association. What is meant by their reference to nuclear superiority versus nuclear stalemate? How could you get superiority?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Stated he believed the members of the Committee of the Air Force Association which drafted the resolution did not have the facts as brought out in the report being presented at this time. (The last subsidiary attack was explained.)

Speaker—Mr. McNamara—Indicated he had a study conducted examining the scale of fatalities after having added 80 billion dollars to the defense budget for blast shelters, increased weapons systems—both offensive and defensive. Under all of these conditions in the 1968 time period, the minimum number of fatalities was in excess of 30 million.

Speaker—President—At Omaha I remember being briefed that if we pre-empt our casualties may be on the order of 12 million.

Answer—Gen. Taylor—That briefing was related to the present SIOP.

Gen. Johnson—The variance rests in the difference in targeting objectives of the Soviets. The weight of effort devoted to urban industrial targets was the key to the variation in US casualties. The results of the Omaha report were obtained by the Soviets firing their retaliation counter force, this did not seem reasonable.

Speaker—Mr. Rusk—Does your study deal with any effects other than the direct weapon effects—such as disease, pestilence?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—No. However, the AEC made a study of the long term effects and basically concluded that not enough was known in this area. As a consequence, a letter was sent to Dr. Johnson, Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy, recommending additional efforts to provide answers on long term effects.7

Speaker—President—Why do we need as much as we've got?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Explained the reason was to reduce the damage and fatalities to our country. Improvement in US systems is of particular importance. Also the development of an ABM defensive system would be of greatest significance, particularly when deployed in an area such as the eastern segment of the US where approximately 70% of the population is concentrated.

Speaker—President—In the discussion the President asked about our conclusions from the offset attack on 23 cities.

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Discussed the results of the attack.

Speaker—President—If we can't pre-empt and reduce fatalities, then what? Why do we have as much as we've got? Doesn't it get into the overkill business?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Indicated that the Soviet knows without any doubt that we can destroy him due to the size of our force. In effect, there should be no margin for error in his assessment of our capabilities. Effort must now be expended to improve the systems in reliability and accuracy. Certainly along with this is the importance of multiple forces—bombers, SLBMs, ICBMs—to compound the Soviet problem. The statement on overkill has been exaggerated since our expectancy of damage against the Soviet time sensitive ICBMs in 1964 was calculated as no higher than 20%, whereas the 1968 estimate reached 70%. If this expectancy were increased to 90%, the overall megatonnage down on the US would be reduced by 20%.

Answer—Mr. McNamara—Gen. Johnson's group has assumed probable planning factors and they seem to me to be reasonable assumptions. They do not represent all the possible factors so we must decide whether we are protecting ourselves against pessimistic factors of Soviet capabilities. By assuming a range of US forces we have calculated a range of US and Soviet fatalities. Large changes in forces result in only small changes in fatalities.

Speaker—President—Why does he have a smaller force?

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Soviet may consider he has sufficient force with which to deter, especially when viewed in relation to the scale of fatalities he is given the capability to produce in this country. (Described manner in which assessments are carried out and assistance rendered by NMCSSC.)

Speaker—Gen. Johnson—Volunteered that he would be very disturbed if the President considered this report indicated that we could reduce our forces and/or not continue to increase to those programmed. If a reduction should take place, the relative position of the US and Soviets would become less in our favor. The President said he understood.

Speaker—Gen. Johnson—Discussed the need for an effective ABM defense; emphasis on Laser and Casaba-Howitzer, intercepting sub-launched missile in boost phase. Also brought in new efforts in chemical and biological warfare such that biological warfare may be adaptable to strategic purposes.

Speaker—Mr. McCone—What would be the effect on casualties of incremental cuts in US and Soviet forces in the event of arms reduction?

Answer—Mr. Rusk—It would be necessary to go very deep into the forces by such cuts before there would be any significant effect.

Speaker—President—Would it be advantageous to tell the Soviets what probable casualties may result from an exchange in order to convince them of the possible outcome?

Speaker—Mr. Bundy—This report is one state secret which has been well kept and it would be a mistake to cite figures from it. There would then be a precedent for someone to ask about any comparable figures from next year's report.

Speaker—Mr. Rusk—I believe such figures for casualties have already been made public. The President has spoken of it on some occasions.

Speaker—Gen. Taylor—I think we should ask the intelligence community how much information of this nature has already gotten out (i.e., casualty figures). (Mr. McCone accepted the query and a review of official US and Soviet statements will be made.)

Speaker—Mr. Rusk—Asked about the difference in results between a high state of alert and no alert.

Answer—Gen. Johnson—This comparison was not made in the study.

Speaker—President—What about pre-empt today with the Soviets in a low state of alert?

Answer—Mr. McNamara—(Today's situation not actually answered.) In the many studies I have had done for me I have not found a situation in which a pre-empt during a low-alert condition would be advantageous. Under no circumstances have I been able to get US casualties under 30 million. In fact, I have not been able to get them down to 30 million. In 1968 we can have 3000 warheads and 5000 MT on alert. Of this force, 95 percent will be used in counterforce attacks or for purposes other than to create casualties. They can destroy us with a few weapons and we can do the same to them. Therefore, pre-empt is not advantageous for either side.

Speaker—Gen. Taylor—The question then is whether we are justified in continuing military targeting.

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Indicated this had to be continued for the potential reduction it made in US casualties.

Speaker—Mr. Rusk—Gen. DeGaulle can sit on the sidelines with five weapons and deter.

Speaker—President—Is that why DeGaulle is satisfied with a small force?

Answer—Mr. Rusk—According to Gen. DeGaulle, he can inflict unacceptable damage on anyone.

Speaker—President—DeGaulle is then using atomic weapons as a trip-wire.

Speaker—Gen. Johnson—Gen. Peter Gallois (French)8 told me, when I was stationed at SHAPE, that certain elements in France believed that in time NATO would collapse and that the fight would be between the US and the Soviets. At that time the French wanted to be able to sit on the side lines and say to the Soviets—Don't touch us, if you do, it will cost you five Hiroshimas.

Speaker—President—He believed this was probably correct and that DeGaulle would not use nuclear weapons to defend Hamburg.

Speaker—President—Consider the study to be very good and helpful. Asked how long worked on it and who composed the group.

Answer—Gen. Johnson—Explained the foregoing. Also explained why today's force was not too large.

Speaker—President—This argues in favor of a conventional force.

Speaker—Gen. Johnson—Stated that he was convinced from this report that you could resort to nuclear weapons in a limited situation without it expanding into allout nuclear war.

Speaker—President—I have been told that if I ever released a nuclear weapon on the battlefield I should start a pre-emptive attack on the Soviet Union as the use of nuclear weapons was bound to escalate and we might as well get the advantage by going first.

Speaker—Gen. Johnson—Stated he did not consider this necessarily true under the circumstances which exist.

Speaker—President—Since pre-emption does not show any advantage—and the Russians also recognize this—it is possible that the US could use tactical nuclear weapons in Laos without the Soviets assuming we would also use them in Europe on the slightest provocation. (This is not an assured understanding of the comment as made—it came in garbled in its import and intent.)

The meeting was concluded by a discussion of the manner in which this information could be released to Congressional groups. It was finally agreed that the source (NESC) should be protected and when the information is finally released, it should appear as though originating from another agency.

* Source: Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Meetings and Memoranda Series, 517th NSC Meeting. Top Secret. Drafted by Smith. The 21 attendees at this meeting in the Cabinet Room included the President, Rusk, McNamara, Dillon, Robert Kennedy, Seaborg, McCone, Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, Sorensen, and eight members of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee headed by General Leon W. Johnson. (Ibid., President's Appointment Book)

1 The Report has not been found. In a memorandum to Bundy dated August 28, Colonel Smith stated that the briefing would cover the report's conclusions concerning projected results of general war at various intervals in the 1963-1968 period. Casualties and damage in the United States would “increase over the years. Soviet damage and capabilities will remain somewhat constant (because their capabilities are increasing). Probably the major NESC conclusion is that during the years 1964 through 1968 neither the US nor the USSR can emerge from a full nuclear exchange without suffering very severe damage and high casualties, no matter which side initiates the war.” Smith held that the study raised one major issue. U.S. “offensive and defensive weapons currently programmed will not reduce damage from a full nuclear exchange to an acceptable level. Consequently, there is a need for development of new offensive and defensive weapons.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, WYS Chron File, Apr-Sep 63)

2 The statement was printed in The Washington Post, September 12, 1963.

3 See Document 118.

4 NSC Action No. 2470, dated September 12, states that the Council: “Discussed the report of the Net Evaluation Subcommittee.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council)

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

6 Top Secret.

7 Neither the study nor the letter to Gerald W. Johnson has been identified.

8 Pierre Gallois, former head of the French Air Force.

142. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 142. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council and Counselor of the Department of State (Rostow) to Secretary of State RuskSource

Washington, September 17, 1963.

SUBJECT

State of the World

At a morning meeting, I believe on September 4, you observed that you could well use a psychiatrist around the table and in dealing with the world. This is an interim effort by the Planning Council to make some shape of the phenomena which stirred your remark. A more systematic and precise review of the state of the world and its policy implications will be developed in S/P during the autumn.1

We have begun by considering the specific items which stimulated your comment and others of a similar kind. They include the new positive Japanese approach to trade with China; Cambodia both accepting Soviet military equipment and joining Communist China in refusing to sign the test ban agreement; de Gaulle speculating airily about the unification of Viet-Nam; the Pakistani flirtation with Peking, including the opening up of an air route between the two countries; Rumania's sassiness with Moscow; Cuba's failure to sign the test ban agreement; and, if you like, Stockholm's 462 of September 92 reporting the Chicom Ambassador in Stockholm promising to come to Sweden's aid if the Soviets should ever attack that country.

What accounts for this odd state of affairs?

What should we do about it?

I believe there are five elements which have converged to produce this situation, of which one is basic, the other four being aspects of recent developments.

1. There is, above all, the underlying fact that the historical trend in our time is towards the diffusion of effective power away from both Moscow and Washington. Although that diffusion is least marked in nuclear affairs, it evidently extends to the nuclear problem, given current French and U.K. policies and attitudes; Chinese Communist policy; and stirrings elsewhere towards command over nuclear arms. But, while nuclear weapons are enormously destructive, they can be used rationally only in very narrow circumstances and as a tool of diplomatic pressure only under special circumstances. Thus, despite the concentration of nuclear power in the U.S. and the USSR, effective diplomatic, political, and economic power continues its trend towards diffusion. This does not mean that we are incapable of influencing the shape of events by means of our military and economic power and through political leadership. It does mean that we must increasingly work by organizing diffuse centers of power and influence within the Free World rather than by decisions made cozily in Washington. The problem is most pronounced in our relations with Western Europe, but extends to Japan, Latin America, and the other less developed areas. The trend is, of course, masked at moments of acute East-West confrontation, such as the Berlin and Cuba missile crises of last year. But all our dispositions must take into account this underlying drift of history.

2. This underlying tendency is, of course, reinforced and brought to the surface by the easing of tensions which followed our successful dealing with the Berlin and Cuban crises of last year. As indicated above, a U.S.-Soviet confrontation reestablishes the surface, at least, of bipolarity, since such confrontations are tests of will in the shadow of relative nuclear capabilities which only we and the USSR now massively command. In 1962 we emerged successfully from such nuclear tests of will over Berlin and Cuba. There is a real sense in which we are now facing the consequences of our success last year.

3. Quite aside from the easing of tensions, our engagement with the Soviet Union in even superficially amicable negotiations, even over a very narrow range (such as the test ban), stirs two images around the world which reinforce the natural impulse of nations to pursue what they conceive to be their national advantage, in old-fashioned regional terms. First, the image that the U.S. and the Soviet Union may get together at their expense to protect themselves from the dangers of assertive nationalism in general and nuclear weapons in particular. The second image is that, perhaps, the cold war is on the way to its end; that U.S. concern with the rest of the world is declining; and that the restraints, disciplines, and intrusions on conventional nationalism are being (and can safely be) withdrawn or diminished.

4. There is the reduced fear of communism on the international scene brought about by the setback to Khrushchev in his various post-Sputnik adventures and, despite Peking's big talk, by the growing sense in some parts of the world that Communist China is a relatively weak state in power terms, although the fear of Communist China remains strong in South and Southeast Asia. There is, in short, rightly or wrongly, a simple reduction in fear of communism.

5. Finally, there is the fact of the Sino-Soviet split. The split has reduced the pretensions and vitality of communism as a doctrine and an international movement; but it has, to a degree, also reshaped the arena of world power. We have tended to look at it in terms of Peking's more aggressive ideological line and in terms of Peking's unwillingness to sign the test ban treaty while pursuing a national nuclear capability. The other side of the medal is, of course, that Communist China, increasingly detached from Russia, assumes the form of just another nation in an increasingly diffused arena of world power. And other nations see the possibility of using relations with this increasingly detached China as a means to advance parochial national interests. Within the Bloc, Rumania and Cuba, as well as Albania, have played this game; outside the Bloc, we can see Japan and Pakistan looking at China from this new perspective—and, in a corner of their minds, even France and Canada. Moreover, the Chinese Communists' effort to reduce their dependence on Moscow has produced a reciprocal Chinese movement to strengthen their national position on the world scene by widening trade and other contacts with the non-Communist world, excepting the United States. This is yielding an increased dependence on the West which, in fact, may prove, in the short and middle term, a more meaningful fact than Peking's tough ideological language or even the possibility of its acquiring some kind of nuclear capability, given the realities of China's economic situation over the foreseeable future and the real nature of modern military technology as opposed to a nuclear explosion.

Taken all together, these five factors have appeared to yield, within a relatively few months after the Cuban missile showdown, a quite remarkable appearance of fragmentation in both blocs; although, as I say, what is really involved is the emergence of a situation which permits the underlying trend towards power diffusion to assert itself more strongly than it was permitted to do in the tenser atmosphere of 1961-62. Specifically, the situation poses for us the danger of diluting the unity of the Free World; releasing local enmities which could yield dangerous regional conflicts; opening up opportunities for communist exploitation; etc.

Now, in broad terms, what do we do about it?

First, we must husband all those levers of influence which permit us to exercise that degree of continuing control over a still dangerous environment necessary to protect our vital interests. We should not, of course, struggle against every manifestation of this diffusion of power. It has many elements of potential advantage to us. And, besides, (in Khrushchev's phrase about his Eastern European satellites) quite a few countries are “getting too big to spank.” But we need to keep it under tolerable control in certain directions. We need, therefore, to look at our military capabilities more clearly as a double asset: a continuing deterrent against communist adventures, but also—and equally—as an essential element in maintaining minimum stability in parts of the world which are inherently explosive if left to themselves; e.g., Korea, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, important areas in Africa, parts of Latin America and Germany. In the latter case it is evident that the maintenance of the Germans on a collective course with the U.S. and the West hinges critically on the continued effective military presence of the U.S. side by side with them. Despite balance of payments pressures and despite the temptations of a period of detente, we must be more explicit than we have in the past in recognizing and accepting this second stabilizing role of the U.S. military presence, in the form of useable force, in every part of the world. Similarly, we must struggle against all difficulties to maintain the foreign aid lever in our hands or strongly under our influence (as through the IBRD, Alliance for Progress institutions, etc.). It is a simple fact, largely unappreciated, that the dependence of many countries on U.S. foreign aid (including their dependence on PL 480 for the feeding of decisive urban populations) is an essential damper on nationalist emotions and policies which, without that damper, could easily rip open many regions of the world, producing results damaging in themselves and opportunities for Communist exploitation.

Second, against this background of useable power and influence, we must dramatize before our own people and the world the limits of the detente. Here Khrushchev has helped us by his reiteration of the theme that there shall be no ideological coexistence. We should explain what that means in terms of other forms of Communist enterprise. I am thinking here not merely of the continued violence of communism in parts of Latin America but the insidious effects of detente on Italian and Greek domestic politics—a kind of making local communism respectable. We may face in post-de Gaulle France a serious form of this softening in the domestic political fiber of the West. Similarly, we should not miss that element in Moscow's debate with Peking which asserts that a period of detente and peaceful coexistence will heighten the “inner contradictions” of the West. They are counting on divisions within the Alliance and on their systematic exploitation. It is our duty, then, to educate the Free World, within our limits, to the dangers and problems of an atmosphere of detente as well as to the enjoyment and exploitation of its real advantages and possibilities.

Third, on the constructive side, despite the difficulties, we must press forward with all those enterprises which would bind together regions of the West in collective enterprises. Despite de Gaulle, there is a great deal to do in NATO which can be done and which the detente does not necessarily preclude; for example, the MLF; movement towards a common strategy; intensified political consultation both on East-West matters and on problems within the Free World outside NATO (e.g., the implications for NATO of the Chicom acquisition of nuclear weapons); work on trade, monetary affairs, aid, etc. The impulses within Latin America to make something serious out of the Alliance for Progress are, I believe, stronger than we often think. There is work to be done on the organizational side of the Alliance for Progress and in giving to it a more vital and effective strategy. In the Pacific there is the impulse of Japan, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines and Malaya to take a greater hand in their own fate; and we have the capacity to help organize these impulses instructively. Over a period of time we have, of course, both the challenge and the possibility of making something more stable out of the Indian subcontinent and the Middle East. The general point is that in the Free World—and here we have a marked advantage over the Communist bloc as presently organized—the atmosphere of detente and the assertion of more familiar nationalist impulses does not eliminate all the areas of common interest within the West, nor does it preclude continued movement forward in joint ventures which would, in effect, organize the world of diffusing power into a world of diffused responsibility.

There are two other major dimensions of policy which evidently flow from the present state of the world: the art of playing the diffusion of power within the Communist world in ways which advance our interests; and the problem of maintaining at home an understanding of this new environment—its problems and possibilities—and the effective will to deal with it. This is a more subtle and difficult—if essentially more wholesome—environment than the eyeball-to-eyeball world of 1961-62. We shall leave prescription under these two headings for the later S/P effort.

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, National Security. Confidential. Other copies are in the Kennedy Library, National Security Files, Subjects Series, Policy Planning 7/63- 9/63, and ibid., President's Office Files, Rostow 1962-1963.

1 The projected study has not been found.

2 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1-1 CHICOM-SWE)

143. Highlights From the Policy Planning Meeting 143. Highlights From the Policy Planning MeetingSource

Washington, September 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

State of the World

Noting that this was the kind of paper most people think S/P writes, but rarely does, Mr. Rostow briefly summarized the State of the World memo.1 The following principal observations were made.

1. One element of additional complexity was the competition between the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union to exploit regional disputes within the Free World, e.g., Indo-Pakistan and Arab-Israeli relations.

2. Given inherent limitations on the effective application of military force and even of economic power it is important to build up cultural, legal and other forms of constructive U.S. influence. The long-run impact of the training of lawyers within the British Commonwealth in Anglo-Saxon law was cited as well as the long-run impact from the immersion of colonials in French culture.

3. The role of economic assistance as a factor limiting the freedom of action of ambitious nations to engage in disruptive regional policies required further thought, since it bore on aid criteria.

4. Without excessive self-congratulation the U.S. had utilized its power in the postwar years on the whole for rather grand international purposes rather than for national aggrandizement. It was not clear that accretions of power and influence to others were being now disciplined to the same extent. How might one use the UN and other instruments for enlarging the sense of responsibility? It might even be interesting to list the various nations of the world and score them on the degree to which their enlarging freedom of action was being used in constructive and responsible ways.

5. Observations were made on the limits as well as the potentials of using the presence of U.S. armed forces as a stabilizing factor. Their presence, if too overt and oppressive, could help produce instabilities.

6. It was suggested that the memo and a summary of the comments made at the meeting be sent to all Chiefs of Mission to acquaint officers abroad with some of the speculative thinking now proceeding in Washington.2

7. It was also felt that a four or five page digest derived from the paper might be used to good advantage in discussions with foreign dignitaries.3

* Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Secretary's Policy Planning Meetings. Confidential. The source text, which is dated September 28, bears no drafting information. No list of participants is given, but they were customarily the Secretary, other principals of the Department, Assistant Secretaries, Bureau chiefs, and the heads or deputies of ACDA, AID, and USIA.

1 Document 142.

2 A note in the margin indicates that copies of this memorandum, and apparently of the “State of the World” paper, went out to all Chiefs of Mission on September 28.

3 In a September 20 memorandum to Taylor, Smith commented that Rostow's “descriptions were better than his prescription,” which amounted to “a conclusion that we should face a changed world situation with ‘more of the same.'” Smith believed that Rostow's prescriptions did not recognize the diffusion of power “of which he speaks.” Instead the United States might try to mold diffusion to its own purposes, substituting “temporary appearances for permanent military presences” and accepting that foreign aid would be increasingly economic, not military, thereby seeking “controlled instability through policies accepting and encouraging moderate change.” An alternative would be to attempt to maintain the bipolar world by allocating enormous resources to the East-West conflict, with the objective of bringing about collapse of the “Bloc” through economic overstrain. “Given our American ethic, the first alternative seems the only acceptable route, but the second merits evaluation.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, 40B2-B4)

144. National Intelligence Estimate 144. National Intelligence EstimateSource

Washington, October 18, 1963.

NIE 11-8-63

SOVIET CAPABILITIES FOR STRATEGIC ATTACK

The Problem

To estimate probable trends in the strength and deployment of Soviet weapon systems suitable for strategic attack, and in Soviet capabilities for such attack, projecting forward for about six years.1

Summary and Conclusions

Trends in Strategic Attack Forces to Mid-1965

1. The Soviet leaders look upon long range strike forces as a major element of their strategic position, intended to support their political objectives, to deter the West from resort to military action, and to fight a war should one occur. The available evidence supports the view that they are attempting to build forces which they regard as appropriate to these objectives rather than forces with which they could launch a deliberate attack on the West and count on reducing retaliation to levels that would be in any sense tolerable. (Paragraph 34)

2. Current Soviet military doctrine holds that a general war could begin with little or no warning, stresses the critical importance of the initial period in determining its outcome, and asserts that enormous advantages accrue to the side striking the first blow. However, the official doctrine also holds that the initial nuclear exchange might not determine the outcome, and that in any event large theater forces are necessary to prosecute a general war successfully. These views, when related to the strategic capabilities now deployed and programmed by the West, impose high and complex requirements upon the Soviet military establishment. Among the chief constraints in meeting these requirements are cost and skilled manpower. The Soviet strategic posture has also been heavily influenced by a concentration on the Eurasian theater, and by an apparent lag in military thinking on the implications of advanced weapons. Soviet military policy and doctrine have been considerably modified in recent years, and the process of change is continuing. However, for the immediate future, Soviet forces for long range attack will be characterized by capabilities against Eurasia far exceeding those against North America. (Paragraphs 35-37)

3. ICBM Forces. Evidence acquired during the past year has led us to modify our estimates as to the size and composition of the Soviet ICBM force in the near term. The most important single development was the interruption of the deployment program during the summer and fall of 1962. The primary reasons for this interruption appear to have been technical, including a probable modification to the second-generation SS-7 ICBM system and persisting difficulties in development of the SS-8. Whatever the reason, however, it is clear that 1962 was a year of reappraisal, in which Soviet planners apparently made important new decisions with respect to their ICBM program. Some of these, for example curtailment of SS-8 deployment, are already evident. For the near term, the result is a somewhat smaller force than previously estimated. (Paragraphs 39-40)

4. We have now identified a total of 18 ICBM complexes, all of which were begun before December 1961. The complexes now contain a total of about 220 launchers in various stages of construction. We estimate that 105-120 ICBM launchers, including about 20 hard silos, were operational as of 1 October 1963.2 An additional 15 launchers were probably operational at Tyuratam.

5. Of the three Soviet ICBM systems now in the field, the SS-7 has been the most successful in development and is the most widely deployed. Deployment of the large, first generation SS-6 was limited to four launchers at one complex. Deployment of the SS-8 had extended to four complexes before the program was interrupted. However, SS-8 deployment has now been curtailed, and it is believed that expansion of the ICBM force over the next year or so will be primarily in terms of the SS-7.

6. We estimate the number of Soviet ICBM launchers operational in mid-1964 at 205-235, and in mid-1965 at 250-350 (these totals include some 20-25 launchers at Tyuratam).3 The force in this period will consist almost entirely of second-generation ICBMs; a few new type ICBMs could be operational by about mid-1965. We now believe that the SS-8 which we previously considered might be a very large missile, is comparable to the SS-7 in payload capacity.4 At present, both of these ICBMs probably carry [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] warheads; initial deployment of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] warheads with these ICBMs could begin in 1964. If new nosecones are developed, improved second generation missiles armed with higher yield warheads [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]could enter service by 1965, and the few SS-6's in the field could be retrofitted to carry [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Thus, it is probable that the great bulk of the Soviet ICBM force through mid-1965 will carry warheads in the 3-6 MT range. By mid-1965, the accuracy of the bulk of the force can probably be improved to about 1.0 n.m. CEP; if new guidance systems are introduced, some portion could achieve CEP's of 0.5-1.0 n.m.

7. The Soviet ICBM force represents a formidable nuclear delivery capability, but cannot maintain a constant readiness state approaching its US counterpart, and is vulnerable since about 80-85 percent of the present force is in soft sites. Successive modifications of soft sites have probably brought some improvement in reaction time, but procedures are still relatively slow, cumbersome, and complicated. We estimate that by mid-1965, about one-third of the ICBMs will be in hard silos, enhancing both the survivability and the reaction time of the force.

8. MRBM/IRBM Forces. We have now identified about 675 launch positions for the 1,050 n.m. (SS-4) MRBMs and 2,200 n.m. (SS-5) IRBMs, of which almost 600 are soft and the remainder are deployed in hard silos. Considering the target coverage and geographic disposition of the force, together with evidence of a cessation or slowdown in site construction, we believe that deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs in the USSR is about complete. We therefore estimate that by mid-1964 this force will have levelled off at about 700-750 launch positions, including 90-110 in hard silos. Soviet MRBMs and IRBMs can presently carry warheads with maximum yields of 2-3 MT.

9. We continue to have difficulty in understanding the Soviet rationale for building such a massive capability to attack European targets. One factor influencing Soviet decisions was undoubtedly the strategic emphasis on Europe, and the concept of a hostage Europe probably played a part. Soviet planning to strike a wide variety of targets, including some in support of the theater forces, may also have exerted an upward pressure on the size of the force, particularly if most of these missiles were to be equipped with kiloton warheads. Finally, a contributing military factor may have been a desire to attain survivability through numbers. (Paragraph 65)

10. We now believe that virtually all MRBM and IRBM launch sites are primary firing positions, i.e., positions which are manned and equipped to participate in an initial salvo. There has been much evidence that the Soviets intend to provide a substantial refire capability for this force, and our evidence on missile production indicates that, by mid-1965, each soft site could have a second-salvo missile available. The same operational deficiencies which characterize the Soviet ICBM force—vulnerability, slow reaction time, and cumbersome procedures—appear in Soviet MRBM and IRBM forces. These have been alleviated somewhat by deployment of a part of the force in hard silos. A further improvement may be made by introduction of an improved missile system. We believe that a new MRBM could be operational in small numbers by mid-1965. (Paragraphs 68-73)

11. Submarine Missile Forces. Current Soviet submarine missile forces are the outgrowth of decisions taken in the middle 1950's to develop quickly a fairly extensive but unsophisticated capability. The USSR now has about 50 ballistic missile submarines, including 11 of the nuclear-powered H class; all are equipped with short range (350 n.m.) missiles capable of delivering warheads [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. The mission originally envisaged for these submarines probably included participation in initial strategic attacks. However, they have now evidently been assigned to second-strike roles, partly because of the growth in numbers of ground-launched systems, but probably also because of Soviet recognition of their limitations. Although this force represents a considerable potential threat, its operational effectiveness is limited by the small number of missiles per submarine (2 or 3), the short range of the missiles, the need to surface before launching, the operational limitations of the diesel-powered units, and the unreliability of some nuclear powered units. These shortcomings probably account for the continued absence of essential operational training cruises to likely combat areas. (Paragraphs 74-76)

12. There is evidence that the Soviets recognize these deficiencies and that improved missiles and submarines will become operational in the near future. Development is far advanced on a new 700 n.m. ballistic missile designed for submerged launching. This missile will almost certainly be incorporated in any new class of ballistic missile submarine which appears in the near future; it could possibly be retrofitted into existing types as well. While we have no direct evidence, it seems probable that at least one new submarine class (either nuclear or diesel-powered) is under development to employ the new missile and that the first units could enter service in the near future. It is likely that new designs will incorporate more than the three missile tubes carried by the older classes. We estimate that by mid-1965 the Soviet force of ballistic missile submarines will have grown to a total of 55-65, including some 15-20 nuclear-powered submarines. (Paragraphs 86-87, 88-89)

13. In addition to ballistic missile submarines, the USSR now has operational some 19 submarines capable of surface launching 300 n.m. cruise missiles. Six of these are nuclear-powered E class, each equipped with six launchers; the rest are diesel-powered units equipped with two or four launchers each. This system was designed primarily for low altitude (1,000-3,000 feet) attack on ships at sea, but it can also be employed against land targets. We believe that the Soviets may now be placing additional emphasis on the cruise missile submarine program. We estimate that by mid-1965 this force will have grown to 25-30 submarines, including 10-12 nuclear-powered. (Paragraphs 82-85, 88-89)

14. Thus, we believe that in the near future the Soviets will bring into service submarine weapon systems better suited to attacks on Eurasian and North American land targets as well as Western naval forces at sea. Further, we continue to believe that by the mid-1960's at least some Soviet missile submarines will be engaging in routine patrols in open ocean areas. (Paragraphs 75, 90- 93)

15. Long Range Bomber Forces. Continued investment in improving Long Range Aviation indicates that the USSR plans to maintain sizable bomber forces for at least the near term. Improvements over the past few years include introduction of a new medium bomber, introduction of air-to-surface missiles, and improved aerial refueling capabilities. Maritime reconnaissance is a secondary role of Long Range Aviation, and the use of both heavy and medium bombers in this role has been increasing. (Paragraph 94)

16. We estimate that Long Range Aviation comprises about 180-205 heavy bombers and tankers and 940-975 medium bombers and tankers. The heavy bomber force includes 95-105 Bison jet bombers and 85-100 Bear turbo prop bombers. Of the medium bombers, about 40-50 are Blinders, with supersonic dash capability, and the remainder are Badgers. There are an additional 360-370 Badgers and 10-20 Blinders in Naval Aviation. Blinder is the only bomber known to be in current production, but there are indications that there may be some new production of Bear in addition to modification. Although research and development on heavy aircraft is under way, no replacement for Bear or Bison is in sight, and we consider it highly unlikely that a new heavy bomber could enter inventory before 1966. We estimate that in mid-1965 Long Range Aviation will comprise 170-200 heavy bombers and tankers and 825-925 medium bombers and tankers.5

17. Soviet Long Range Aviation, by reason of its equipment, basing, and deployment, is much better suited for Eurasian operations than for intercontinental attack. The capabilities of the Bison and Badger aircraft which make up the bulk of the force are restricted by their limited range. The emphasis on aerial refueling and Arctic training of the past several years reflect Soviet efforts to overcome this limitation on capabilities for intercontinental attack. (Paragraphs 99-104)

18. In view of the training patterns of recent years, the capacity of the principal Arctic staging bases, and the range capabilities of Soviet bombers, we believe that an aircraft attack against the US (except Alaska) would involve heavy bombers almost exclusively. Considering the requirements for Arctic staging and refueling, and allowing for non-combat attrition, we estimate that, by committing their entire heavy bomber force to this mission, the Soviets could put 90-115 of these aircraft over the US on two-way missions. The scale of an initial intercontinental attack could be increased by the use of refueled Badgers on two-way missions. Considering all operational factors, we estimate that the Soviets could put up to 150 of these medium bombers over target areas in Greenland, Canada, Alaska and portions of northwestern US. Initial attacks would probably be mounted in successive waves and extend over a considerable number of hours.6

Trends in Strategic Attack Forces, 1966-1969

19. No well-defined strategic concept appears to have governed the long range strike forces which the Soviets have deployed to date, but a number of characteristics can be discerned in the building of these forces. Research and development programs have been vigorous. In contrast, the scale and pace of deployment programs have been uneven. This behavior has reflected, in part, technical problems and economic constraints, but it also suggests that the USSR is willing to tolerate a condition of limited intercontinental capabilities and considerable vulnerability over a long period of time. (Paragraph 125)

20. Perhaps the most consistent patterns apparent in Soviet policy toward long range strike forces over the past several years are to be found in the increased allocation of resources to this mission, the numerical expansion of these forces, the improvement of various weapon systems for long range attack, emphasis on high yield weapons, and continuing interest in diversified capabilities. During this period, emphasis has shifted from weapon systems best suited for Eurasian use to intercontinental systems. Our estimates for the next two years suggest, in the main, a continuation of these broad trends. The forces which we project for mid-1965 are stronger, both numerically and qualitatively, but they represent no substantial change in the overall strategic posture of the USSR vis-à-vis the West. (Paragraphs 126-128)

21. The prospects for the later 1960's are far less clear. We believe that the desire for an effective deterrent will remain one of the primary concerns of Soviet policy. None of the evidence available to us suggests, however, that the USSR contemplates forces designed to neutralize US strike forces in a single blow, nor do the Soviets appear to be seeking to match the US in numbers of delivery vehicles. Other programs, particularly strategic defense and space, will continue to compete with strategic attack programs, not only for resources but for scarce skills and quality materials. In general, we believe that the USSR would have great economic difficulty in pursuing a policy which called for antimissile defenses of major cities, competition with the US in space, and the higher sides of our estimates for long range strike forces which appear below. (Paragraphs 130-135)

22. Soviet long-range strike forces could also be heavily affected by political factors. In the present and prospective strategic situation which confronts the USSR, there is much which argues for a policy of safeguarding national security through some fairly moderate level of military strength or even, more radically, through international agreements to limit or reverse the arms race. Moreover, Khrushchev's advocacy of higher priority for certain civilian economic programs appears to be growing stronger. These political and military considerations suggest, not that the Soviets will cut back on their strategic programs, but rather that they are unlikely to undertake large-scale programs on a crash basis. Indeed, current trends in development and deployment indicate that in the absence of an arms limitation agreement, the Soviets will continue improving their capabilities, but at a moderate pace. In framing the estimates which follow, we have attempted to take into consideration the various factors—strategic, economic, military, political, and technical—which could influence the size and composition of Soviet long range strike forces deployed by mid-1969. (Paragraphs 136-138)

23. The ICBM Force. Our analysis of Soviet programming to date, and of the possible impact of new systems as well as other factors, indicates that by mid-1969 the USSR probably will have acquired a force of some 400-700 operational ICBM launchers.7 8 Currently operational systems will still make up the largest part of the force, but it will probably also include significant numbers of follow-on or improved ICBMs. In general, any new ICBM systems to be deployed in quantity during the 1960's would need to be under development already or to begin development shortly. (Paragraphs 139-141, 151, 155, 164)

24. We believe that the Soviets are most certainly engaged in both improvement of existing ICBM systems and development of new systems, as well as to a continuing space effort. However, the available evidence does not indicate the specific nature of planned improvements to existing ICBMs or of follow-on systems. Our views on the Soviet need to correct current deficiencies, on tendencies in Soviet missile design, and on Soviet technical capabilities heavily affect our judgments about likely new and improved systems. a. Very Large ICBMs. We continue to believe that the Soviets are developing a large vehicle (with a million or more pounds of thrust), which could be used as a space booster, as a “global” rocket, or as a carrier for warheads yielding up to 100 MT. If test firings begin within the next few months, such a large vehicle could probably have an initial operational capability as an ICBM in the period mid-1965 to mid-1966. Initial deployed sites would probably be soft, but the Soviets might find it feasible to incorporate hardening at some stage in the program. (Paragraph 144)

b. Standard-Size Follow-on ICBMs. We believe the Soviets would consider the primary qualitative improvements needed in the bulk of the ICBM force to be increased survivability, shorter reaction time, higher accuracy, and decreased logistic and personnel support. These requirements can probably be met almost as well, and at much lower cost, by improvement to the SS-7 as by a follow-on system in its general weight class. Improved SS-7's may be deployed in new configurations, possibly including semi-hard or single-silo hard sites. (Paragraphs 145-146)

c. Smaller Follow-on ICBMs. Soviet development of an ICBM system similar to the US Minuteman would run counter to trends thus far discernible in Soviet long range missile systems, and Soviet technology necessary for large grain solid propellants is weak. However, some of the operational attributes of the Minuteman concept would reduce the main deficiency in the Soviet force—namely its vulnerability to US attack—and might also reduce maintenance requirements. A new missile somewhat smaller than SS-7 and using improved propellants could reach operational status during the period. We believe it likely that such a new smaller missile would be deployed in hard sites. We believe that test firings of such a new smaller missile would not start for about a year and that operational launchers would not exist at deployed sites until 1966-1967. Should the Soviets elect to deploy a new missile in soft or semi-hard sites, test firings could begin in the near future, with an initial operational capability occurring in about mid-1965. (Paragraphs 147-148)

25. We believe that deployment of currently operational missiles in soft launch sites will cease by the mid-1960s. The low side of our estimate for 1969 (400 launchers) assumes that, in addition to deployment of a few very large ICBMs which begin to enter operational inventory in mid-1966, the Soviets will at about the same time introduce either a new, somewhat smaller ICBM or an improved SS-7, possibly in single-launcher hard sites. A moderate buildup of this sort, with emphasis on hardening, would in our view be consistent with a Soviet effort to maintain and improve the credibility of its deterrent. The reasons why the Soviet force might develop in this manner include such economic considerations as the need to devote more resources to the civilian economy or to antimissile and space programs as well as political factors. (Paragraph 151)

26. The high side of our estimate for mid-1969 (700 launchers), takes into account the possibility that the deployment of soft launchers, perhaps including some semi-hardened sites, is carried somewhat further than in the preceding alternative; that a very large system is introduced somewhat earlier than 1966; and that over 200 launchers of a new type—an improved SS-7 or a new, somewhat smaller hard system, possible in single silo sites—are deployed. Such a buildup might reflect not only a Soviet concern for deterrence, but also an effort to put the USSR in a somewhat better position to undertake a preemptive attack if a Western strike appeared imminent and unavoidable. (Paragraph 152)

27. Although the force levels indicated by the upper and lower limits of the range are derived from technical and strategic considerations, other force compositions and force levels within this general range are equally possible. The Soviets would recognize that forces within this range fell far short of those required for a preemptive attack which might reduce devastation of the USSR to an acceptable level, but in any case, the force would include a protected component capable of devastating retaliatory blows if it survived. (Paragraph 153)

28. MRBM and IRBM Forces. We believe that Soviet MRBM/IRBM force levels will remain fairly constant in the 1966-1969 period at about 700-750 launchers. The developments which we can foresee in Western forces are not likely to add to potential Soviet MRBM/IRBM targets in a major way, although we do not exclude the possibility that a general strengthening of NATO forces would result in some incremental expansion. Improvements in Soviet MRBM/IRBM capabilities in this period are more likely to be qualitative than quantitative. The Soviets may be developing a new MRBM, and it is possible that they also contemplate a new IRBM. If two separate systems are developed, the IRBM would probably phase in a year or so after the MRBM, i.e., in about 1966-1967. It is also possible that the Soviets have elected to work toward a single follow-on system which could cover all MRBM and IRBM ranges. In either event, follow-on systems are likely to feature hard or possibly mobile deployment. If, as we estimate, the size of the force remains fairly stable, improved systems will be deployed to supersede present systems, and may have largely replaced currently operational MRBMs by 1969. (Paragraphs 154-158)

29. Submarine Missile Forces. We think that the Soviets will continue to consider missile submarines an important adjunct to their ground-launched missile capabilities, and we expect the requirement for capabilities to attack surface naval formations to continue. Thus we estimate continued construction of both ballistic missile and cruise missile submarines in this period. Although we have no specific evidence, we believe that longer range submarine-launched ballistic missile systems could become operational in about the 1966-1967 period. We do not anticipate significant technical changes in the cruise missile submarine force. (Paragraphs 159- 163)

30. The size of Soviet missile submarine forces will depend upon a number of factors including the availability of militarily competitive but less expensive delivery systems (especially hardened ICBMs), construction capabilities, and allocation of nuclear submarines to other naval missions. Considering all factors, including estimated construction programs, and the possibilities for improved systems, we believe that by 1969 the Soviets will have 65-80 ballistic missile submarines operational, of which 25-35 will be nuclear-powered. At that time, we estimate a cruise missile submarine force of 40-60 of which 20-30 will be nuclear-powered. (Paragraph 164)

31. Long Range Bombers. We estimate that by 1969 Long Range Aviation will have gradually declined in total strength to about 130-175 heavy bombers and tankers and 400-650 medium bombers and tankers. We believe that it will still consist of aircraft types now in service: Bisons, Bears, Badgers, and Blinders, with the last of these comprising about half of the medium bomber force. Considering the types and quantities of missile delivery systems they are likely to have, as well as the probable continued availability of existing heavy bomber types, we think it unlikely that the Soviets will bring any follow-on heavy bomber to operational service in the period of this estimate. However, the Soviets have the technical capability of developing and producing new, high-performance military aircraft of intercontinental range for operational use in the 1966-1969 period, should they come to consider this necessary or worthwhile. In the later 1960s they would probably employ bomber forces in follow-on, rather than initial attacks and for increasingly specialized missions.9 (Paragraphs 165-166)

32. Space Weapons. On the basis of evidence presently available, we are unable to determine the existence of Soviet plans or programs for the military use of space. However, we believe that the USSR almost certainly is investigating the feasibility of space systems for military support and offensive and defensive weapons. For accomplishing military missions, we think that during the 1966-1969 period, orbital weapons will not compare favorably with ICBMs in terms of cost and effectiveness. Based on these considerations as we now understand them, it would appear unlikely that the Soviets will during this decade deploy orbital bombardment systems of military significance. Moreover, we believe that the USSR would probably recognize that a Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons in space would produce an unfavorable reaction in other countries and strong US counteractions. Further, if the Soviets enter into a formal obligation to refrain from orbiting nuclear weapons, this will constitute still another factor inhibiting such deployment. (Paragraphs 168-171)

33. We recognize, however, that the Soviets might reach different conclusions as to cost and effectiveness, and in some future phase of East-West relations, political inhibitions might lose their effectiveness. Moreover, considering the pace of developments in the weapons field in general, it is extremely hazardous to estimate Soviet decisions for a period many years ahead. For these reasons, a firm estimate as to whether the Soviets will deploy an orbital bombardment system within the 1966-1969 period cannot be made at this time. (Paragraphs 172-173)

Discussion

I. Soviet Policy Toward Strategic Attack Forces

34. The Soviet leaders look upon long range strike forces as a major element of their strategic position, intended to support their political objectives, to deter the West from resort to military action, and to fight a war should one occur. The available evidence supports the view that they are attempting to build forces which they regard as appropriate to these objectives, rather than aiming at forces with which they could launch a deliberate attack on the West and count on reducing retaliation to levels that would be in any sense tolerable.

35. Soviet policy toward long range strike forces is heavily affected by the Soviet view of the character of future war. This Soviet view has become increasingly complicated in the last several years as the result of a continuing debate over the implication of modern weaponry for military doctrine. This debate persists, and may lead to further important changes, but at the present state it has produced several official conclusions which bear on long range capabilities: (a) General war might begin in a variety of ways, including circumstances which provided very short warning times.

(b) The initial period is of critical importance and might determine the outcome.

(c) Enormous advantages accrue to the side striking the first blow.

(d) But the initial nuclear exchange might not determine the outcome, and in any event large ground campaigns would follow.

36. These propositions, when related to the strategic capabilities now deployed and programmed by the West, impose high and complex requirements upon Soviet long range strike forces. Among the chief constraints in meeting these requirements are cost and skilled manpower, which pose distinct problems to Soviet decision-makers. One of these problems is the proper balance of expenditure among military needs, the space program, and the civil economy. Another is the proper allocation of military funds among the various force components. This problem is made particularly acute by the insistence of the military leadership that all arms of service, including large theater forces, are necessary to prosecute a general war successfully and to provide the USSR with flexibility in a variety of possible circumstances.

37. Two other main factors have been involved in the past decisions which have determined present Soviet capabilities for long range attack. One is a concentration on the Eurasian theater, which is traceable to traditional Soviet preoccupation with this area as well as to the higher costs and greater technical complexity of intercontinental weapon systems. The other is an apparent lag in military thinking, which seems to have been relatively slow in working out some of the more sophisticated implications of advanced weapons. Both these factors are now changing, but for the immediate future Soviet forces for long range attack will be characterized by capabilities against Eurasia far exceeding those against North America, and by a considerable deficiency in certain performance characteristics—chiefly survivability and reaction times—relative to corresponding US forces.

38. A continuing Soviet emphasis on high yield weapons for long range striking forces was indicated by the 1961-1962 nuclear test series. The USSR's nuclear testing program has provided it with a wide variety of weapons for strategic delivery, with yields up to 100 MT. As new weapons enter the inventory they will progressively improve the total nuclear delivery capabilities of the strategic striking forces.

[Here follow the body of the paper and two annexes, totaling 41 additional pages. See the Supplement.]

* Source: Central Intelligence Agency Files, Job 79-R01012A, ODDI Registry. Top Secret; Restricted Data; Controlled Dissemination. A more highly classified version of this document is ibid. A table of contents is not printed. For complete text, see the Supplement. A note on the cover sheet reads in part: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, AEC, and NSA.” The members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred, except the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside his jurisdiction.

1 The weapon systems considered are ground-launched missiles with ranges of 600 nautical miles or more, submarine-launched missiles, heavy and medium bombers, air-to-surface missiles, and advanced delivery and support systems such as orbital and suborbital vehicles. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates that 145-160 ICBM launchers were operational as of 1 October 1963. See his footnote on page 15 at paragraph 60. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates 215-250 operational ICBM launchers by mid-1964, and 300-350 by mid-1965. See footnote, page 15. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency and the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, believe that a confident selection between possible SS-8 delivery capabilities cannot be made at this time. In their opinion, available evidence and analysis do not permit excluding the possibility that the SS-8 may carry a nosecone of 10,000 lbs or a little more. [3 lines of source text not declassified. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, estimates the medium bomber/tanker force level for mid-1965 at 925-1025 aircraft. He considers the heavy bomber/tanker force will remain at approximately 200 aircraft although the Bear/Bison mix may vary somewhat. Introduction of a longer endurance aircraft based on the Bear could begin in late 1964 or early 1965. See his footnote to page 23, paragraph 98 of the Discussion. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, considers this paragraph seriously underestimates the manned aircraft threat to the continental United States. In the event war should eventuate and the USSR attacks the United States with nuclear weapons, he believes this will be an all-out effort aimed at putting a maximum number of weapons on US targets. He would therefore estimate that the number of aircraft, including Badgers on one-way missions, could exceed 500. See his footnote to pages 22, 23, paragraph 102 of the Discussion. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 The Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy, believes the force level is likely to be toward the low side (400) of the estimate presented here. See his footnote to paragraph 153, page 33, of the Discussion. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, considers the Soviet ICBM force by mid-1969 could range from 600 to as high as 1,000 operational ICBM launchers, depending on whether a new, small, easily-deployed system is introduced in the 1965-1966 period. See his footnote to the Table on page 33, paragraph 153 of the Discussion. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, disagrees with this paragraph since he thinks that the Soviets will continue to consider manned strategic aircraft an important adjunct to their ground launched missile capabilities. He estimates that the USSR will introduce a follow-on heavy bomber. He further estimates the heavy bomber force will remain at about 200 or somewhat larger, depending on the timing of an expected follow-on bomber, and that by mid-1969 the medium bomber/tanker force probably still will include about 900 aircraft. See his footnote to the Table on page 36 and to paragraph 167. [Footnote in the source text.]

145. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Kennedy 145. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President KennedySource

Washington, November 14, 1963.

SUBJECT

Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Continental Air and Missile Defense Forces (U)

Our program for strategic defense is approaching a threshold where a major national decision should be made whether to base our strategic posture primarily on strong offensive forces or to provide the elements of a balanced defense against a nuclear attack. A choice between these fundamental alternatives involves the following arguments: (a) Our strategic offensive forces, alone, should deter a calculated Soviet first strike. Additional offensive forces would contribute most to defense by reducing the probability of general nuclear attack. The nation may not be willing to provide the resources for an expanded strategic defense program, including the requisite civil defense, in view of the limited effectiveness of such a program. Moreover, a level of defense that threatened the credibility of the Soviet deterrent would probably be countered, at some fraction of the cost of the defense, by additional expenditures for offensive weapons.

(b) A nuclear war, however, may result from other conditions—an accident, an uncontrolled attack by a Soviet field commander, a catalytic attack by a third nation, or from a deep crisis in which the Soviets act irrationally or are willing to accept greater damage. Balanced defense forces would significantly raise the level of attack that would cause serious damage under such, probably most likely, conditions of war outbreak. For any given level of Soviet forces, balanced defense forces would allow the U.S. to take greater risks to achieve a favorable outcome from such crisis periods. Although the Soviets could overcome our defense by somewhat smaller expenditures than the cost of our defense, they may not so respond for a period of time, due to constraints on specific economic resources or competing demands for these resources. And last, a balanced strategic defense program would provide a more favorable environment for disarmament negotiations, permitting the U.S. to accept a smaller number of known or undetected offensive weapons maintained by any potential enemy.

Our present strategic defense force provides only a nominal capability to reduce the damage of a nuclear attack and is not consistent with any rational strategic posture. The ultimate choice between these fundamental alternatives should be implemented either by a phased reduction of our present programs to meet limited defense objectives or by programs to provide the basic elements of an effective defense. The import of this decision should be recognized: This decision should be addressed at the level of the aggregate strategic defense program as the effectiveness of each major element depends critically on the scale of the other elements. A decision to improve our continental air defense force is not consistent with a decision against deploying a ballistic missile defense system. A decision to deploy Nike X is not consistent with a decision against a fallout shelter system. A decision on any one of the major elements implies a choice of strategic postures which should not be made by default.1 At this time, I do not believe an intelligent choice can be made between these fundamental alternatives. The recommended strategic defense program, consequently, provides only those elements required to meet limited defense objectives and to provide the technical and organizational base for later decisions on the major elements.

For comparison, the following paragraphs summarize the characteristics, costs, and effectiveness of three alternate strategic defense programs.

1. Summary of a Low Alternate Program

Choice of a strategic posture based primarily on strong offensive forces should lead to a phased reduction of present programs to a level sufficient to meet limited, feasible defense objectives. A low alternate strategic defense program would include the following basic elements: (a) The continental air defense forces would be reduced by FY 1969 to include only 25 active interceptor squadrons, a surface-to-air missile defense of selected hardened sites, and a minimum surveillance, warning, and control system. The ANG interceptor squadrons and the bomber warning lines would be deleted.

(b) The missile warning and space surveillance systems would be maintained and improved to alert, launch, and control our offensive systems. The Nike Zeus test program would be maintained as part of the Nike X Army development and to gather data to design our offensive penetration aid systems. The Nike X and Defender program would be limited to development work only.

(c) The civil defense program would include an expanded shelter survey program and the associated provisioning and shelter management programs but would include no direct assistance for shelter construction. This program, at most, would provide 140 million low-shielded shelter spaces by 1970.

2. Summary of High Alternate Program

A balanced strategic defense program would include the following basic elements: (a) A 12 squadron force of advanced interceptors would be deployed by FY 1970; the ANG interceptor force would be re-equipped with the best interceptors released from the active force. A part of the surface-to-air missile force would be re-sited for defense of selected hardened sites. A reorganization of the air defense surveillance, warning, and control system would provide a more flexible, survivable system at a lower annual cost.

(b) A ballistic missile defense of the 22 largest urban areas would be deployed by FY 1973. The missile warning and space surveillance systems and the Defender program would be maintained.

(c) An expanded civil defense program would provide 185 million shelter spaces with the necessary provisions for warning, shelter habitation, and post-attack recovery by 1970. Active thermal counter-measures would also be deployed at the 22 largest urban areas on a schedule consistent with deployment of Nike X.

3. Summary of the Recommended Program

The recommended strategic defense program for FY 1965 must be recognized as an interim program, providing those elements that are common to the low and high alternate programs and those necessary to provide the base for later decision on the major new elements.2 This force includes the following basic elements: (a) The active interceptor force will be reduced by normal attrition to 38 squadrons by FY 1969; the ANG interceptor force will be substantially re-equipped with F-102s withdrawn from the theaters and maintained at a 22 squadron level through FY 1969. A part of the surface-to-air missiles will be re-sited for defense of selected hardened sites, with the remainder of the force maintained for urban area defense. Development of two new control systems will provide a basis for the ultimate replacement of SAGE.

(b) The missile warning and space surveillance systems will include several new elements for SLBM detection and space tracking. The Nike Zeus, Nike X, and Defender development programs will be maintained on a priority schedule to provide a technical base for a later decision on the production and deployment of a ballistic missile defense.

(c) The civil defense program would be revised consistent with the low or high alternate programs, dependent on Congressional action on the proposed FY 1964 program.

4. Estimated Costs of Alternate Active Defense Programs

The estimated costs of the approved active defense programs and the three alternate programs are presented below.

(Millions of Dollars)

FY62 FY63 FY64 FY65 FY66 FY67 FY68 FY69 Total FY65-69

Air Defensea

Approved 2125 1946 1962 1708 1649 1610 1597

Low Alternate 1467 1370 1188 1038 882 5945

High Alternate 2101 2293 2325 1964 1294 9977

Recommended 1754 1632 1587 1565 1482 8020

Ballistic Missile Defense b

Approved 570 550 582 614 547 458 393

Low Alternate 614 535 463 399 355 2366

High Alternate 709 1267 2649 3350 3339 11314

Recommended 614 535 463 399 355 2366

Total Active Defense c

Approved 2695 2496 2544 2322 2196 2068 1990

Low Alternate 2080 1905 1651 1437 1237 8311

High Alternate 2810 2560 4974 5314 4633 21291

Recommended 2368 2167 2050 1964 1837 10386

a Air Defense total includes both Service and Guard weapons, the surveillance, warning and control system, the command and support for all approved continental air and missile defense systems, and R&D for new air defense systems.

b Ballistic missile defense total includes missile warning and space surveillance systems, investment and operating costs for Nike X, and the Nike Zeus, Nike X, and Defender R&D programs.

c A complete presentation of the total expenditures for strategic defense would include the cost of the CONUS ASW forces and the civil defense program. The annual cost of the CONUS ASW forces is now around $1.1 billion and will be slightly reduced as a result of the changes recommended in the ASW memorandum. The estimated costs of the approved civil defense program and alternate programs consistent with the alternate active defense programs is presented below:

(Millions of Dollars)

FY62 FY63 FY64 FY65 FY66 FY67 FY68 FY69 Total FY63-69

Civil Defense

Approved 250 128 347 300 300 300 300

Low Alternate 273 247 140 199 195 1054

High Alternate 557 732 750 783 598 3420

5. Effectiveness of the Present Program

A strategic defense program should contribute to three important objectives: (a) attack warning to alert, launch, and control the strategic offense and defense forces;

(b) defend the national and military command centers and those military forces necessary to control and terminate the war; and

(c) limit damage to U.S. population and industry.

The present warning systems, with several minor improvements, are adequate for the next several years. The primary response to the changed warning environment of the late 1960s will involve changes in our strategic forces to reduce dependence on warning and changes in operational procedures to make use of shorter warning times.

The present strategic defense force, unfortunately, provides only a nominal capability to limit damage to U.S. population and industry and is not sited for effective defense of the critical command centers and military forces. At the present time, the damage resulting from a Soviet attack would be limited primarily by the number and capability of Soviet offensive weapons, the effectiveness of our counterforce response, and the effect of coercive tactics on Soviet intentions and targeting. Our present strategic defense forces are comparable to a building with fragile walls and no roof or foundation. The air defense force is a costly product of earlier planning for a large all-bomber threat, and is critically vulnerable to a small ballistic missile attack; under favorable conditions this force could probably destroy around 100 bombers, but most of the bombers would penetrate to their priority targets.3

With no defense against ballistic missiles, a 50 missile attack would kill more than 30 million people and a 200 missile attack would kill most of our urban population. The CONUS ASW force provides a capability to destroy around 30 percent of a follow-on attack by Soviet diesel-powered missile submarines but provides only a limited capability against the growing nuclear-powered submarine force. With full utilization of the present fallout shelter spaces, a Soviet attack on military targets only would kill more than 30 million people; no increase in active defenses alone would significantly increase the survivors from a determined Soviet attack in the absence of a complete fallout shelter system. Without a balanced strategic defense, a determined Soviet attack in the late 1960s would probably kill around two-thirds of the U. S. population. The present force, at most, could provide some defense of our hardened military forces, and a substantial re-siting would be required to achieve this capability. Our present strategic defense program, in summary, is larger than necessary to meet limited, feasible defense objectives and is grossly inadequate to provide an effective defense of population and industry.

6. Effectiveness of a Low Alternate Program

A reduction of the present program should be accompanied by a reduction of the missions for which they are charged. A low alternate strategic defense program would provide a negligible capability to increase the population surviving a determined Soviet attack but would still contribute to several valuable objectives.

The smaller interceptor force considered would be adequate4 for peacetime airspace surveillance and policing, a defense against an airborne attack by a third power, and defense against intra-war reconnaissance; as over half of the present 40 active squadrons are co-located with SAC, the distribution of a 25 squadron force over the available non-co-located bases would present a comparable number of aiming points. A re-siting of a small proportion of the surface-to-air missile force would provide an effective defense of selected hardened national and military command centers and missile fields, where none now exists. The forward bomber warning lines could be deleted,5 as the contiguous radars now provide more warning to our strategic forces than is available against a ballistic missile attack.

A continuation of the ballistic missile defense R&D programs may not be appropriate unless eventual deployment of Nike X or a similar system for defense of urban areas is expected. (A ballistic missile defense of hardened command centers and missile fields does not now appear competitive with other means of reducing the vulnerability of these systems.) The missile warning and space surveillance systems and the Nike Zeus test program are requisite to maintain the effectiveness of our strategic offensive forces.

A Congressional decision against the proposed shelter development legislation would limit any additional fallout shelter spaces to those that could be identified by an expanded shelter survey program. At most, this program would provide 140 million shelter spaces (with a protection factor of 20 or more) by 1970. This lower program, including the associated shelter stocking and management programs, would increase the proportion of population surviving a determined Soviet attack from around one-third to over 40 percent.

Against the range of feasible defense objectives, this low alternate program would be nearly as effective and significantly less costly than the approved program.

7. Effectiveness of a High Alternate Program

The high alternate program outlined in this memorandum would provide the basic elements of a balanced strategic defense on a schedule which makes full use of the available technology and minimizes the annual fluctuations of funding requirements. A nationwide fallout shelter system with the necessary provisions for warning, shelter habitation, and post-attack recovery, would be the most effective component of a balanced program; for a total cost to the economy of around $7 billion, this program would increase the proportion of the population surviving a determined Soviet attack in 1970 from around one-third to around one-half. The improved air defense program and a ballistic missile defense of the 22 largest urban areas, for a total cost (including five years operations) of around $25 billion, would further increase the population surviving to around two-thirds. The air defense program would also provide a considerably improved defense of the hardened command centers and missile fields. The active defense systems provide an additional capability to moderate damage to our industrial structure, for which there appears to be no substitute short of a major program to disperse and/or harden industrial facilities.

Depending on the scale of a potential attack, the desired level of defense, and the amount of resources required, some additions to these programs should be considered later. These include the deployment of a new surface-to-air missile defense against bombers and cruise missiles in the areas defended by a ballistic missile defense, deployment of Nike X at smaller urban areas, and additional thermal countermeasures. An additional $20 billion for a combination of these programs would increase the proportion surviving to around three-fourths against a constant Soviet threat or would provide a comparable level of defense against a somewhat larger attack.

8. Effectiveness of the Recommended Program

The recommended strategic defense program provides a capability comparable to that of the approved program. The air defense program includes one substantial improvement, where a minimal capability now exists—an effective air defense of selected hardened command centers and missile fields; the program also includes a modernization of the ANG interceptor force and the control system developments necessary for the replacement of SAGE with a more survivable, flexible system. The recommended program, however, should not be judged primarily by present capability, but by potential future capability. This program differs from the low alternate program, primarily, by providing the technical and organizational base necessary for possible deployment of a balanced defense force at some later time.

The sections following discuss the major alternative programs for each major component of a balanced defense, the analysis relevant to a choice among these alternatives, and outline the recommended programs. Part I outlines the air defense program. Part II outlines the ballistic missile defense program. The related ASW and civil defense programs are presented in separate memoranda.6

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab II of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs,” dated December 19. Another copy is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US. An earlier version of the draft memorandum, which was circulated to the JCS for comment, is dated October 9. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1800/774, JMF 7000 (1 Oct 63))

1 “The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that their interdependence is not so absolute that difficulties in one of these programs should restrict advancement in another.” [Footnote in the source text. The quotation is from a November 6 JCS memorandum to McNamara. (Ibid., JCS 1800/774-2, JMF 7000 (1 Oct 63)) It stated that “measured against a postulated Soviet threat which has not decreased in proportion to the proposed reduction in US forces, the recommended program provides insufficient defensive strength.” This deficiency was caused by premature reliance on anticipated surveillance, warning and control equipment, and postponement of missile defense and new interceptor systems.]

2 In addition, certain forces not required for either of the alternative programs have been included at the request of the JCS. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The JCS believe this statement is based on conditions more favorable to the enemy which now appear unrealistic. [Footnote in the source text. According to the JCS memorandum cited in footnote 1 above, the statement was “based upon most favorable conditions for the enemy which appear unrealistic.”]

4 The JCS state the force may be inadequate in an age of super-sonic transports. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 The JCS believe these should be retained as long as there is a manned bomber threat. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 None printed.

146. Editorial Note 146. Editorial Note

In a memorandum to Secretary Rusk dated November 15, 1963, Rostow enclosed two drafts of a basic national security policy. One, dated November 8, was a 14-page paper described by Rostow as “the essence.” The other was a much longer paper dated November 11. Rostow stated that while the papers had benefited from interagency discussion of previous drafts, they had not been seen by anyone outside the Policy Planning Council. He stated that he continued to believe “that promulgation of a BNSP would contribute in important ways to effective, coordinated execution of U.S. policy.” No record has been found of action by Rusk on this memorandum or its attachments during the remainder of 1963. The memorandum is in Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, BNSP 1963; the two drafts are ibid., S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, TS-BNSP.

147. Memorandum From Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr., to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 147. Memorandum From Spurgeon M. Keeny, Jr., to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)Source

Washington, November 22, 1963.

SUBJECT

22 November Budget Meeting with Secretary McNamara1

The briefing paper prepared by the Bureau of the Budget2 presents a good summary of the four OSD white papers3 and covers all of the key budget issues to be discussed with Secretary McNamara today. I have the following general comments on these papers:

(1) Strategic Retaliatory Forces. While not abandoning the concept of “damage limiting” capabilities, Secretary McNamara in this very interesting paper4 continues to shift the focus of his strategic doctrine away from the concept of “damage limiting” counterforces to the concept of “assured destruction” of the Soviet Union. Within this context the central issue is the proper size for the Minuteman force. The analysis presented makes it clear that we have a capability for “assured destruction” of the Soviet Union entirely independent of the MM force. This is significant since the previous draft of this document5 that I believe you read went through an elaborate and unimpressive argument in an attempt to demonstrate that under certain extremely pessimistic assumptions one could justify the entire force of 1200 MM force under the requirement for an “assured destruction” of the Soviet Union. The rationale for the MM force level is tied exclusively to the “damage limiting” concept. However, examination of the table on page 19 of the OSD paper6 shows that the “damage limiting” strategy is at best not very effective in a second strike situation and that diminishing returns have set in long before one reaches the proposed OSD MM force level of 1200. When the Soviets initiate the attack, a force of 1200 MM does not appear to be significantly more effective in reducing fatalities than a force of 950 MM.7

As compared with last year, the new OSD proposals essentially involve a reduction in MM force levels by 100 MM from 1300 to 1200, a slippage of one year in achieving these goals (FY 68 to FY 69), and an acceleration in the retrofit program of improved MM for MM in existing silos. I do not believe that the OSD paper makes a real case either for the total force level or for the urgency in the improved MM program, even in the most pessimistic contingencies. (If one chooses to be pessimistic about future adverse technological developments, I think that it would be wiser to begin to invest strategic funds in advance systems development such as the Polaris B-3 missile rather than build up of the MM force beyond 950 since it is conceivable that in the 70's the MM may prove more vulnerable than we are now willing to admit.) While I think the improved MM is a sensible program which overcomes some of the serious limitations of the MM system, it is being pushed on a very tight concurrency schedule for which there appears to be no military justification.8

In view of the above, I agree with the BOB proposals to hold the MM force level at 950, to slip the schedule of improved MM program slightly, and to delay the retrofit program of improved MM for MM. Nevertheless, Secretary McNamara will undoubtedly argue, persuasively, that it is impossible for Congressional and Pentagon political reasons to cut the force objectives below 1200 and that an acceleration of the improved MM program is necessary to sell even this modest objective.9

I believe that there is an additional issue here as to whether it is really necessary to fire 10 percent of the missile force annually as part of the reliability program. I do not believe that this many firings are necessary to obtain adequate reliability statistics. Such a large number of firings would also appear to be rather provocative as the size of the MM force grows (e.g. one every four or five days by FY 65 and one every three days in FY 69).

There is no real reason to continue the B-70 program; however, given the amount of our investment, I believe that it would be politically impossible to cancel the program without any flights. I believe a practical solution to this problem would be the cancellation of the third aircraft which the BOB estimates would save $80 million.10

(2) Continental Air and Missile Defense. This paper11 essentially pushes all significant policy issues into the future. It is an unusual document that appears to have been written by supporters of a very large continental defense program who were directed to support a very small program. Since OSD is not prepared to face the policy issues involved, it only appears practical at this time to question whether the recommended program is in fact consistent with future decisions to go either to a smaller or much larger continental defense effort. The points raised by the BOB all appear valid with the exception of the objections to BMEWS improvement. I believe that, unless these can be shown to be technically unsound, they are probably justified given our existing investment in BMEWS and alert B-52 aircraft.

The civil defense question is not really covered in the OSD paper and the discussion of this subject in the BOB briefing paper is not very helpful. The basic issue on civil defense is whether we should attempt to get additional shelter spaces through an incentive program as Secretary Pittman12 proposes or whether we should take the steps necessary to make the shelters we have already identified useable as OST proposes. Secretary McNamara has asked Mr. Gilpatric and Jerry to discuss this question separately and I assume, therefore, it will not be discussed at the meeting today, other than to establish a fiscal ceiling.

(3) ASW. The principal budget issue in the ASW area is the force level and procurement of SSN (nuclear attack submarines). Unfortunately, the OSD paper13 sheds little real light on this question. The paper does not make a convincing case for the use of large numbers of SSN submarines and admittedly presents no rationale for the proposed force level other than it will provide a better basis from which to build a force if it is found to be necessary. While the BOB proposal to entirely eliminate production of SSN submarines is very appealing, I am afraid that it is a bit too harsh to be acceptable. A good argument can certainly be made that some continuing production capacity should be retained. Therefore, I would propose building three or four SSN's in FY 65 rather than the six proposed by OSD or the nine proposed by the Navy.14 Secretary McNamara will undoubtedly take the position that he has already cut the Navy as much as he possibly can on this highly emotional item.16

(4) General Purpose Forces. This is an excellent paper17 which arrived at important policy conclusions with which I agree. If there are important budget issues in this area, they have been carefully disguised by the OSD and have not been identified by the BOB.

Spurgeon Keeny18

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Defense Budget 1965 Section 2. Secret.

1 No meeting was held on November 22, the day President Kennedy was assassinated. A meeting was held on November 16 among McNamara, Bundy, Gordon, Wiesner, and others. (Memorandum for the record by J.S. Hoover, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense (Budget); ibid.)

2 Dated November 20. (Ibid.)

3 Reference is to semifinal versions of three DPMs and the final version of one. They are cited in footnotes below.

4 “Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Strategic Retaliatory Forces,” dated November 13. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US)

5 The August 31 version of the strategic DPM is attached to a September 2 memorandum from McNamara to Taylor. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (31 Aug 61) Sec 1)

6 Reference is to the chart entitled “U.S. Fatalities Assuming the Soviets Initiate the Attack” in the strategic DPM. The chart is unchanged in the final version, Document 151.

7 Kaysen made a similar argument regarding the August 31 draft of the strategic DPM. (Memorandum to Bundy, October 25, with 8-page attachment; Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Defense Budget 1965 Section 2)

8 Bundy wrote “agreed” in the margin next to this sentence.

9 Bundy wrote “I doubt this” in the margin next to this paragraph. In a budget discussion held November 27, McNamara did not accept the Bureau of the Budget proposals for a reduced Minuteman force level and slippage in improved Minuteman production, and it was agreed that the issues would be submitted to President Johnson. (Memorandum from Keeny to Bundy, November 30; Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Defense Budget 1965 Section 2) In a December 9 memorandum to President Johnson, Kermit Gordon recommended holding the Minuteman force level at 950 in FY 1965, but did not oppose McNamara's eventual force goal of 1,200. (Ibid.)

10 At the November 27 meeting, McNamara agreed to cut back one of three programmed B-70s “provided a positive decision was made on handling of the classified project with which you are familiar.”

11 Reference is to Document 145.

12 Steuart L. Pittman, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Civil Defense).

13 “Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces FY 1965-1969,” November 9. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US)

14 Bundy made a similar recommendation in a December 5 memorandum to McNamara. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Defense Budget 1965 Section 2)

16 The final version of the ASW DPM, dated December 11, retains the recommendation that SSN procurement continue at six boats per year. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A)

17 “Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Army and Marine Corps General Purpose Forces,” November 15. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US) The final version of this paper is Document 153.

18 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

148. Memorandum for the Record 148. Memorandum for the RecordSource

Washington, December 4, 1963.

[Here follows discussion of forthcoming travel and scheduled meetings of administration officials, U.S. policy toward Venezuela, and military assistance procedures.]

6. Strategic Policy Papers. Cooper used the discussion on the State Department to remind Bundy that some of Rostow's strategic policy papers1 were reaching the point of signature, and he wondered whether the White House was prepared to accept them or whether the work would have been in vain. He said that if the papers were not used, a lot of talented and well-meaning bureaucrats would be dissatisfied; they would have spent long months working on them for nothing. On the other hand, if they were to be used, the procedures for getting them approved as outlined by Rostow should be carefully scrutinized.

This led to a long discussion—one of several in the last few months—on the Rostow papers, and there is no other subject that makes Bundy's staff bristle as much as this one. The exchanges, as they seldom do, become sharp and direct. Bundy himself, concerned essentially with operational matters, seems not to believe the papers will be of much value in determining policies because they may be out of date before they are finished. His basic approach, as he admitted today, has been that since he could not stop the Rostow papers from being developed, he could, if necessary, ignore them. Other people at the table, who are more planners than operators—Ken Hansen,2 for example—think the papers may have some value. But the issues are seldom joined directly. Instead they flit by in shorthand remarks.

The discussion was fairly long and, as noted, at times caustic. It dealt essentially with three questions, although in no particular logical sequence: (1) Are the Rostow papers worth the trouble? (2) How will they be approved? and (3) What will their relation be to the Long Range Assistance Strategies and the Internal Defense Plans?3

With respect to their value, the consensus was that, quite naturally, some will be good and some bad. If the split is 50-50, that will be about what is expected. The good ones should be used, the poor ones junked. Bundy thought that some attrition would be beneficial in order to set a standard. With respect to level of approval, Bundy seemed to think, and everyone agreed, that this would depend upon the subject of the paper and its interest in the White House. Some papers could be approved by the departments and need go no further. Others should come to the White House, this determination being made by the White House staff officer responsible for the country under study. Bundy looked on the White House role as being the right to intervene without any obligation to do so. He agreed with Bromley Smith's point that no procedure should be established which allowed only disagreements to come forward. The President is often as interested in what the department heads have agreed on as he is on what they disagreed. In other words, if the White House is interested, it will be interested across-the-board. Bundy closed this phase of the discussion by saying that he would closely review the Rostow-proposed procedures for approving the papers to see that they meet White House needs.4

Although the relationship of the Rostow papers to the Long Range Assistance Strategies and the Internal Defense Plans has not yet been completely decided, the Secretary of State has said that these latter two documents should be folded into the strategic policy studies. Given the view that the Secretary of State should take stronger control over foreign affairs, the White House staff feels that it cannot very well object to a Secretary of State decision to do just that in case of the Rostow papers, although the Rostow approach is not considered necessarily the best way to proceed.

One major objection Bundy referred to several times, possibly because Hansen kept mentioning the potential budget impact of these papers, was that the Rostow documents could not be programming documents. He said you could not make programming decisions in a policy document and, when asked where these would be made, did not answer directly, although it was clear he believed they would be made in the budget. Bundy made another interesting (and valid) observation in stating that there should not be a Rostow paper for every country. There are some countries where the policy could be set by the Secretary of State, and other, less important, countries where the policy could be effectively set by a level even below the Secretary of State. The Principals just would not have time to acquaint themselves intimately with the details of each country.

In summary, the discussion reached no recognized conclusions, and the role of the strategic policy papers remains unsettled, although it seems they may be more important than Bundy now wishes.5 (I believe he recognizes this, which partially explains his irritation when they are discussed.) At any rate, I suggest that the JCS look the Rostow papers over carefully when they are referred for comment.

7. Bundy's Status. In the discussion of putting material on cards for the President,6 it seemed to me this was not Bundy's way of operating. Later, in the MLF discussion, he repeated a remark he has made several times lately, that a decision will have to be made as to whether the White House will continue to monitor certain programs closely or whether they will be left to the State Department. Klein, who is more sensitive to these things than I, also connected Bundy's remark on publishing President Kennedy's letter to the State Department,7 telling the Secretary to take over foreign affairs if he wished, as yet another sign of Bundy's uncertain status at present. The only conclusion I can reach thus far is that the issue of Bundy's retention perhaps is not yet completely settled. In an earlier report, I believe I commented that Bundy could well end up with more power if he stays. It is not inconsistent to add that if he sees himself with much less power, he will decide to go.

WYS

* Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Chairman's Staff Group, December 1963. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Major Smith.

1 The Strategic Country Studies were by this time known officially as National Policy Papers.

2 Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

3 These were series of country policy papers prepared under the auspices of the Agency for International Development and the Special Group (Counter-Insurgency), respectively.

4 In a memorandum to Department of State officials dated December 2, Rostow stated that on November 19 Rusk had approved a recommendation that he review and formally sign National Policy Papers “following their approval by the appropriate interdepartmental committee under the Chairmanship of an Assistant Secretary of State.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, Basic National Security Policy 1963) A manual of procedures issued on January 6, 1964, for the national policy papers prescribed signature by the Secretary of State after a lengthy interagency approval process which was to include some White House participation. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, Department of State, Policy Planning Volume I)

5 On December 24, Rostow stated in a memorandum to Rusk that the “town tends to view the seriousness of any program in accordance with the nature of the directive creating it” and recommended, with support from the Department of Defense and AID, that the directive establishing procedures for the national policy papers be issued in the form of an NSAM. (Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Planning 1963) Rusk approved this procedure on January 7, 1964, and on February 11 McGeorge Bundy signed NSAM No. 281, addressed to 13 agency heads, which stated that the President had “vested in the Secretary of State the responsibility for the promulgation of certain national policy papers.” (Ibid., S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 281)

6 This is a reference to discussion in the omitted portion of memorandum.

7 Not further identified.

149. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 149. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President JohnsonSource

Washington, December 5, 1963.

SUBJECT

Remarks to the National Security Council1

The following is cast in the form of a short talk by you, but it is really intended only as a memorandum of what you said this morning for you to draw on as you please.

1. I want to say a word of welcome to the Speaker who will be with us from time to time when his very heavy duties permit it.2 I hope that all members of the Council will show the same readiness to keep him fully informed in this great field that they showed to me as Vice President.

And I want to welcome you all to the first NSC meeting of this Administration. Most of us have served together now for nearly three years; I know the quality of your work and place great reliance on all of you.

2. This Council is the formal meeting place for the men in the Executive Branch who have top responsibility for the safety of our nation. I want you to know that I look on these matters of security as the No. 1 business of the Government, and I propose to run my own office and my own business with that priority. Not all the work of National Security can be done in meetings of this Council, and I expect to go on with special meetings for special purposes, but I do plan to use this Council from time to time as a forum in which these matters can be examined. I welcome candid and open expression of views and differences of opinion, and I also welcome the opportunity which these meetings give for making my own positions clear.

As a beginning, I want to take a few minutes this afternoon to state the essentials of U.S. policy as I see it.

4. The greatest single requirement on the world's statesmen today is that we should find a way to ensure the survival of civilization in this nuclear age. This group knows better than most what a general nuclear war would be like, and my view is simple: such a war would be the death of all our hopes, and it is our task to see that it does not happen.

5. From this there follow two basic rules for U.S. policy: (1) we must be strong, and (2) we must be temperate.

6. On strength and the need for fully effective defenses I yield to no one. I have been concerned with the strength and effectiveness of our Armed Forces for 30 years, and I mean to continue with energy the great work which Bob McNamara and the Defense Department have carried forward in the last three years. He and I have reemphasized the need for economy in recent days and we mean it—but we do not mean the kind of economy cuts into the necessary strength of the Armed Forces. The basic improvement in the balance of power which has taken place in the last three years is one-half of the explanation for the sense of hope that was developing in President Kennedy's last months. I have not become President to give away this advantage.

7. But we must be temperate, too. One of my first concerns after the terrible event of November 22 was to make it clear to the Soviet Government and to Mr. Khrushchev personally that the U.S. will go its part of the way in every effort to make peace more secure. I do not agree with everything Walter Lippmann3 says, but I do agree with him on the importance of the progress we made in this area, too, in the last three years. I made this point forcefully to Mr. Mikoyan4 at the same time that I was emphasizing our continued and intense interest in the strength of our alliances to such men as Chancellor Erhard and Prime Minister Douglas-Home.5 I strongly supported the limited test ban treaty and I want Bill Foster to know that I look on his work as part of National Security, just as much as the work of Bob McNamara.

8. I won't take your time today to give views on all the major issues we will be working on together, but I do wish to signal my concern on two specific issues: (1) We are heavily committed in South Vietnam with 18,000 Americans there, and we should all of us let no day go by without asking whether we are doing everything we can to win the struggle there.

(2) We have to live on the same world with the Soviet Union, but we do not have to accept Communist subversion in this Hemisphere—or, indeed, in any free country that can use our help effectively. But especially in this Hemisphere I think we should let no day pass without asking what more we can do against Communist subversion and against the Castro government in particular.

I have scheduled separate meetings on both these subjects next week.

9. But being against subversion is not just a matter of fighting Communism. We have the positive job of helping to make the democratic system effective and attractive, both in our own country and wherever we have influence. This positive job, too, is of first importance.

10. I'll make just one more comment: We are all here to serve the interest of the United States, but I think we can serve that interest better if we always remember that the other man sees things in his own way. We need to show patience and understanding of other systems as well as our own, and each of us should ask himself when he deals with other nations how he would feel if he were in the other man's place.

11. The business of this meeting is to hear the intelligence assessment of the current situation in the Soviet Union, and I will ask Mr. McCone to take over.

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Volume I. No classification marking.

1 See Document 150.

2 Representative John McCormack of Massachusetts was, as Speaker of the House, Johnson's successor in the event of the President's death in office.

3 Walter S. Lippmann, author, foreign policy analyst, and syndicated newspaper columnist.

4 Anastas I. Mikoyan, First Vice Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers and full member of the Presidium of the Central Committee of the Soviet Communist Party.

5 Ludwig Erhard, Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, and Sir Alec Douglas-Home, British Prime Minister.

150. Summary Record of the 520th Meeting of the National Security Council 150. Summary Record of the 520th Meeting of the National Security CouncilSource

Washington, December 5, 1963, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Soviet Military Capabilities

The President opened the meeting with a summary of his views. He followed more or less the draft prepared at his request by Mr. Bundy (copy attached).1

At the conclusion, the President asked Director McCone to present his briefing. The reading copy of Mr. McCone's comments and the accompanying charts which were displayed to the Council members are attached.2

The President asked several times at appropriate points in the briefing for comparable U.S. figures. Secretary McNamara responded each time, giving comparative figures on missiles, bombers, etc.

At the conclusion of the briefing, the President asked Secretary Rusk to comment. The Secretary emphasized that despite the problems which the Soviet Union is having in the economic field, and despite our nuclear superiority, the Russians are making a tremendous effort. We cannot reduce our effort in any way—military, space, economic assistance, etc. We have a full agenda ahead of us. We should concentrate on those factors which make people pull the nuclear trigger. We should be ready to explore agreements with the Soviets which are based on our current military strength.

Secretary McNamara commented on the relative military strength of the U.S. and the USSR. As regards a first-strike capability, we have a 2-1/2 to 3 advantage over the USSR. In the air defense field, the USSR has a 3 advantage over us. [sic]During the decade of the ‘60s, our advantage over the USSR in the nuclear area will not fall below two times. In a nuclear exchange, there would be no winner, even though after such an exchange the U.S. would retain a superior capability than that remaining to the Russians. A nuclear exchange involves the loss on each side of from 50 to 100 million lives. Thus, any rational use of nuclear weapons is deterred. However, the nuclear situation does not deter other uses of military force, such as halting convoys on the Berlin autobahn. Neither side now has a deployed anti-ballistic missile system. It would cost $15 billion to give 30% of our population protection. As of now, neither side can blunt an attack by the other.

In response to the President's request, NASA Director Webb made a comparison between Soviet and U.S. space capabilities. During the next few years, we will be firing much larger payloads into orbit although there will not be manned space projects during this period. The Soviets will be conducting manned space projects during this period, but we have no evidence that they are building delivery vehicles of the size we will soon be firing.

Secretary Dillon responded to the President's request for a review of the domestic economic situation by giving an optimistic report. He said economists had feared that our economy would run out of steam in the next few months. However, better prospects for the tax cut bill have stimulated business and especially the stock market.

The President concluded the meeting by repeating a sentence which he had read at the beginning, i.e.: “The greatest single requirement is that we find a way to ensure the survival of civilization in the nuclear age. A nuclear war would be the death of all our hopes and it is our task to see that it does not happen.”3

Note: There is attached a copy of the transcript of Press Secretary Salinger's press briefing which was authorized by the President following the meeting.4

* Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings File. Top Secret. The source text bears no drafting information.

1 Not attached. Apparent reference to Document 149.

2 Not attached.

3 According to NSC Action No. 2473, the NSC “noted” McCone's briefing on Soviet military capabilities and economic problems and also “noted the President's informal statement on national security problems.” (Department of State, S/S-NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95, Records of Action by the National Security Council)

4 Not attached.

151. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 151. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President JohnsonSource

Washington, December 6, 1963.

SUBJECT

Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Strategic Retaliatory Forces (U)

I have recently completed my review of the long-range nuclear delivery forces and their associated support for FY 1965-FY 1969. The program recommended will form the basis for the preparation of the FY 1965 Budget. This memorandum summarizes the main factors I have taken into consideration in determining United States requirements for these forces.

I believe we should adopt, for planning purposes, the force structure summarized in the table on page two. Where they differ from my recommendations, the forces proposed by the Air Force are shown beneath mine in parentheses. In particular, I recommend: 1. Approval, in FY 1965, of an increase in the total Minuteman force level of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missiles (to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]), at a total procurement cost of $250 million, of which $167 million will be funded in FY 1965.

2. Retrofit of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] of the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missiles in the first five Minuteman Wings with the Improved Minuteman at a total procurement cost of $279 million of which $130 million will be funded in FY'65.

3. Approval of an extensive ICBM reliability improvement program at a 1965 cost of $115 million. The eventual costs will depend on the extent of the program. They are now estimated to be about $537 million over FY 1965-FY 1969.

4. Phasing out of 27 Atlas “D” ICBM's in FY 1965 instead of FY 1968, phasing out 27 Atlas “E” ICBM's in FY 1967, and phasing out 54 Titan I ICBM's in FY 1968, for a total estimated savings of $209 million over FY 1965-1969.

5. Retrofit of the five A-1 Polaris boats with A-3 missiles. Disapproval of the proposed retrofit of the thirteen A-2 boats with A-3 missiles, for a FY 1965-69 saving of $425 million, of which $110 million is realized in FY 1965.

6. Disapproval of the recommendation of the Chief of Staff of the Air Force for procurement of 355 additional Hound Dog missiles at a cost of $388 million.

7. Disapproval of the recommendation of the Chief of Staff of the Air Force for expenditure in FY‘65 of $78 million on development of a new manned strategic bomber.

8. Continuation of a related classified program discussed in a separate enclosed memorandum.

In addition, I recommend provision in the FY 1965 Budget for: studies of alternative advanced manned strategic aircraft; continuation of conceptual studies leading to an advanced ICBM system and an advanced sea-based deterrent system; and continuation of the development of the MRBM, which will be discussed in my memorandum on Research and Development.1

RECOMMENDED AND SERVICE-PROPOSED FORCESa b End-Fiscal Year

1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969

Bombers:

B-52 555 615 630 630 630 630 630 630 630

B/E-47 900 810 585 450 225

B-58 40 80 80 80 80 80 72 72 66

Total 1495 1505 1295 1160 935 710 702 702 696

Air-Launched Missiles: Hound Dog 216 460 580 580 551 522 522 493 493

Surface-to-Surface Missiles: Atlas 28 57 126 126 99 99 72 72 72

Titan 21 68 108 108 108 108 54 54

Minuteman 150 600 800 750 610 480 *

(780) (700) (620) (*)

Imprv. Minuteman 200 390 620 *

(170) (550) (780) (*)

Polaris 80 96 144 288 464 560 656 656 656

Total 108 174 488 1122 1471 1717 1836 1882 1982

(2086) (2182) (2182)

Other:

Quail 224 392 392 392 392 392 392 392 392

KC-135 400 440 500 580 620 620 620 620 620

KC-97 600 580 340 240 120

RC-135

3 3 4 13 13 13 13

RB-47 90 45 30 30 30

Thor 60 60 60

Jupiter 45 45 45

Regulus 17 17 17 17 9

PACCS: KC-135 17 17 17 17 17 17 17

B-47 18 36 36 36 36 36 36 36

Alert-Force Weapons: c Weapons 1074 1512 2184 2689 2765 2785 2753 2854 2930

(2966) (3109) (3100)

* * * * * * * * *

Megatons * * *

a The forces proposed by the Secretary of the Air Force, where different from the Recommended Forces, are shown in parentheses.

b The Multi-Lateral Force (MLF) is still under discussion with our NATO Allies. Assignment of nuclear weapons of the U.K., France, or a “Multi-Lateral Force,” to NATO in accordance with the terms of the Nassau Pact, may lead to adjustments in the U.S. force structure.

c Bombers have flexibility in the choice of gravity bombs and yields. For purposes of this table, average planned loadings of 1.5 weapons and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]MT for the B-47, 3.3 weapons and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]MT for the B-52's, and 3 weapons and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]MT for the B-58's are assumed. Beginning in FY 1962, 50% of the B-52's, 55% of Polaris, and 85% of the ICBM's on operational launchers are assumed to be on alert or on-station. An additional 12% of the Polaris force would be intransit to patrol areas.

* Entry not declassified.

The estimated total obligational authority required to procure and operate these forces is shown in the following table.

TOTAL OBLIGATIONAL AUTHORITY BY FISCAL YEARa (Billions of Dollars)

1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1965-1969 Prev. Approved 9.11 8.53 7.29 5.07 4.32 3.59 3.30 2.99 19.27

SecDef Recom. 7.53 5.34 4.35 3.81 3.16 2.76 19.42

SecAF Proposed 7.52 6.09 5.34 3.81 3.24 2.79 21.27

O/SAF Proposed

25.12

a These and all other cost estimates in this memorandum are preliminary, and are subject to further refinement. The figures for General LeMay's proposal exclude the cost of a new manned strategic bomber.

The Strategic Retaliatory Forces I am recommending are considered to be adequate by the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of staff, the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, the Chief of Naval Operations, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. The results of their review of my recommended forces were summarized as follows: “8. Recognizing that, in the time frame considered, it is not possible to assure the limiting of damage, in loss of life, to the United States to a level below the criterion suggested by the Secretary of Defense, we consider that: “a. A vital first objective to be met in full by our strategic nuclear forces should be the assured capability of destroying singly, or in combination, the Soviet Union and the Communist satellites in Europe as national societies. In combination with theater nuclear forces, they should be able to impose adequate punishment on Red China for nuclear or nonnuclear aggression.

“b. [13 lines of source text not declassified]

“9. It is our view that the strategic force structure set forth in your draft memorandum for the President provides appropriately for the foregoing objectives.”2

The Chief of Staff, USAF, recommends [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minutemen by 1969 and procurement of an additional 355 Hound Dog missiles, enough to equip the entire B-52 force. The 1965-1969 cost of the Minuteman program proposed by the Chief of Staff, USAF, would be approximately $10,064 million, as opposed to about $4,757 million for my recommended program.3 The additional Hound Dog procurement would cost approximately $388.5 million. This proposal was not included in the program submission of the Secretary of the Air Force.

Within the objective of a force of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman missiles by end-FY 1969, I am recommending an increase in the force level of only 50 missiles in the FY 1965 Budget, instead of the 200 previously planned, for several reasons. First, there has been some reduction in the Soviet ICBM force projected for the late 1960's. NIE 11-8-62, published 6 July 1962,4 estimated 300-600 operational ICBM launchers in mid-1967. The range is now estimated to be 335-525. Second, an FY 1965 increment of 50 missiles should reduce the risks of extensive modification which can arise from difficulties discovered in the Improved Minuteman development cycle and permits a more orderly deployment schedule. Moreover, because of the reliability improvement program, plus a $368 million cost overrun for FY 1963 and FY 1964, and other cost increases, the total obligational authority required in FY 1965 for Minuteman is now increased by $274.8 million over the amount previously approved. Finally, the over-all force effectiveness of the recommended force of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]basic and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Improved Minuteman, is greater than that achievable with the previously approved force level of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] basic and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Improved Minuteman missiles. In terms of target destruction capabilities, the recommended force provides [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] percent greater effectiveness than the previously approved force.

I also recommend that we continue development and procurement of the Post-Attack Command and Control System, which includes 17 KC-135B airborne command posts and 36 B-47 airborne communications relay aircraft. This system permits the maintenance of one SAC command post in the air at all times, plus one on a high state of alert at each of the SAC alternate headquarters. These aircraft can launch and control the SAC force, including launching of the Improved Minuteman in the event that its Launch Control Centers have been destroyed.

Based on advice from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and General Power, I have cancelled plans for the construction of a Deep Underground Headquarters for SAC. While there is a requirement for an increase in the survivable command and control capability for SAC, a re-examination of the operational considerations and associated costs have led me to conclude that this center could not be justified at this time. I recommend that the funding previously approved for FY 1965 through FY 1968, totalling $106 million, be deleted from the program.

The following section describes in greater detail the basis for my recommendations. I shall review first our strategic objectives, the Soviet Bloc nuclear threat, our target destruction capabilities, and general nuclear war outcomes. I shall outline in more detail in Appendix I,5 pages 24-29 the key decisions to be made this year.

II. General Basis for Force Level Recommendations

General Nuclear War Objectives

The objectives for our Strategic Nuclear Forces can be summarized under three distinct headings. These objectives provide quantitative tests of the adequacy of our posture.

“Assured Destruction” of the Soviet Union

An essential test of the adequacy of our posture is our ability to destroy, after a well planned and executed Soviet surprise attack on our Strategic Nuclear Forces, the Soviet government and military controls, plus a large percentage of their population and economy (e.g. 30% of their population, 50% of their industrial capacity, and 150 of their cities). The purpose of such a capability is to give us a high degree of confidence that, under all foreseeable conditions, we can deter a calculated deliberate Soviet nuclear attack. The calculations made to test this ability are our best estimates of the results of possible Soviet calculations of what we could do to them in retaliation if they were to attack us. This calculation of the effectiveness of the U.S. forces is not a reflection of our actual targeting doctrine in the event deterrence fails. I will call this objective “Assured Destruction.”

“Damage-Limiting” Forces

Beyond the force required to meet the test of “Assured Destruction,” additional forces may be justified if they could further reduce the damage to the U.S. in the event of a Soviet attack by an amount sufficient to justify their added costs. Such forces might help to limit the damage to the United States both by destroying some of the Soviet nuclear delivery systems, and by disrupting the coordination of the rest, thereby easing the task for our defensive forces.

[Heading and 1 paragraph (13 lines of source text) not declassified]

The following analysis reviews alternative U.S. forces in terms of their ability to accomplish these objectives. The conclusions I have reached are as follows: 1. The forces I am recommending are clearly adequate for the objective of “Assured Destruction” under any reasonable definition.

2. The prospects for “Damage Limiting” by counterforce attacks may not hold great promise in the latter part of the 1960's if the Soviets harden and disperse their ICBM force and build up their missile submarine force as we now expect them to do. I believe that the recommended forces accomplish what might reasonably be able to be done from this point of view, and that the extra capability proposed by the Air Force would make a contribution to “damage limiting” too small to be justified in the light of its extra cost.

3. A “Full First-Strike Capability” does not appear to be feasible during the time period under consideration with the weapon systems projected for both sides, unless the Soviets choose to buy strategic forces that are both smaller and less well protected than we now expect. In any case, 200 or 750 extra Minuteman missiles, as proposed by the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the Air Force, respectively, would not significantly improve the outcome of the war for us.

Projected Soviet Strategic Posture

The following table summarizes current estimates of Soviet strategic forces in mid-1967 and 1969. For comparison, estimates for mid-1967 made last year are also given.6

SOVIET STRATEGIC RETALIATORY FORCES AND DEFENSIVE FORCES Based on NIE of
6 July 1962 Based on NIE of 18 October 1963

Mid-1967 Mid-1967 Mid-1969

Low Med High Low Med High Low Med High

Operational ICBM Launchers a

Soft Launchers (2 per site)

1st & 2d Generation 150 200 250 150 200 250 150 200 250

Very Large ICBM's 10 20 30 25 40 50

Hard Launchers

2d Generation (3 per site) 100 115 125 100 115 125

Follow-on (possibly one per site) 150 250 350 50 75 100 100 175 250

Tyuratam 25 25 25 30 30 30

Total (rounded) 300 450 600 325 435 525 400 560 700

Operational IRBM/MRBM Launchers a Soft (4 per point) 550 650 650 600 600 600 500 500 500

Hard (2 per more/point) 100 125 150 200 225 250

Total 550 650 650 700 725 750 700 725 750

Missile Submarines b

Ballistic

Nuclear 25 28 30 19 24 28 23 30 36

Diesel 41 43 45 41 43 45

Cruise

Nuclear 24 24 24 14 17 20 18 23 28

Diesel 20 25 30 20 25 30

Total Missiles:

Ballistic 75 84 90 173 194 212 185 212 236

Cruise 144 144 144 144 177 210 168 213 258

Bombers/Tankers

Heavy

Bison 70 80 90 95 70 80 90

Bear 35 70 85 95 60 70 85

Total 105 150 175 190 130 150 175

Medium

Badger 500 400 475 525 200 200 300

Blinder 250 200 250 275 200 275 350

Total 750 600 725 800 400 525 650

Total—Bombers/Tankers 855 750 900 890 530 675 825

Defensive Forces

ABM Defended Areas N/A N/A N/A 2 2 2 2 2 15

SA-2 600 600 600 1100 1100 1100 1100 1100 1100

SA-3 400 600 800 460 460 535 500 500 650

a Soft launchers, but not the hard launchers, are believed to have missiles and capacity for refire.

b The NIE is noncommittal on the total number of Submarine missiles. Best estimates have been used for this table.

Projected Soviet Strategic Posture (Contd)

Although projections of Soviet forces in the late 1960's are necessarily subject to uncertainties, development and deployment patterns have made possible the identification of some broad trends.

ICBM's and IRBM's

The Soviets now appear to be deploying ICBM's in both a soft configuration with two launchers per site and a hard configuration with three launchers (silos) per site. One additional missile is probably available to each soft launcher, but not to the hard launchers, for a refire capability. Our own experience suggests their silo hardness would be in the range 100 to 300 psi. Although NIE 11-8-63 of October 18, 1963, estimates that by the late 1960's the Soviets will be deploying only one instead of three silos to a site, there is as yet no evidence of such a dispersal.

During the past year, the Soviets apparently have encountered difficulties in the development of the SS-8 and have curtailed its deployment. The SS-8 was suspected to be a large payload missile, 25,000 lbs., but further analysis has indicated that its payload is similar to that of the SS-7 (2000-5000 lbs.). While no new missile development has been identified, the estimate includes the possibility that, if test firings begin in the next few months, a new ICBM capable of delivering very high yield warheads might be operational during FY 1966. No statement is made to imply that such test firings are likely to begin. As a follow-on to the successful SS-7 program, the Soviets may either improve this missile further, or develop a new standard size missile using improved liquid propellants, with initial deployment in 1966-67.

By 1965, the Soviet IR/MRBM force will probably level off at 700-750 launchers. Currently a refire capability for soft launchers is available, and this force is deployed in a four launcher per site configuration. The Soviets are also hardening some of their IRBM sites, and while currently believed deployed in a two launcher per site configuration, three launchers per site is possible. There is no evidence to indicate that follow-on systems are being developed. However, a mobile deployment of a new system is possible.

SLBM's

The Soviets have under development a 700 n.mi. submerged-launch ballistic missile for their submarine force. Existing submarine launched ballistic missiles have only a 350 n.mi. range and the submarine must surface to fire. At present, Soviet submarines carry at most three ballistic missiles. Although likely, there is no evidence that the Soviets are building a new class of submarine carrying more missiles. In addition to ballistic missiles, the Soviets also have a large number of submarines (both nuclear and diesel powered) capable of launching cruise missiles. It is believed that the cruise missiles will be deployed in support of anti-shipping warfare; however, the possibility that they could be used against land targets is not ruled out.

By mid-1969, the number of submarines carrying ballistic missiles is estimated to vary between 64 and 81, and in the absence of a new class submarine, this force would carry between approximately 185 and 236 missiles.

Long Range Bomber Forces

Although the Air Force believes that the Soviets intend to deploy a new heavy bomber between 1965 and 1967, this view is not shared by other members of the intelligence community. Barring this possibility, there is a projected reduction in both the heavy and medium bomber forces. Evidence indicates that the Bear and Blinder “B” aircraft have available a standoff missile capability. However, the capability for intercontinental attack remains limited, even though the Soviets have given considerable emphasis to Arctic staging exercises and to aerial refueling practice in an effort to overcome range deficiencies of their bomber force. (The range of the medium bombers is shorter than previously estimated.) The NIE suggests that the Soviets could place only 90–115 heavy bombers over target areas in the United States on two-way missions.

Availability of High Yield Weapons

We expect that in 1969 the yields of most Soviet ICBM's will be in the range between 6 and 13 MT. The Soviets could have available some high-yield weapons (100 MT for delivery by both bombers and missiles) to use as “terror weapons,” or to employ against hard targets or cities.

The Soviet homeland defenses, including civil defense, are discussed in Appendix II, pages 30 to 31.

Strategic Targets in the Soviet Bloc

A projected list of Soviet Bloc targets was derived based on the NIE estimates of the Soviet strategic offensive forces for the mid-1969 period. In addition to cities, the list includes primary military targets which represent a threat to the U.S., Western Europe and overseas theater forces. This projection includes targets which would compromise the Allied Command Europe (ACE) Threat List. The number of these targets which would be attacked by theater forces and would not have to be scheduled for attack by our Strategic Retaliatory Forces is uncertain. The total Sino-Soviet Bloc Target List which is of primary interest to the U.S. is shown on the following page.

SOVIET BLOC TARGETS END-FY 1969

[Table (1 page of source text) not declassified]

[Heading and 4 paragraphs (17 lines of source text) not declassified]

There are, in addition, other unscheduled targets of opportunity which would be attacked in connection with the land battle.

The extent to which U.S. “external” forces (i.e., U.S. forces not under SACEUR's command) are now scheduled to attack targets on the ACE Threat List is shown below.

[Table (1/2 page of source text) not declassified]

Forces Required for “Assured Destruction”

Returning now to the broad strategic objectives mentioned earlier, I would like to address first the forces required for “Assured Destruction.” The effectiveness of our posture as a deterrent to deliberate Soviet attack depends on the Soviet calculation of what we can do to them in retaliation if they attack us. Although the Soviets would doubtless consider the prospective military outcome of such an attack, they would have to give great weight in their consideration to the number of people we could kill and the amount of damage we could cause to their industry. Therefore, in considering “Assured Destruction,” I shall calculate he destructive capacity of our force on the hypothetical assumption that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] even though in fact we would not use our forces in that manner if deterrence failed. The key decision we now face is the total size of our Minuteman force. Through the FY 1964 Budget, a force of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman missiles has been authorized. In the calculations that follow, I shall assume that all other forces are held constant at the levels shown from FY 1969 in the table on page 2, and then vary the number of Minuteman missiles as we consider alternative objectives.

In 1969, without any Minuteman missiles, we plan to have about 1,900 weapons and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] in the alert portion of our Strategic Retaliatory Forces. Assuming that the Soviet Union, using the “Medium” force, attacks our forces with a well planned and executed surprise attack, and that in all cases our expected (i.e., most likely) estimates of operational factors (listed in Appendix III, pages 38-39)7 prove to be correct, the U.S. force targeted as hypothesized above could be expected to deliver about 700 weapons and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] DGZ's.8 Recognizing that such estimates are necessarily uncertain, the “most likely” factors imply that such an attack [2 lines of source text not declassified].9 On this basis, then, the programmed forces for 1969 appear more than adequate without any Minuteman missiles to meet the test of a capability for “Assured Destruction.” And, with the inclusion of the already programmed force of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman missiles, the force could [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

But these calculations depend on the assumptions made about many uncertain variables. In fact, there are several key uncertainties and possible alternative assumptions considerably less favorable to ourselves than those underlying these estimates. Because of the critical importance of our ability to retaliate against deliberate surprise nuclear attack, I believe that our force requirements for this mission should be tested against pessimistic assumptions as well as against our best estimates. We want both fully adequate insurance against future contingencies and to be able to deter even an “optimistic” Soviet decision-maker.

We recognize that it is not normally sensible to design the defense program entirely on the basis of pessimistic estimates. In fact, it can be just as dangerous to overstate as to understate enemy capabilities, for it can lead to the pricing out of the market of valuable capabilities that would appear very useful under realistic estimates of the threat, and it can lead to the adoption of strategies of desperation. In some cases, the fact that a capability exists under optimistic estimates may be significant. However, deterrence of deliberate nuclear attack is so fundamental to our whole defense posture that I believe we should require that our retaliatory power to [be] beyond any reasonable question.

The major uncertainties affecting the assured retaliation capabilities of our Strategic Nuclear Forces can be grouped under four headings:10 1. Improved Soviet Defenses,

2. Larger or More Effective Soviet Offensive Forces,

3. Lower U.S. Missile Reliability, and

4. Unanticipated Wartime Degradation in U. S. forces.

The effectiveness of U. S. forces for “Assured Destruction” under each class of uncertainties is discussed in Appendix II, pages 31-33.

The effect of making all pessimistic assumptions, however unlikely such a contingency might be, as opposed to making the assumptions we consider most likely, is shown for several alternative Minuteman forces in the following table. In each case, it is assumed that the rest of our forces as shown in the table on page 211 for FY 1969.

[Table (1/2 page of source text) not declassified]

Granted there are uncertainties, in my judgment these calculations show that to the extent that the prospect [2 lines of source text not declassified]already authorized, in combination with the other planned forces should be clearly adequate for “Assured Destruction,” while a larger force would add very little from this point of view. From a Soviet viewpoint, the potential damage that could be inflicted by a United States retaliatory attack is so severe that they, the Soviets, should be deterred from initiating general nuclear war.

Because of the concentration of Communist China's industry, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]Minuteman missiles can destroy about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] of the industrial capacity or alternatively [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman missiles can destroy about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. My recommended program is more than sufficient to cover this possible requirement.

“Damage Limiting” Capabilities of Alternative U.S.Forces

In this section are discussed the “damage limiting” potential of alternative Minuteman forces acquired for second-strike [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Of course, in the range of conditions most likely to be faced in 1969, almost all of our ICBMs and all of our bombers, and perhaps some Polaris missiles should be available for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

The effectiveness of the U.S. second-strike missile attack when applied to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is shown below for three alternative forces. Force I represents the FY 1964 Budget to be in place by end FY 1966. Force II is my recommended program including [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minutemen by end FY 1969, and Force III is Secretary Zuckert's proposal including [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]Minutemen by end FY 1969.12 All Minuteman/Polaris missiles are programmed to utilize a “missile-away” indicator (which allows the commander to assess whether the missiles completed count-down and were launched). Furthermore, the greater flexibility of Improved Minuteman is used to enhance the performance of the basic Minuteman force by a combination of retro-fitting improved missiles in Wing I through V silos and co-location of Improved Minuteman squadrons with existing Minuteman wings.

[Table (1/2 page of source text) not declassified]

[5 paragraphs (1-1/2 pages of source text) not declassified]

Little is known about the Soviet targeting doctrine. The Soviets would probably plan on attacking both military targets and cities. But it is possible that we might be able to deter them from attacking cities or that the war could be terminated before massive city attacks are executed. In the table on the following page, cases are considered in which the Soviet attack against our cities are either executed immediately, delayed, or withheld. With respect to the extent of U.S. active and passive defense, if we have fallout protection and effective defenses, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] can make the job of our defenses easier and reduce directly the number of weapons falling on the United States. Alternative U.S. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are compared under alternative sets of assumptions representing combinations of the above conditions. A case is also shown in which [1 line of source text not declassified]. This case will be designated Force A.

These calculations suggest that the damage-limiting potential of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is subject to diminishing returns. In the absence of a nation-wide fallout protection program the U.S. fatalities are great even if urban-industrial areas are not directly involved. For all cases considered, the advantage (as measured in the reduction in fatalities) of second-strike [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] attacks when compared with attacks which do not target [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is clearly shown. However, the return associated with th. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] extra missiles proposed by the Secretary of the Air Force is small.

[Heading and 6 paragraphs (1-1/2 pages of source text) not declassified]

U.S. FATALITIES ASSUMING THE SOVIETS INITIATE THE ATTACK13

Alternative U.S. Forces (Fatalities in Millions)

Force A Force I Force II Force III

Low Soviet Forces

A. Minimum Fallout Protection in U.S. a

1. U.S. cities hit immed. 165 138 138 138

2. U.S. cities attack delayed c 165 100 83 80

3. U.S. cities attack withheld N/A 67 53 51

B. Augmented Fallout Protection in U.S. b

1. U.S. cities hit immed. 95 88 88 88

2. U.S. cities attack delayed c 95 66 55 52

3. U.S. cities attack withheld N/A 25 17 16

Medium Soviet Forces

A. Minimum Fallout Protection in U.S. c

1. U.S. cities hit immed 195 183 183 183

2. U.S. cities attack delayedc 195 162 150 145

3. U.S. cities attack withheld N/A 145 130 127

B. Augmented Fallout Protection in U.S.b1 1. U.S. cities hit immed. 120 110 110 110

2. U.S. cities attack delayed c 120 92 85 79

3. U.S. cities attack withheld N/A 48 43 40

Force A: Forces only targeted against urban-industrial areas.

Force I: Includes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman, and achieves the target destruction capabilities against Soviet Bloc [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] as previously shown.

Force II: Includes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman, and achieves the target destruction capabilities as previously shown.

Force III: Includes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minuteman, and achieves the target destruction capabilities previously shown.

a Fifty million stocked shelter spaces, but because of limited training for the population, no effective use of these spaces is made.

b The “Augmented” protection program assumed here for the U.S. is a nation-wide fallout protection at a cost of $4 billion and consists of 240 million fallout shelter spaces.

c The delay is assumed to be roughly 1 to 8 hours, long enough for our missile attack but not our bomber attack to arrive.

The following table compares four alternative U.S. forces. Force I is a force posture including [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]Minutemen. Force II is the recommended force and includes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minutemen. Force III is the proposal of Secretary Zuckert and includes [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Minutemen. Force IV includes the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]Minutemen proposed by the Chief of Staff, Air Force.

US/WESTERN EUROPE FATALITIES UNDER U.S. INITIATION And Soviet Counter-City Retaliationa (In Millions)

U.S. Fatalities Western Europe Fatalities

I II III IV I II III IV

/(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/ /(*)/

Low Soviet Postureb 50 40 32 28 90 75 65 60

Medium Soviet Posturec 95 75 65 58 100 90 85 75

High Soviet Postured 162 153 148 138 155 142 138 130

a All surviving Soviet forces, except their bomber force, are assumed targeted against cities. If only military targets are attacked, U.S. fatalities would be under 20 million providing that the U.S. has a nation-wide civil defense program. In the absence of a civil defense program U.S. fatalities could number between 70-90 million. Under first-strike circumstances U.S. reserve forces greatly outnumber those of the Soviet Union.

(*) Number of Minutemen not declassified.

b The results are based on the “low” Soviet force, Optimistic U.S. operational factors and nation-wide Civil Defense program.

c The results are based on the “medium” Soviet force, Expected U.S. operational factors and nation-wide Civil Defense program.

Only if the Soviets elect a minimum force posture would there be prospects of keeping U.S. fatalities at a relatively low level. But in this case, greater numbers of Minutemen beyond the level recommended do not substantially reduce U.S. fatalities. Moreover, the potential damage to Western Europe remains very high. For the two other Soviet postures U.S. and NATO fatalities are high, and additional Minutemen do not hold great promise in reducing these fatalities. For the Medium Soviet Posture, even if we were to augment Force IV with the Nike-X anti-missile system at a cost of $20 billion (assuming the system could be deployed around 23 cities by mid 1969) U.S. fatalities would, nevertheless number about 35 million provided the U.S. has a nationwide civil defense program. However, in the absence of a civil defense program and assuming the High Soviet Posture U.S. fatalities would number about 120 million.

It would seem almost unbelievable that the Soviets would not react if we started building Force IV augmented by Nike-X. What would be the prospects in such an arms race? Studies suggest that, assuming Soviet costs are similar to ours and that they disperse their hard ICBM's two to a point, and assuming that we wish to assure the survival of 80 percent of our population (i.e., no more than 40 million dead) after a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the cost exchange rate is roughly three to one against us. That is, if we attempt to maintain a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] (and the Soviets attempt to achieve a capability to kill at least 40 million Americans in retaliation) we must outspend them, at the margin, by three to one. And if we set our sights higher than 80 percent, the cost exchange rate becomes even more unfavorable.

What this and other analyses suggest quite clearly about the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]objective is: first, that if we were to want to make the attempt to achieve such a capability, the most productive increments with respect to our current program would certainly be in civil defense and possibly in anti-missile defenses, not more ICBM's; and second, that the attempt to achieve a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]capability, under any reasonable definition of the term is, to the extent that anything is predictable in defense planning, bound to be defeated by diminishing marginal returns.

Other Reasons for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

There are other reasons for having strategic forces available for targeting against [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. The list includes a capability for limited strategic nuclear attacks, forcing the Soviets to devote resources to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and placing significant constraints on the Soviet attack planners. These considerations are discussed in greater detail in Appendix II, pages 33-35.14

Conclusions

The advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the various calculations and studies I have reviewed over the past year, and the analysis described in this memorandum have led me to the following conclusions: 1. The forces I am recommending are clearly adequate for the objective of “Assured Destruction” under any reasonable definition.

2. The prospects for “Damage Limiting” by counterforce attacks may not hold great promise in the latter part of the 1960's if the Soviets harden and disperse their ICBM force and build up their missile submarine force as we now expect them to do. I believe that the recommended forces accomplish what might reasonably be able to be done from this point of view, and that the extra capability proposed by the Air Force would make a contribution to “damage limiting” too small to be justified in the light of its extra cost.

3. A [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] does not appear to be feasible during the time period under consideration with the weapon systems projected for both sides, unless the Soviets choose to buy strategic forces that are both smaller and less well protected than we now expect. In any case, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] extra Minuteman missiles, as proposed by the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the Air Force, respectively, would not significantly improve the outcome of the war for us.

Attachment

15 APPENDIX II: SOVIET DEFENSIVE POSTURE AND OTHER “ASSURED DESTRUCTION” AND “DAMAGE LIMITING” CONSIDERATIONS

[Here follows discussion of the Soviet defensive posture.]

Other “Assured Destruction” Excursions

In the memorandum the capability of U.S. forces to inflict high levels of damage on the Soviet Union was calculated on the basis of expected U.S. operational factors. In problems of long range defense planning, we always encounter substantial uncertainties about the factors that influence force requirements. Many of these uncertainties can be described by the range of likely possibilities. For purposes of planning and analysis, it is often useful to describe this range by three estimates: an “optimistic” estimate, an “expected” or most likely estimate, and a “pessimistic” estimate. The pessimistic estimate is the estimate least favorable to ourselves of those which are consistent with the available evidence. For example, we have so far achieved about a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]success rate in Minuteman ICBM tests. Based on this and our experience with other missile programs, and assuming that we continue reliability testing and development, it is my judgment that a reliability of less than [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] under operational conditions by 1969 is effectively ruled out by the data. And that is our pessimistic estimate. In fact, by 1969 we expect to achieve 75 percent, and possibly as high as 85 per cent reliability under operational conditions.

The point here is that the relevant test is, “Is it consistent with the available evidence?” and not “Is it conceivable?” A 1969 reliability of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] or less, is conceivable. But it is so unlikely that it can be ruled out of the range of practical possibility. This point requires emphasis because there is a mistaken tendency sometimes to test our forces against the most adverse circumstances conceivable.

The major uncertainties affecting the assured retaliation capabilities of our Strategic Nuclear Forces can be grouped under four headings: 1. Improved Soviet Defenses,

2. Larger or More Effective Soviet Offensive Forces,

3. Lower U.S. Missile Reliability, and

4. Unanticipated Wartime Degradation in U.S. Forces.

First, the Soviets may improve the protection of their cities and population beyond what we now expect. Our first calculation of expected damage was based on the assumption that the Soviet populace use whatever fallout protection is now available, but do not have a nation-wide fallout protection program. Moreover, although we expect the Soviets to deploy ABM defenses only at Leningrad and Moscow, they might deploy such a defense at as many as 10 or 15 cities. Such a defense would cost us from $12-15 billion. Assuming a nation-wide fallout protection program and ABM defenses for 15 cities, but not assuming Soviet offensive forces larger or more effective than anticipated, [3 lines of source text not declassified].

Second, the Soviets may prove to have larger and more effective strategic forces than those we now anticipate. The calculation of expected damage shown above was based on the assumption that the Soviets would have the “Medium” force of 560 ICBM's by 1969. The high NIE estimate of the 1969 Soviet force is now 700.16 Moreover, there is uncertainty about Soviet missile accuracy and reliability. The foregoing calculations were based on the assumption of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missile reliability (forces peaked for attack) and a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] CEP as suggested by our intelligence estimates. However, I believe it prudent to insure against a reliability as high as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and a CEP of as low as [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].17

Finally, there may be unanticipated wartime degradation in the performance of our forces. There are several possibilities. First, we have assumed that our warning systems work and that we successfully launch the B-52 Alert Force. However, our force will be concentrated on about [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]; the Soviets will have missile launching submarines that can attack our bomber bases with very little warning; there are ways in which they can reduce the warning we get from their ICBM's (e.g., long-way around or low angle trajectories); and we may be slow in responding. We should consider the possibility of [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

Another possibility is that, for one of several reasons, we might be unable to launch our ICBM's before a Soviet follow-up bomber attack. One reason for this might be disruption of our high-level command or communications. Another might be that fear of the effects of gamma radiation on the guidance systems, if we expose the missiles soon after an ICBM attack, would cause us to want to hold the missiles in their silos until the radiation pulse has passed. Therefore, we should consider our retaliatory capability on the assumption that the ICBM's must ride out the Soviet bomber attack. Yet another uncertainty we face is the precise blast resistance of our ICBM silos. [7 lines of source text not declassified]

The results shown in the memorandum combined all four groups of pessimistic assumptions.

Some other possible reasons for possessing counter-military forces are as follows.

Limited Strategic Nuclear Options

Besides the ones already mentioned, there are other reasons for having strategic forces available for targeting against Soviet military forces. One is to give us the possibility of executing limited strategic attacks. Admittedly our understanding of this range of possibilities is very limited and inadequate at this point in time. But it will doubtless become more important relative to other forms of thermonuclear war as both sides deploy secure well-protected nuclear delivery systems. What I have in mind here are controlled deliberate demonstrations of intent to escalate to strategic nuclear war, to back up ultimata, and to do so in such a way that the war might be able to be controlled and brought to a close.

Assume, for example, that a conflict over Berlin, or elsewhere in the NATO area, has expanded into a large scale non-nuclear war and that we are losing. Although I do not believe that our loss at the non-nuclear or small-scale tactical nuclear level is as inevitable as commonly supposed, it is clearly a possibility that must be considered. In these circumstances, it may be desirable to have, as an alternative, the possibility of a [1-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. The recommended force clearly provides us enough missiles for such contingencies.

Forcing the Soviets to Harden

Another reason for a [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Forcing the Soviets to harden, or otherwise protect, their forces from U.S. missile attack has at least two advantages for us. The first is that it forces the Soviets to incur a very heavy cost whence, out of any given budget, they can afford fewer forces.

We do not have detailed studies of the cost of protecting our forces, but there are many indications that it is high. For example, we maintain [7 lines of source text not declassified].

[1 paragraph (13 lines of source text) not declassified]

These factors suggest that the program of protection of our Retaliatory Forces from nuclear attack has roughly doubled their cost. If the same factors apply for the Soviets, and we have no reason to suppose the contrary, forcing them to harden would halve the number of weapons they can deploy.

Moreover, we have found it very difficult to harden our large liquid fueled missiles to the point that we can have high confidence they will survive ground shocks and still operate. This is one of the factors that led us to Minuteman. A Soviet liquid-fueled missile capable of delivering a 100 MT warhead would have a gross weight of approximately 660,000 pounds. This represents a weight twice that of Titan II, and two and one-half that of Atlas F. While this Soviet missile could be hardened, assurance of making the silos withstand high overpressures could be difficult. By forcing them to harden, we may force them to go to smaller missiles with lower payloads.

Finally, forcing the Soviets to harden may be desirable from the point of view of creating a more stable posture, reducing their incentive as well as their ability to make a pre-emptive strike against us. However, in view of the fact that the recommended U.S. force provides us with between a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]numerical superiority in ICBM's alone [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], I do not believe that a further increment in our forces is required for this purpose.

Constraints on Soviet Attack Planner

Our possession of a [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] puts significant constraints on the Soviet attack planner. In the cost of their bomber operations, the Soviets can get substantially more out of their intercontinental bomber force if they can stage it through peripheral staging bases. But this is a very vulnerable operation. If they have to take seriously the possibility that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]they must plan a far less vulnerable operation which would deliver fewer bombers to the United States. [5 lines of source text not declassified] However, it is clear that the recommended U.S. forces will provide enough missiles for this purpose.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab I of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs,” dated December 19. An earlier version of this draft memorandum, dated August 31, is ibid., JMF 7000 (31 Aug 63) Sec 1. Another, almost identical to that printed here, is marked “Final Draft” and is dated November 13. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US)

1 This memorandum was another tab of the December 19 compendium; see Document 152.

2 The quotation is from Appendix A to a November 7 memorandum from the JCS to McNamara. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1800/753-3, JMF 7000 (31 Aug 63) Sec 2)

3 [text not declassified]

4 Document 96.

5 Entitled “Basis for Recommendations on Particular Weapons Systems,” not printed.

6 The NIE of July 6, 1962, referred to in the table below is NIE 11-8-62, Document 96. The NIE of October 18 is NIE 11-8-63, Document 144.

7 Entitled “Strategic Targets in the Soviet Bloc, U.S. Force Laydown, and U.S. Operational Factors,” not printed.

8 These Designated Ground Zeros (DGZ's) include [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]USSR military and government control centers in major urban areas, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]defense suppression targets located in corridors on the way to the target cities. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 The Soviet surprise attack on the U. S. to which this is a response would have killed 195 million Americans in the absence of an effective nationwide fallout protection program, 120 million if there were a nationwide fallout protection program, in both cases assuming the Soviets immediately target cities. If the Soviets do not target cities, U. S. fatalities would, nevertheless, vary between 75 million (nationwide fallout protection program) and 180 million (no nationwide fallout protection program). U. S. fatalities in a nuclear war are discussed in more detail in the section on “Damage Limiting” below. [Footnote in the source text.]

10 The range of optimistic, expected, and pessimistic estimates for U. S. operational factors discussed in this section is tabulated in Appendix III, pages 38-39. [Footnote in the source text.]

11 Reference is to the first table above entitled “Recommended and Service-Proposed Forces.”

12 [Here follows a footnote in the source text that is a table with the costs of Minutemen forces for FY 1964 through FY 1969. The total for Force III for FY 1964-1969 was [text not declassified].]

13 The November 13 draft cited in the source note above gives figures for the four items marked N/A in this table. In order, they are 135, 49, 180, and 75.

d The results are based on the “high” Soviet force, Pessimistic U.S. operational factors and no nation-wide Civil Defense program.

14 These pages are included in the portion of Appendix II that is printed below.

15 Top Secret. The portion of Appendix II printed here comprises pp. 31-35.

16 The Air Force dissent speaks of 750-1000 ICBM's under certain conditions. Although this possibility cannot be altogether ruled out by the available evidence, if the Soviets were to embark on such a building program, we would find out about it in time to expand our own forces enough to offset it. We therefore do not need to buy insurance against that possibility now. [Footnote in the source text.]

17 It is also possible that the Soviets might have multiple guided re-entry vehicles for some of their ICBM's by 1969, although there is no evidence that the Soviets have begun development on such a capability. Our own studies indicate that this would be costly and difficult, and not an efficient way to expend [expand?] our force. Therefore, I believe we can rule out this possibility for 1969. [Footnote in the source text.]

152. Editorial Note 152. Editorial Note

Fourteen draft memoranda from McNamara to President Johnson are included in “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs,” a compendium dated December 19, 1963. The memoranda at Tabs I, II, and III are printed as Documents 151, 145, and 153, respectively.

The remaining documents in this compendium, none printed, are: “Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Air Force Tactical Program,” dated December 12, 1963; “Attack Carrier (CVA) Forces,” dated December 18, 1963; “Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces FY 1965-FY 1969,” dated December 11, 1963; “Recommended FY1965-FY 1969 Amphibious Assault Forces,” dated December 10, 1963; “Naval Mine Warfare Forces,” dated December 11, 1963; “Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Fleet Air Defense Systems,” dated December 19, 1963; “Navy Shipbuilding and Conversion Program,” dated December 11, 1963; “Underway Replenishment Forces,” dated December 11, 1963; “Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Airlift and Sealift Forces,” dated December 6, 1963; “National Deep Underground Command Center as a Key FY 1965 Budget Consideration,” November 7, 1963; and “FY 1965 Budget, Research and Development,” December 16, 1963. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A)

153. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President Johnson 153. Draft Memorandum From Secretary of Defense McNamara to President JohnsonSource

Washington, December 19, 1963.

SUBJECT

Recommended FY 1965-FY 1969 Army and Marine Corps General Purpose Forces (U)

I have recently completed my review of the Army and Marine Corps General Purpose Forces for FY 1965-FY 1969. The recommended program will form the basis for the preparation of the FY 1965 Budget. This memorandum summarizes the main factors I have taken into consideration in determining United States requirements for these forces.

I believe we should adopt, for planning purposes, the Army and Marine Corps force structure summarized in the table on page two. Where they differ from my recommendations, the forces proposed by the Army are shown beneath mine in parentheses. In particular, I recommend we: (1) Maintain the current Army structure of 16 Divisions, 7 Brigades and 4 Armored Cavalry Regiments with support elements.

(2) Maintain the present active force of three Marine Division-Wing teams.

(3) Continue the program to evaluate the Air Assault Division begun with your approval last year.

(4) Provide $2,081 million in FY 1965 for procurement of Army weapons, equipment, and materiel.

(5) Provide about $227.3 million for procurement of Marine Corps weapons and equipment, exclusive of aircraft.

In addition, I recommend disapproval of Army proposals to expand the Air Mobility tests; to add additional maneuver battalions to existing divisions; to add additional combat and support units to STRAF; and to add two Hawk battalions. The Deputy Secretary also recommends inclusion of $45.6 million in the FY 1965 Budget for initiation of procurement of Shillelagh.1 Appendix 1, page 36,2 presents a more detailed basis for these recommendations.

[Here follows a tabular breakdown of all requested general purpose forces.]

The Marine Division-Wing teams I am recommending are those recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and proposed by the Secretary of the Navy. The Army divisions and brigades I am recommending are concurred in by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, except for the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army, who with the Secretary of the Army recommends the larger forces shown in parentheses in the table on page two. In the case of the Air Assault Division, the deployment decision can be deferred until next year. Since the test program I have approved is still in its early stages, a decision to program this division at this time would be premature.

The estimated total obligational authority required to procure and operate these forces is shown in the following table.

Total Obligational Authority by Fiload scal Yeara (Billions of Dollars) FY 62 FY 63 FY 64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY 68 FY 69 FY 65-FY 69

Army:

Prev. App'vd. 6,328 6,195 6,765 6,411 6,090 5,860 5,744 ——

SecDef Recom. 6,353 5,614 5,569 5,494 5,509 5,292 27,478

Army Prop.(18 Div.) 6,765 7,370 7,584 7,356 7,169 6,876 36,355

Marine Corps:

Prev.App'vd. 1,348 1,436 1,017 931 839 688 738 ——

SecDef Recom. 954 1,014 876 809 776 409 3,884

USMC Proposed 1,003 1,250 993 863 911 409 4,426

Because the issues and risks associated with decisions about the major combat units of the Army and Marine Corps are so important, I will discuss in Section II of this paper the reasons underlying my force recommendations.

II. General Basis for Force Level Recommendations3

This analysis of our ground force requirements is based on consideration of these six areas: A. A basic statement of strategy.

B. A comparison of NATO and Warsaw Pact ground force strength.

C. The special situation in NATO.

D. U.S. force requirements for various conflicts around the world.

E. Tactical nuclear posture and strategy.

F. Conclusions on contingencies, force structures, and deployment.

A. A Basic Statement of Strategy

The Joint Chiefs of Staff state the objectives on which General Purpose Forces should be based as follows:

“U.S. General Purpose Forces should be sufficient in quantity, quality, and mobility to meet the early reinforcement requirements of NATO and, while maintaining current or similar overseas deployments, meet the estimated requirements of any one of the most likely contingency plans of the commanders of the unified and specified commands. In combination with available Allies, these forces should have the following capabilities without a major deployment of reserves other than the Marine 4th Division Wing team: “a. Resist, without using nuclear weapons, major non-nuclear assault by Soviet Bloc forces against areas where vital U.S. interests are involved. As a minimum, U.S. and Allied forces should be able to hold long enough to convince the communists of the risks involved in their present course of action.

“b. Defeat, without using nuclear weapons, non-nuclear aggression by Soviet Bloc forces at levels less than major assault in areas where such aggression would directly threaten U.S. vital interests.

“c. Execute successfully without counting on the use of nuclear weapons any one of the contingency plans of the unified and specified commanders outside the NATO area, [3-1/2 lines of source text not declassified].

“d. These general purpose forces must provide an adequate force structure to incorporate, protect, and employ tactical nuclear weapon systems.

“e. Accomplish their prescribed general war missions in the event of an all-out [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Soviet attack.

“f. Maintain control of required land and sea bases, sea areas, and essential air and ground lines of communications with non-nuclear weapons, if possible, but be prepared to use nuclear weapons, if necessary to accomplish this objective.

“g. Conduct counterinsurgency actions.”4

B. Comparative Ground Force Strength

The key issue in designing a non-nuclear posture is the size and strength of the enemy. For many years Soviet and ChiCom forces have been greatly overestimated in western military thinking. This has led to an overestimation of the forces required to stop them and, consequently, to an air of hopelessness about our prospects of winning in a major non-nuclear war. As the discussion below shows, however, our prospects for successful non-nuclear defense along the Sino-Soviet periphery are better than is commonly supposed. The problems we face are related more to readiness, deployment capability and tactical mal-deployment than they are to matters of manpower and equipment resources.

NIE 11-4-635 estimates that the Soviets get about 145 divisions and cadre divisions out of their theatre ground force of 1,950,000 men, and that about 80 of these units, having 80 per cent of their manpower, can be called combat ready.6 This number of divisions can be maintained within the estimated total manpower only if the active Soviet division “slice” is very small. If all 145 divisions were manned equally, the slice would be 13,500; if only the 80 operational divisions were manned, their slice would be 25,000. Obviously, reduced strength and cadre divisions use some men, so the actual slice must be less than 25,000. In addition, the Soviet Army surely has manpower requirements not directly related to its divisions, and must fill them at the expense of the slice.

Further, despite the NIE's estimate of 145 divisions and 1.95 million men in the Soviet theatre ground forces, there have been indications that the Soviets may be maintaining smaller numbers. Recently, a joint CIA/DIA group concluded that the number of divisions and cadre divisions may be smaller than had been estimated. The group's view is that the total is between 115-135 such units, and that the number of combat-ready divisions is in the range of 58-75, in contrast to the NIE's 80. So far as manpower goes, the group's view is that a high degree of confidence can be placed on a range of 1.8 to 2.1 million men in the total Soviet ground force.7 Computations on this basis indicate that the slice would be 15,000 if available manpower were spread evenly over 125 divisions. On the more likely premise that support forces are furnished in proportion to the division's combat-readiness category, the slice for combat-ready units is about 23,000.8 Since the value of 1.95 million men represents total ground force strength in the CIA/DIA group's view, as opposed to the NIE's estimate that it reflects theatre ground force strength only, further subtractions would have to be made for activities not directly connected to division support. These could produce a slice as small or smaller than 20,500.

Combat (Near full strength) Reduced (70%) Cadre (Off, NCO, Few Others)

65 25 25-45

Assuming an average authorized strength of 10,000, the men actually assigned to divisions would be:

Combat Reduced Cadre (Assuming 10%/35 Divs) Total

650,000 175,000 35,000 860,000

in total manpower in the same proportion, two possible slices can be computed. The first uses NIE 11-4-63's theatre ground forces total of 1.95 million; the second uses the panel's average high confidence total of 1.95 million in total ground force, less 200,000 for air defense forces. This latter subtraction is only one of several which should be made, but it is typical, and the largest of NIE 11-4-63's non-theatre ground force drains on the Soviet Army. (1. 1,950,000x.765B65=23,000. 2. 1,750,000x.765B65=20,500.) [Footnote in the source text.]

In contrast, if one were to divide the U.S. Army's total manpower by its combat-ready divisions, the resulting slice would be about 60,000 men. Many of these men, however, are also in activities not directly related to support of the divisions (e.g., 25,000 in ARADCOM, 10,800 in South Vietnam, 30,000 in Intelligence and Security, 48,000 in Command and General Support, etc.). Allowing for this, the U.S. Army division slice, worldwide, is on the order of 34,600. Although division slices are not a precise measure of effectiveness, the differential between this figure and the Soviet slice of less than 23,000, indicates that a Soviet division's support is slender or that it is to be generated on mobilization.

The Chinese Communist Ground Force Order of Battle

The Chinese Communist Army is organized into 34 Field Armies of 132 divisions, of which 117 are at operational strength. Unlike their Soviet counterparts, these are primarily infantry forces. Their support consists of separate armored, artillery, anti-aircraft, and armored cavalry units, plus engineer, service and support units. The non-divisional combat support provided is roughly equal, in numbers of men, to Soviet levels but administrative and logistic support forces comprise only about 25 per cent of the total forces. The latter is low even by Soviet standards, while both combat and logistic support are deficient by U.S. standards.

The Chinese Communist Army is still essentially a World War II model and even by these standards is lacking in firepower and mobility. In many cases it has not reached its own authorized levels of equipment. The main strength of the Chinese Communist Army is in manpower, an advantage which does not stand up well against a well-equipped, modern Army. Its main weakness is logistical, compounded by its having been designed and built to operate with large scale Soviet logistical and technical support. Without Soviet assistance, China may be able to supply itself with small arms and ammunition, but it could not produce the needed quantities of armor, artillery, vehicles and other heavy equipment.

Comparative Combat Effectiveness

The development of military force structures, especially in an alliance, is not an exact science. Quite apart from the variables introduced on one's own side, there is the difficult matter of arriving at a precise estimate of the enemy's potential. A substantial margin of uncertainty seems inescapable, and while it is obviously unsafe to underestimate the enemy, an overstatement of his capability is equally dangerous. It can lead to a strategy of desperation and to pricing necessary and valuable military capabilities out of the market. Thus, although it would be simpler to design our military posture to deal with a single objective and a single estimate of enemy capabilities, we must confront the full range of uncertainty, maintaining both a hedge against unfavorable possibilities and the ability to take advantage of favorable circumstances.

The uncertainties stem, in large part, from the intangibles inherent in ground combat. Many things other than sheer numbers and the amount and quality of equipment influence the combat effectiveness of ground forces. Tactical surprise, morale, training, the ability to keep large forces healthy in the field, generalship, terrain, the air situation, defense versus offense, and sheer chance can and will affect the outcome of any war, campaign, or individual battle. But, before any differences between the two sides in these factors can be taken into account, it is necessary to establish some basis for comparing the measurable aspects of opposing ground forces on the assumption that the non-measurable factors are equal. One obvious measure is strength in men. Another can be derived from the relative firepower which has been measured by an Index of Comparative Firepower (ICF). This technique was originally developed by the Army as a means of resolving arguments arising during maneuvers. It has been increasingly applied in studies and in wargaming of specific tactical battle situations, although it was not designed for application on a strategic scale over an entire campaign. The Secretary of the Army has stressed this limitation, with respect to both the ICF and a parallel index which takes into account some items beyond raw firepower, the Index of Combat Effectiveness (ICE).9

I accept these reservations, but feel that, so long as it is clearly understood that these indices do not take into account the intangibles mentioned above and are not an infallible means for predicting the outcome of an entire campaign, they are useful in determining relative pre-hostilities combat potential—certainly the best tools now available. Some such tool is clearly needed. In addition to their obvious task of fighting effectively if war comes our military forces must, in peacetime, deter aggression and provide a power base for the conduct of our foreign policy. Our civilian leaders need a means of assessing, in broad terms for each specific situation, the probable adequacy of our deterrent and the strength of the military foundation supporting our diplomatic position. Moreover, some approximate aggregate factor is needed to correct the widespread tendency to equate U.S. and Soviet divisions, despite the fact that ours contain, with their Corps support, at least twice as much manpower, as well as more expensive equipment. I am, therefore, asking the Army to continue its investigations with the aim of reaching the most accurate ICE possible.

If U.S. Mechanized and Armored divisions are compared to their Soviet counterparts, the Motorized Rifle and Tank divisions, on a basis of raw firepower, we find a differential of about 10 per cent in our favor:

[Here follows a table entitled “Indices of Comparative Firepower: Divisions”. The U.S. Mechanized division advantage was 1.075/1; the Armored division advantage was 1.48/1.]

This calculation does not, however, take account of the firepower contributed by the division's proportionate share of those non-divisional combat units normally pooled at the next higher tactical level: the U.S. Corps and Soviet Combined Arms Army. When non-divisional combat support is included, the U.S. advantage increases:

[Here follows a table entitled “Indices of Comparative Firepower: Division Fighting-Force”. The U.S. Mechanized division advantage was 1.28/1; the Armored division advantage was 1.69/1.]

However, our mechanized and armored division fighting-forces are about twice as large as their Soviet counterparts in terms of manpower, and it appears that we equip each of our men with about 30 per cent more initial equipment than do the Soviets, measured in U.S. prices. There is substantial uncertainty about comparative expenditures, but a CIA study has estimated the costs of building various Soviet items of equipment in the U.S., with the following results:

[Here follows a table showing comparing the U.S. equipment cost of $9,300 per man to the Soviet equipment cost of $7,100 per man.]

In combination, the manpower and money we invest in our divisions and their immediate combat support should produce an advantage in comparative effectiveness of at least two to one, but firepower ratios give only 1.2—1.7 to 1.10 At issue is the contribution of those men and that equipment which either do not appear in firepower calculations or whose real contribution is out of proportion to their direct firepower scores because their contribution is to mobility, target acquisition, command and control, or essential “M-day onward” staying power. The Secretary and the Chief of Staff of the Army, while considering raw firepower the most reliable available basis for comparison, believe that we do gain a real advantage from these “add-ons.” Their evaluation is:

[Here follows a table entitled “U.S. Organizational and Firepower ‘Add-ons'” that shows the evaluation of the Secretary and the Chief of Staff, U.S. Army.]

In summary, the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the Army conclude that on comparing a U.S. Corps and a Soviet Combined Arms Army we find ourselves stronger, more mobile and able to outshoot the Soviets. The U.S. Corps gets superior reconnaissance and flank protection from its armored cavalry units, better control from its communications units, and from its advantage in engineers, the ability to facilitate its own movements while impeding the enemy's. With light aviation units organic at lower levels, it benefits in mobility, control, and battlefield surveillance, and its logistics come from a system proven repeatedly in war. In short, the U.S. organization provides its commander a rounded capability for combat, which I believe is at least 1.75 to 2.3 times that of comparable Soviet divisions. The Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff feel, however, that at this stage of our investigation of this matter, we should equate one U.S. division to 1.2 to 1.7 Soviet divisions,11 depending of course on the specific tactical situation under consideration. Therefore, I have used these latter figures hereafter, although quite evidently there is much room for further study, and I am directing that the Army pursue this matter.

C. The Special Situation in NATO

At the outset of any discussion of United States strategy in NATO-Europe, it should be clearly recognized that the United States is not a free agent. United States strategy and NATO strategy are inextricably linked and our ability to influence the NATO members is limited. NATO strategies which may be militarily and economically feasible may be politically infeasible or feasible only after extensive psychological preparation.

If Europe is vulnerable to a non-nuclear attack today, as it is, it is not the result of overwhelming Soviet strength, nor failure of the Europeans to devote men and a great deal of money to defense. The immediate problem is much more one of balance and inefficiency in the allocation of resources. In my remarks to the NATO Council last December,12 I pointed out that for Europe to meet virtually its [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] goals would take about 1 per cent more of the growing aggregate European GNP and that this, along with our own contribution, would provide Europe with a solid non-nuclear defense. In the light of our recent studies of NATO and Warsaw Pact tactical air and ground strength it appears that our position was entirely warranted and, in fact, that it should be possible to get the most important gains with increases of less than this amount. In any case, U.S. forces will not by themselves provide an adequate non-nuclear force for the defense of Europe. Our leadership can help, but the basic remedies lie with the other members of NATO.

[Here follows a detailed exposition of NATO and Warsaw Pact force dispositions.]

Despite NATO's relatively encouraging position in manpower and units, its forces could not assuredly hold the Soviets at a forward line. Mal-deployments, frictions, and misunderstandings within NATO forces could give the Soviets an opportunity to break through in a decisive way. If one or more of the larger countries in the center were to drop out of the conflict NATO's position would be untenable. However, the Soviets also have problems—apart from their lively concern that NATO might employ nuclear weapons—in that the reliability of their allies is questionable, especially if the situation is such that the Soviets are not clearly in the ascendancy.

Given anything like the present Russian strength, and our tactical air strength, well-equipped and stocked NATO forces [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to include first echelon forces, should be able at least to delay to and defend on the line of the Rhine against a Bloc surprise non-nuclear attack without using nuclear weapons. There would remain the possibility of a sudden Soviet nuclear attack catching us by surprise, and there is also a possibility that the Alliance might not hold together. But, for a wide range of circumstances NATO forces should do well, provided they had reached their [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] goals.

Within the past year there has been a net increase in non-U.S. NATO defense budgets of about $1.3 billion (from $18.7 billion to $20.0 billion). About one-half of the increase has come in Germany, and has provided an increment of real power. The “hard core” high priority budget increase that I proposed last December as meeting the most urgent needs of the non-U.S. members of NATO, amounts to $3 billion a year. The prospects for getting this much of an increase in European defense budgets are remote. However, having in mind the existing balance of forces described above, it is becoming increasingly obvious that the problem is not so much getting the Europeans to spend a great deal more, but rather getting them to fill gaps in their efforts and to get a better balance of effort.

Most of our non-nuclear requirements studies look at the problem of defending Europe against a massive attack. I believe it at least equally important that NATO have strong conventional forces for use in contingencies arising over Berlin, or in connection with other contingencies whose course is hard to predict. In either, our ability to put pressure on the Soviets—a crucial element in crises of this sort—may depend on our ability to make limited military moves without using nuclear weapons.

Neither our opponents nor our Allies have their forces at the high readiness of U.S. forces in-place in Europe. France has only two divisions in Germany. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. In addition to having to move all of its forces forward in a crisis, the French Army is to be at 450,000 man strength in peacetime, with plans for expansion in a crisis, to a million men. The Germans say that they plan by end-1964 to go from a peacetime force of 260,000 men to over 700,000 within 72 hours. Britain also plans to fill out its three division requirements by airlifting two brigades and a division headquarters from the U.K. in an emergency—a move that would take at least seven days.

If, however, the conventional forces provided [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] are not capable of stopping a surprise non-nuclear Soviet attack reasonably well forward, we are faced with the alternative of resorting to tactical nuclear weapons or increasin. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] force levels.

Soviet vs. Western Rapid Mobilization Capabilities: Mobilization vs. Instant Readiness

Both the Soviet Union and our Allies rely on rapid mobilization and deployment, and can fill understrength units rapidly. Nevertheless, these mobilization actions cannot be accomplished instantaneously nor, if done on a massive13 scale, in secrecy. Further, once existing, equipped units are filled out it will take several months to create additional combat-ready units, even if stocks of equipment exist.

This practice is at variance with both that of the United States and official NATO doctrine. The U.S., in accordance with agreed NATO requirements, keeps its NATO committed ground forces, including logistic support units, at high readiness. The FRG and the Soviet Union distribute their active duty personnel as follows:

Percent Active Duty Personnel FRG USSR

Divisions (U.S. at 98%) 79-96 30-85

Non-Div. Combat Support 81 40-85

Logistic & Service Support Units 14 0-40

These German and Soviet forces clearly do not have “instant readiness” by U.S. standards, but their practices have some merit. The Germans in particular man their combat units at a relatively high level, counting on reservists to perform less demanding rear activities. They claim to be able to mobilize the necessary reservists in 72 hours, and one estimate is that their mobilized units would reach 70 per cent effectiveness in 10-14 days. For many rear area functions this German estimate may be correct; although it should be noted that German planning has not yet been rigorously tested, and not all the necessary reserve units are organized and equipped. Somewhat similarly, the British plan on reinforcing the BAOR within a period of seven days from the alert, and the French would have to move forces into Germany as well as calling up reservists. CINCEUR may, therefore, be optimistic in estimating that all NATO first echelon reserve units with a peacetime manning level of 65 per cent would be brought to full strength and deployed in 20 days, and that second echelon units at 5 per cent strength could be brought to full strength and deployed in 30-35 days. Certainly, at that stage, these reserve units would be less effective than those active on M-Day.

The Soviets apparently also plan to fill out units rapidly. Although they intermittently call up former active duty people for training, they do not have a systematic program for maintaining their reserve personnel at a high state of training. Therefore, at a minimum, it would probably take the Soviets, as well as our Allies, several weeks to get non-operational ground force units in a state approaching combat readiness and deploy them. For this reason, the JCS estimate that although the Soviets could fill out their total divisions (115-135 in DIA/CIA panel's view) rapidly, only about 20 Soviet divisions, beyond those now combat-ready (58-75 in DIA/CIA panel's view) would become operational by M+30.

This disparity between the high readiness of our ground forces and those of our opponents and Allies raises the question: “Are we allocating our manpower resources efficiently?” Although the Communists might launch a sudden attack in any of a number of areas, our principal limiting factor in meeting such a contingency at this time is our deployment capability, not the readiness of our entire Army structure, including its logistic system. Further, in Europe 100 percent manned U.S. units have on their flank non-ready, under-manned Allied units.

D. U.S. Force Requirements for Various Conflicts

Thus far, emphasis has been on NATO. It is necessary also to look at other likely areas and contingencies. A number of studies of possible non-nuclear conflicts in various areas of the world were done last year by the Chairman's Special Studies Group in the Joint Staff. These studies, which are being brought up-to-date in the light of new intelligence and other factors, cover a wide range of situations, showing the requirements for ground forces in relation to those now available. United States and Allied forces worldwide are summarized in the following table. Communist forces are summarized on the following page. The table after these summarizes U.S. divisional requirements for nine potential conflicts on the Sino-Soviet periphery. (Fatalities in Millions)

[Here follow 3 pages of tables.]

Middle East

In the Middle East Iran is the area most vulnerable to Soviet attack. It is also especially difficult for us to move forces to this country rapidly and to support them there. The Russians maintain 24 divisions, of which 12 are operational, and about 1,000 combat aircraft in the military districts bordering Iran.

Taking account of the severe communications and logistics limitations in the rugged terrain of northern Iran, the net initial Soviet threat is estimated to be about 10 divisions. The bulk of the Soviet aircraft are short-range day fighters unable to reach very far south into Iran.

This attack would present us with a formidable problem. With our programmed airlift capacity for 1968 we could build up our forces as depicted below:

No. of U.S. Divisions in Iran Days After D-Day

10 20 30 40 50 65

Airlift/Sealift only:

Suez Open .5 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0

Suez Closed .5 1.0 2.0 2.0 4.0 5.0

Airlift/Sealift plus Forward Pre-Positioning 1.0 2.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0

With its 10 divisions and strong air support the Soviet Union can dominate the situation in northern Iran. Assuming that Iranian forces hold together and withdraw south to the Zagros Mountains, and also assuming that the Russians do not take key centers in the south, including Abadan, by air assault, the U.S. might be able to deploy enough forces (8 divisions and about 1,600 aircraft) to stop the Soviets at the Zagros Mountains, or even mount a counterattack, although this would require an additional six divisions.

This situation obviously is touch and go. Our response time in this case is critically important. For this reason, the Middle East-Indian Ocean area is the one in which pre-positioning of stocks has a great payoff. For example, if we had 30,000 tons of stocks in a depot in the area (possibly a forward floating depot) the time to get two divisions into Southern Iran in 1968 (one airborne, one infantry) would be cut from 40 days to 20 days. The 40 day figure takes into account that heavy equipment which must be moved by sea. This is the equipment which would be pre-positioned. The difference of 20 days could be decisive in certain circumstances. We are investigating this possibility and analyzing its costs.

Another point to be noted is that our ability to hold Southern Iran might depend on moving a relatively small force, along with some air defenses (interceptors or Hawks), very quickly to key ports and airbases in Southern Iran, in order to prevent their seizure by Soviet air attack.

In short, treating this as a single-situation contingency, our main initial limitation is deployment capability, not forces. Programmed additions to our airlift capacity will help, and so would pre-positioned equipment in the area. I will make recommendations to you when the results are in from our investigation of pre-positioning.

Southeast Asia

The General Purpose Forces Study of the defense of South Vietnam, Thailand, and the southern part of Laos against attack by Communist China and North Vietnam concluded that the U.S. and its SEATO Allies could successfully defend the area against a 21-division Communist attack. The 13 Thai and South Vietnam divisions in the area (used mostly for counter-guerrilla and rear area security tasks), plus five U.S. divisions and one Commonwealth Division, rapidly introduced into the area, along with allied air superiority, could halt the enemy along the general line of the 15th parallel and thence north along the Mekong River. To restore the situation would take four more U.S. divisions, or a total of nine.

In that region we have a major logistic advantage. For example, with air superiority on our part the existing road and rail net combined permits the tonnages shown in the table below.

Comparative Logistic Capability (Tons per Day) U.S. and Allied Forces Communist Forces

Dry Season Wet Season All Season and

Area Road/Rail Air Road/Rail Air All Sources

Northeast Thailand (near Vientiane) 5,000 1,000 4,000 500 Less than 1,000

East Thailand 2,000 —— 1,000 —— Less than 1,000

Totals 8,000 5,500

A Chinese Communist or North Vietnamese division consumes about 75-150 tons per day in conditions of average combat; a U.S. infantry division, approximately 371 tons. The transportation net available to the Communists can support about 7 to 12 of their divisions at their average combat rates. Most of the 21 division Communist force therefore would be capable only intermittently of a high level of activity.

Although the Chinese Communist and North Vietnamese can do a lot with a little, these logistic differentials of at least 8 to 1 and 5.5 to 1 place them at a severe disadvantage—one they must face for years to come (despite Chinese road building endeavors in Northern Laos).

Northeast Asia

This study examined a resumption of the war in Korea under several different assumptions, the most pessimistic of which had the Chinese Communists sending troops covertly into North Korea before a coordinated North Korean and Chinese attack: 36 divisions on D-day and 63 divisions by D-plus 30 days. The Special Studies Group estimated that seven more U.S. divisions in addition to the two in place, or a total of nine, along with the ROK Army, would be required to absorb the blow and regroup on the Han River line. With eventual U.S. air superiority and five additional U.S. divisions, these forces could restore the present position.

This requirement is fairly sensitive to assumptions about the timing of enemy moves and about the size of his force committed. The following table shows three variants of this situation: (1) Low in which only the North Koreans attack; (2) Medium in which the Chinese join after the outbreak but commit forces only on the scale of the Korean War because of concern about trouble elsewhere should they get over-committed; and (3) High in which the ChiComs commit all their divisions in the Mukden area plus further divisions from their strategic reserve (this is the case referred to above, the most severe looked at by the Special Studies Group).

Chinese Communist and North Korean Ground Strength at D+30 Days High a Medium b Low

Divisions in Korea

ChiCom's 43 27 —

North Korean 20 18 18

Total 63 45 18

Ground Force Totals

ChiCom 801,000 509,000 —

North Korean 198,000 178,000 178,000

Total 999,000 687,000 178,000

ROK and U.S. Ground Strength Divisions in Korea At Present Required to Hold High Attack Required toRestore High Attack Situationc

U.S. 2 9 14

ROK 18 20 20

Total 20 29 34

Ground Force Totals

U.S. 56,000 360,000 550,000

ROK 536,000 600,000 600,000

Total 592,000 960,000 1,150,000

Assumptions:

a ChiCom's (a) do not feel compelled to keep major forces opposite Taiwan and the Soviet Far East, and can, therefore, employ all operational divisions now in the Mukden area and commit further divisions from their strategic reserve; (b) possess enough equipment to meet their combat support force needs; and (c) have adequate supplies for support of both own and North Korean forces.

b ChiCom's (a) commit the bulk of the operational forces from the Mukden area, but feel compelled to hold back their strategic reserve. This is the commitment of forces the JCS estimate would be available to support the North Koreans in view of Chinese requirements to maintain deployments opposite Taiwan, in Tibet, and elsewhere.

In the Medium case, 10 Chinese divisions (approximately 150,000 men) move to the 38th parallel in ten days, and an additional 17 divisions move within 17 days. This force, along with 18 North Korean divisions, in terms of combat effectiveness is over 50 per cent stronger than the presently deployed U.S. and ROK forces. However, an Army study of this situation indicates that with a fortified zone developed in advance, (estimated cost of system approximately $50 million) present forces in Korea would defeat the attack. In effect, this is approximately the scale of the Korean War.14 At their peak, the Chinese Communists and North Koreans had 33 divisions engaged on the line while the U.S. had eight and the ROK's had 8-10.

E. Tactical Nuclear Posture and Strategy

Though we have conducted several studies of tactical nuclear warfare on the ground in Europe, we have not yet been able to clarify fully the role of tactical nuclear weapons in our over-all strategy. For example, we have yet to resolve important questions about the vulnerability of ground forces to nuclear weapons and the feasibility of sustained operations in a nuclear environment. In general, our understanding of this kind of warfare is far less advanced than our apparent understanding of most other kinds of warfare. So far our studies suggest the following conclusions:

There are reasons for believing that the escalation potential of tactical nuclear warfare, of the type on which present plans are based, is high, particularly in terms of increasing yields. We are looking for ways to reduce this escalation potential.

[2 paragraphs (13 lines of source text) not declassified]

Ultimate Soviet attainment of approximate parity in tactical nuclear weapons may reduce and possibly eliminate whatever military advantages the US or NATO would obtain by resorting to tactical nuclear weapons in fighting the USSR. Though this aspect has not yet been fully explored, there is little evidence to suggest that the use of tactical nuclear weapons under such conditions will result in anything better than a military stalemate between the engaged forces.

Nuclear conflict can be divided into: 1. Strategic Nuclear warfare, global in scale.

2. Theater Nuclear warfare; probably as damaging within the theater as global war, and probably extremely difficult to limit to the theater.

3. Battlefield warfare, with nuclear strikes limited to the forward battle area plus interdiction of lines of communications outside the US and USSR.

4. Battlefield warfare, limited to just the forward battle area.

5. Demonstrative nuclear strikes, intended to put pressure on the opponent by threatening escalation.

Although ground forces must be prepared to participate in any of these types of nuclear conflict, the design of our ground force nuclear systems should be oriented primarily, but not exclusively, toward the last three of these cases.

Uncertainties

Tactical nuclear warfare presents large areas of uncertainty which have not been resolved. We have had no experience in it and cannot be sure we have the right mix and balance of weapons. The main uncertainties are these:

How Might the War Start?

Troops in barracks areas are extremely vulnerable to nuclear attack without warning. On the other hand, with even a little warning, troops can rapidly disperse to field locations, in which case far more nuclear strikes would be needed to inflict the same casualties. If nuclear weapons are employed from the outset, installed atomic demolitions can be fired as the enemy approaches; if they are not, uncertainties about timing complicate their installation and employment. Similar problems plague other planned nuclear fires and troop deployments. These problems of timing stem primarily from delays inherent in NATO's decision making machinery, which, of course, is subject to a multitude of political imponderables.

Escalation?

Estimates of civilian casualties in Europe range from several hundred thousand, for a restricted zone battlefield campaign, to from five to fifty million or more for a theater-wide tactical nuclear war. Whether constraints against escalation can prevail over the temptation to employ larger weapons to destroy the enemy's nuclear delivery means before they are used is a large question. For example, the vulnerability of our nuclear strike aircraft in Europe creates a major instability. This would be a source of major concern to commanders attempting to conduct a limited battlefield nuclear war.

Soviet Weapons and Concepts?

As far as we know, Soviet planning, like NATO planning, has emphasized theater-wide nuclear attack. The Soviet nuclear stockpile is estimated to be much smaller than ours and, perhaps largely for this reason, Soviet programs have not emphasized short range small nuclear warheads as we have. They, of necessity, would be forced to use longer range, higher yield systems. Soviet classified military writings reflect their relative scarcity of warheads, the absence of a concept to limit nuclear engagement to forward areas or to a sector of the battlefield, and an interest in some quarters in employing a small number of high yield weapons to destroy the opposing army. These negative Soviet attitudes toward the possibility of a forward zone, small yield nuclear conflict may change as their stockpile of nuclear weapons increases, but we cannot predict with any confidence when, or if, this change in doctrine will take place. Moreover, a “high-yield-low-cost” faction may come to dominate Soviet thinking on ground warfare.

In this regard a recent study has assessed the impact of a Soviet blanket barrage of 32 20MT weapons along the general area occupied by NATO troops in Central Europe, assuming that the NATO forces are preparing and occupying defensive positions whose exact locations are unknown.15 The NATO force of over 670,000 men in 30 divisions and associated units sustains losses of seven per cent of men in trenches, 33 per cent of troops in buildings and 43 per cent of troops in the open. It also loses 11 per cent of its tanks and artillery and 35 per cent of its vehicles and electrical equipment. If it is assumed that the troops were disposed equally in trenches, buildings and in the open (the study hazards no such guess), then 28 per cent of the entire force become casualties and 15 of the 19 divisions affected by the blast suffer from 40-65 per cent casualties. 1.8 million civilians also become casualties in this attack, even though it avoids large cities.

The Nuclear Battlefields

[1 paragraph (11 lines of source text) not declassified]

Psychological Reactions

A tactical nuclear war would be an entirely new experience for all involved, troops, civilians, commanders, and statesmen, on both sides. It is extremely difficult to predict how these various groups would behave when subjected to such a novel and unpleasant experience as an intensive tactical nuclear engagement. Our studies suggest that in the first several days casualties in engaged combat forces might be as much as 50 per cent. A large number of units would receive 30 per cent or more casualties. Many survivors would have gotten radiation dosages, whose level would be quite difficult to determine. The cumulative effect would be intense, on troops, on intermingled civilians and on decision-makers alike, as they sought to correlate fragmentary reports and take appropriate actions, both military and civil. There would be major problems at all levels in sustaining a rational, controlled effort.

Results of our Studies

These examples from recent studies illustrate the general nature and quantitative impact of some of the principal factors involved in determining how many tactical nuclear weapons are needed for Central Europe.

Many qualifications must be attached to any conclusions based on these studies. In addition to those pointed out earlier, the figures are highly sensitive to the specific details of the war situations assumed. In particular, the numbers and types of weapons expended reflect the weapons allocations assumed for both sides and apply only to the first day or two of nuclear warfare.

In October 1962 the JCS published the following results of four manual map exercises conducted to develop the first day or two of nuclear exchanges between a 3-1/2 division NATO corps defending 100 kilometers of front and a seven division Soviet combined arms Army in 1967:

Situation NATO Employs Soviet Employs Results

[Table entries (4 rows) not declassified]

Taking a different, more theoretical approach16 to over-all NATO ground warfare tactical nuclear requirements, the October 1962 JCS study also calculated the dynamic effects of the progressive attrition of opposing nuclear weapons systems. Inputs to the model included force relationship, the size of Soviet nuclear stockpile, relative rates of fire, and random fire weapons effects. It revealed that in order to reduce likely Soviet 1967 forces by 50 per cent and exhaust Soviet tactical nuclear weapons, while sustaining no more than 30 per cent losses to NATO forces, NATO Central Region tactical nuclear requirements, depending on the selected mix of weapons by yield, would be as shown below. Note that the number of weapons required is sensitive both to the number available to the Soviets and to the sizes of weapons we choose to use, particularly the latter.

[Table (3 columns, 3 rows) not declassified]

Note: This table is subject to the qualifications which follow:

Though the method employed does take into account NATO weapon losses due to enemy ground action, it does not include a number of other factors which quantitatively affect total NATO stockpile requirements, such as: (1) organizational losses due to enemy air and missile forces; (2) weapon system reliabilities; (3) maldeployment of delivery systems or nuclear weapons; (4) restrictions on weapon deliveries due to constraints; (5) improvement from firing at close-in acquired targets rather than using the random fire involved in the mathematical model. The first three factors create extra requirements; the small percentage of high yield weapons in the mixes considered make it unlikely that constraint restrictions would significantly modify requirements; but the fifth factor promises substantial reductions. JCS studies involving somewhat different troop densities, weapon availabilities, and rates of fire from those discussed above indicate that through the use of acquired target fires, the last alternative above might be modified as follows:

[Table (3 columns, 2 rows) not declassified]

In April 1963, the JCS published the results of further investigations into the effects of varying the mix of tactical nuclear weapons available to the NATO Corps defending the 100 Km of front described above. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

[Table (3 columns, 4 rows) not declassified]

[1 paragraph (10 lines of source text) not declassified]

Allied Views

[1 paragraph (20 lines of source text) not declassified]17

Summary on Tactical Nuclear Weapons

On the basis of the work done so far we have much to learn concerning tactical nuclear warfare, both from the point of view of its military consequences, including the central question, “To whose advantage would it be?” and from the point of view of the political environment in which it would occur. It is clear, however, that we do not have an adequate basis at this time for placing greater dependence on a tactical nuclear strategy of the type described by the British and Germans. We are providing an option for this strategy in the planned buildup of tactical nuclear weapons, and in the event of a sudden Soviet attack in Europe, we may be forced to rely upon it. Against this contingency a serious effort is being made by the JCS to develop plans for limited zone, low yield operations involving the engaged battle zone and its immediate interdiction.

[Here follows a full-page table.]

F. Conclusions on Contingencies, Forces and Deployments

Although it is a major objective of our General Purpose Forces programs to open up as many useful military options as possible, we must decide on the relative emphasis to be put on preparations for non-nuclear versus nuclear conflict. In the nuclear category, resources must be further allocated among programs for short range battlefield systems, longer range interdiction systems, and still longer range theatre systems whose functions are virtually the same as our strategic retaliatory forces. Within both the nuclear and non-nuclear categories we must decide on how much mobility to have, and on the scale and duration of possible conflicts. We must also make decisions concerning the number of conflicts we should be prepared to handle simultaneously and the performance to expect from Allies, and must make assumptions on the circumstances in which war may break out.

Several things are clear in this regard. First, our ability to predict contingencies is poor. Second, while we can and should take out some insurance against low probability contingencies—especially if they are dangerous ones—in the design of our General Purpose Forces we must give great weight to the more probable ones. Third, being able to handle the biggest or the most dangerous contingencies does not necessarily mean that we can manage others equally well. We have learned this in counterinsurgency, and we are learning the greatly differing demands of nuclear and non-nuclear conflict. Fourth, there may or may not be any wars in the 1965-1969 period above the counterinsurgency scale, but there will surely be situations in which our ability to use measured force will be relevant—if not critical—as in Cuba, Berlin, and Thailand.

It would be a mistake to concentrate on any one or a few of these peacetime or wartime objectives and neglect the others. We must give careful consideration to the full range of enemy capabilities. Surprise attack is one of these, against which we must always be alert and prepared. We were surprised at Pearl Harbor and in Korea, and so long as there is an enemy capable of launching a surprise attack we may be surprised again. Logically, surprise attack is less likely where U.S. forces are deployed and, historically, the best deterrent and defense against surprise attack has been forward deployments. The presence of U.S. forces insures that any attack will immediately involve U.S. power, decreasing the enemy's chance of achieving a decision before U.S. and Allied reinforcements can intervene. Where there are no U.S. forces the temptation is greater and the likelihood of surprise attack is increased. In such areas emphasis must be on early detection of the long build-up required for a major attack—with due consideration to the lag between perception and action—and our general purpose forces must be able to move quickly into the area, applying increasing pressure both to reassure our Allies and to force the enemy to back-off. In Europe, in particular, for both military and political reasons, we should continue to have large forces on the ground.

In the event of surprise attack against areas in which we have ground forces, Europe and Korea, we may find it necessary to use nuclear weapons. Present U.S. and Allied capabilities, however, are strong enough to keep this issue from being forced on us early. In any event, this decision should not be regarded as automatic. And, if nuclear weapons are used, we should try to limit their use to the battlefield, initially to force the opponent to back down or failing that to hold him. Depending upon the method of allocating “dual capable” costs, our battlefield nuclear programs take less than 10 percent of the ground forces budget. This is not too high a price for this insurance.

As to the scale and duration of non-nuclear contingencies for which we should be prepared, at present our largest scale contingency plan involves no more than 10 divisions (five deployed from CONUS to Yugoslavia or the European satellites plus whatever portion of CINCEUR's five divisions he may make available). In the General Purpose Forces Study, the JCS have examined a 12 Army division single contingency (Iran) and a 14 Army division two-conflict situation (Europe and Korea). This does not mean there is a guarantee against larger conflicts, but simply that we have been unable to foresee them.

It is easy to be very wrong on contingencies. But, it is clear that the U.S. should not, for example, plan on trying to solve the problem of non-nuclear defense of Europe by itself. Despite our assessment that Soviet conventional strength is lower than has been thought, and improvement in German forces, NATO will not be able to fight a large non-nuclear war on a sustained basis during at least the next several years. The conditions for a sustained non-nuclear defense of Europe are now in sight, however, and our planning and negotiations should begin to exploit this forthcoming alternative to nuclear war.

This assessment of contingencies and their implications for the design of our forces can be summarized as follows: 1. We will continue to be faced with counterinsurgency conflicts and should continue with our counterinsurgency programs.

2. Crisis deployments and show-of-force operations short of fighting will be necessary to support our foreign policy. This clearly means a continuation of large forces in Europe.

3. We can expect the more likely conflicts to arise from local confrontations which will call for deployments from the U.S. of forces up to several divisions. We should be capable of rapid reinforcements for such situations.

4. So long as surprise attack remains an enemy capability we must be alert and prepared to counter it. We should not make preparations for this type of conflict a major design objective of our General Purpose Ground Forces although some insurance programs are appropriate in order to keep the probability of this contingency low, and in order to meet it if it occurs.

5. The programmed force will enable us to meet this requirement for single-region, non-nuclear conflicts in all but a few cases. In Europe, this would not be so in the worst case, given current non-U.S. force deficiencies. In the medium and low cases, non-U.S. forces would run out of stocks after about four weeks. In each of the two simultaneous conflict situations, and in the Middle East in particular, our main current deficiency is more in deployment than in forces in being.

6. Our present battlefield nuclear programs are not especially costly and they help to reduce the probability of local nuclear wars and to provide a way of meeting it if it occurs. However, we must recognize that such a war with the Soviet Union would stand a good chance of leading either to a collapse of Alliance support or to a global war.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JMF 7000 (3 Jan 64) Sec 1A. Top Secret. This draft memorandum is Tab III of “Department of Defense Draft Memoranda for the President: Recommended FY 1965-1969 Defense Programs.” dated December 19. An early version of the draft memorandum, which was circulated to the JCS for comment, is dated October 10. (Ibid., JCS 1800/775, JMF 7000 (10 Oct 63) Sec 1) A later draft dated November 15, not identical to that printed here, is in Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US.

1 I have disqualified myself from participating in this decision because my two minor children each own 300 shares of Ford stock. [Footnote in the source text.]

2 Entitled “Basis for Particular Force Structure Recommendations,” not printed.

a Includes only the cost of the forces listed in Table I.

3 The JCS have expressed divergent views in commenting on an earlier draft of this section. The Chairman, JCS, the CNO, and the Commandant, USMC, would prefer a substitute section based on JSOP, analyses of studies, and the contingency plans of overseas commanders. Their proposal is attached as Appendix III. The Chief of Staff of the Air Force recommended that the earlier draft be forwarded with certain changes, most of whose essentials have been incorporated in this version. The Secretary and the Chief of Staff, Army, supplied a completely rewritten section which has formed the basis for this draft. [Footnote in the source text. The “earlier draft” referred to is that of October 10, cited in the source note. Appendix III is not printed.]

4 The source of the quotation is not identified.

5 Entitled “Soviet Military Capabilities and Policies, 1962-1967,” dated March 22. (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimates, 11-63)

6 U.S. Divisions are not considered fully combat-ready unless 90 per cent manned. Our divisions in Germany are programmed for 98 per cent manning in FY 1964. [Footnote in the source text.]

7 This study has not yet been addressed by the JCS and is still subject to confirmation by the USIB. The full range of uncertainty is estimated by the group to be 1.5 to 2.4 million men in the total Soviet ground forces. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 The CIA/DIA panel's highest confidence estimate is that Soviet divisions and division cadres are divided into readiness categories, thus:

9 The Chairman, JCS, also has reservations: “the ‘Index of Combat Effectiveness' has no practical validity and would fall under sharp criticism if presented for serious consideration in international discussions. While we in the military service have sometimes used coefficients of effectiveness in maneuvers to determine and control combat outcomes, no one seriously believes that the outcome of battle is calculable in mathematical terms through their use. If a mathematical solution to combat outcomes were possible, it would have to resolve an equation of many variables (such as weather, terrain, proximity of the enemy, time of day, status of supply and equipment, physical condition of troops, their courage, morale, leadership), which are all constantly changing. The most important factors, courage, morale and leadership, are not subject to physical measurement. If as most soldiers believe, ‘in war the morale is to the physical as three is to one,' only about a fourth of the determinants of victory are susceptible to the coefficient approach and they are variables undergoing constant change . . . . There is insufficient recognition of some of the critical aspects of the defense of NATO such as the shallowness of the combat theatre and the decisive advantage accruing to an aggressor in concentrating his forces swiftly for the attack of a critical sector.. [Footnote in the source text. The quotation is from CM- 1009-63, a memorandum from Taylor to McNamara dated November 12, 1963. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, JCS 1800/775-2; JMF 7000 (10 Oct 63) Sec 3) The sentences immediately following the quoted material read: “If these considerations are taken into account, it is difficult to conclude that for the present a successful defense can be effected by NATO forces without the early use of tactical nuclear weapons. I believe this to be the unanimous judgment of the military leaders of NATO, US and European, and I would be loath to have the President receive a different impression.”]

10 The manpower ratio is approximately two to one, the equipment cost ratio, 1.3 to 1, producing an over-all cost ratio of 2.6 to 1. This ratio should be further increased to reflect the higher percentage of professionals and the higher level of experience and training in our Army. [Footnote in the source text.]

11 A fuller discussion can be found in Appendix II. [Footnote in the source text. Appendix II, “Comparative Combat Effectiveness,” is not printed.]

12 See Document 120.

13 In the sense of exploiting the full capacity of the Soviet mobilization base. [Footnote in the source text.]

c c “Required” divisions from report of the Chairman's Special Study Group includes one Marine Division-Wing Team.

14 Historical research indicates the Korean Peninsula limits the number of combat forces at the front to something less than 400,000. The Communist Spring Offensive of April-May 1951, for example, involved 30 ChiCom and North Korean Divisions, with about 375,000 men at the front. It was stopped north of Seoul by some 360,000 U.N. forces in terms of combat troops at the front. The U.N. counter-offensive which followed involved 360,000 combat troops versus about 322,000 Communist combat troops—Communist casualties having been about 70,000. This offensive regained the line of the 38th parallel. [Footnote in the source text.]

15 Data from “Development of Basic Arms Control Research Data for Measuring Collateral Damage from Nuclear Weapons Effects,” dated 30 Nov 1962, by Stanford Research Institute. [Footnote in the source text.]

16 In commenting on this report, the JCS have declared this theoretical approach to be useful in gaining insights into requirements, but to be invalid for determining specific numbers because the relation of the area fire model to practical delivery techniques and concepts is not realistic and because the delivery of other interacting weapons was not considered. [Footnote in the source text.]

17 This concept is not, so far as can be determined, a fully coordinated government position. It should not be considered as the FRG's last words on the matter. [Footnote in the source text.]

154. Memorandum of Conference Between President Johnson and Chancellor Erhard 154. Memorandum of Conference Between President Johnson and Chancellor ErhardSource

LBJ Ranch, Texas, December 30, 1963.

The President held a preliminary budget meeting with the Joint Chiefs on November 29, emphasizing the need for economy and for closer supervision of defense contractors. The President agreed to consider reissuing NSAM No. 55 of June 28, 1961, which Taylor stated had been a satisfactory guidance for the Chiefs. “President Johnson asked each Joint Chief to give him an inscribed color picture to hang in his study ‘because he would be looking at them and thinking of them quite often in the future' as he took over the awesome task of being President and Commander-in-Chief.” (Memorandum from Clifton to McNamara with attached memorandum of conference with the President by Clifton and Shepard; National Defense University, Taylor Papers, Taylor CJCS Memoranda) NSAM No. 55 is printed as Document 32.

The President referred briefly to Chancellor Erhard's visit and noted that the Chancellor had informed him that they were now planning to spend slightly over 20 billion DM for German defense.1 Secretary McNamara expressed satisfaction at this development as, prior to the Chancellor's discussion with the President, the previous planning figure had been 19.2 billion DM. He pointed out that the new figure represented a 40% increase over the past 24 months and that this was all to the good despite the fact that the German defense expenditures, as per cent of GNP, still did not match those of the United States.

Secretary McNamara briefly described the manner in which the FY ‘65 defense budget, beginning with the initial recommendations of the Service Secretaries, had been prepared in the Department of Defense. The Secretary particularly noted the participation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in its development: their comments on each of the draft memoranda to the President prepared by the Secretary on the various program packages, their many and extensive discussions with the Secretary on the over-all budget as well as portions of the budget, and finally, the JCS corporate position on the DOD budget as submitted “that the program supported by this budget will provide effective forces in a high state of readiness for defense of the vital interests of the United States.”2 The Secretary stated that though elements of each Service's recommended forces were still not provided for in the budget, he and all the Chiefs felt that—on balance—this budget would provide effective forces for our national security. The Secretary then suggested that the meeting proceed by having each Chief give his reactions to the proposed budget and his comments thereon.

General Taylor then expressed the appreciation of all the Joint Chiefs for this opportunity to discuss directly with their Commander-in-Chief the proposed defense budget and any resulting problems of concern to the individual Services. He compared the present extensive role of the Joint Chiefs in the development of the over-all force structure and defense budget vis-a-vis their much narrower participation a few years previously when he had been Chief of Staff of the Army. He noted that, at that time, each Chief was deeply involved in his individual Service submission whereas the JCS had little time or opportunity to consider thoroughly the impact of the defense budget as a whole. In contrast, the Joint Chiefs now spend a great deal of time on the overall defense budget and the force structure it supports; their consideration goes beyond the parochial views of their Services. Furthermore, the Joint Chiefs were privileged to consider and comment on any program change proposal, submitted to OSD, which they considered to be of significance. General Taylor noted that the JCS had participated in 104 meetings during which budgetary matters, force structure, or PCPs related to this year's budget had been discussed. He also pointed out that the Joint Chiefs avoid dealing with uni-Service matters and that they had neither the intention nor the time to become experts on line items in the Services' modernization or R&D programs. Such matters were dealt with through Service Secretary channels, while the Chiefs concentrated on their main role as principal advisors to the President on strategy and national security. General Taylor closed by indicating that the proposed budget was, over-all, a good one; nevertheless, there were some items which were of concern to the individual Services and he felt that each Chief should comment on these.

General Wheeler summarized the Army view by noting that the FY ‘65 Army budget was tight but that it would support the Army at the present level of strength and activity through the fiscal year. He pointed out that the Army's budget had varied from $11.96 billion in FY ‘63 to $13.10 billion in FY ‘64 to $11.994 billion in FY ‘65. The President noted that this was about the same as for FY ‘63 and that the figures had been reduced slightly from Secretary McNamara's original proposal.

General Wheeler indicated his concern over the PEMA portion of the budget which had dropped from $2.5 billion in FY ‘63 and $2.9 billion in FY ‘64 to $2.08 billion in FY ‘65. This budget would not permit major improvements in material modernization or in the buildup of reserve stocks.

[Here follow Wheeler's detailed exposition of potential deficiencies in tanks, ammunition, and personnel, and McNamara's description of improvements made in recent years.]

General Wheeler then returned to his last area of concern, the Nike-X, stating that he considered the lack of a ballistic missile defense the most serious deficiency in our defense posture. He considered the R&D FY-65 funding to be ample and the funding for the Nike Zeus Kwajalein tests to be satisfactory. He assured the President that the Nike-X development program was proceeding on schedule, calling particular attention to the work being done on the multi-function radar, the missile site radar, and the Sprint missile. He emphasized the need for a decision, by fall of CY 1964, to permit deployment of a Nike-X unit to the first operational site in September, 1969. This decision should be affirmative in view of the Soviet Union's actions to protect and harden its ICBM sites.

General Wheeler then reiterated his views as to the tightness of the budget and the level of support it would afford the Army. He warned that reduction of these funds, should the Congress take such action, would be at the expense of the Army's combat readiness and its potential combat effectiveness.

The President then queried General Wheeler as to whether he could stand on the budget and his readiness to defend it before Congress and before the reserve officers, who were likely to be critical.

General Wheeler replied affirmatively. He noted that, at a luncheon meeting, he had met with the Reserve Components Advisors to the Secretary of the Army and had informed them of the tightness of the budget and its probable impact on both the active Army and the reserve forces; in his view, they had accepted the facts in a most satisfactory manner.

The President then expressed his appreciation of General Wheeler's stand, noting that no one would get everything that he wanted. Nevertheless, the over-all FY ‘65 budget would provide more than others previously had received and about as much as the country could afford. He then cautioned that we would get less than we need unless all exercised care in their defense of the budget. In his view, with a new President in office in an election year, administration officials would find the Congress probing extra deeply. He asked all present to stand together when they “got on the line”.

[Here follow Admiral McDonald's exposition of potential deficiencies in ship conversions, ship overhauls, and aircraft procurement; General Shoup's support of McDonald with regard to ship conversion and overhaul; and McNamara's statement that he might need to reconsider and find additional money for ship overhaul.]

General LeMay then assured the President that the Air Force had received his austerity message loud and clear and was prepared to live with it. He noted that he was not concerned over the airlift and tactical air forces which the FY ‘65 budget would support. These forces were being modernized with a new transport and an advanced tactical fighter both actively under development. Though the rate of modernization was not all that he would like it to be, on balance he was not unhappy about these particular forces. On the other hand, he was deeply concerned in regard to strategic forces and air defense forces.

At this point General LeMay handed to the President a letter, dated 29 December,3 on his evaluation of both the strategic and the air defense situation as well as his proposal for an improved manned strategic aircraft and an improved manned interceptor. He indicated that all of the Air Force's pertinent studies, as well as other studies of the DOD, had concluded that the strategic superiority of the United States would rapidly diminish from the present to 1968. He then referred to estimates of the rapid rise of the total megatonnage of Soviet weapons on the alert vis-a-vis those of the United States, as well as to study conclusions that the Soviets' protected missiles could inflict greater damage on the U.S. than we could inflict on the USSR. This latter was due to the manner of distribution of the population of the two countries and the Soviet production of weapons of higher yields than those of the U.S. General LeMay emphasized the decrease in the budget for strategic forces from $9 billion in 1962 to a forecast estimate of less than $3 billion in FY 69.

In response to a Presidential query, Secretary McNamara noted that the Air Force's FY 65 budget totaled approximately $19.5 billion. General LeMay pointed out that even should a decision be made later to increase the $3 billion strategic forces budget for FY 69, it would be difficult to do so inasmuch as research and development activities in this field were diminishing rapidly and the present strategic systems were phasing out. Thus there would be but little which could be put into production.

In regard to the ballistic missile force levels, General LeMay's view was that the budget would provide about 150 less missiles than the number necessary to attack all essential targets on a time-urgent basis. Fortunately, the manned bomber systems could make up for this deficiency.

At this point there was considerable discussion as to whether 50 Minuteman missiles had been deleted from the budget submitted by the Secretary.4 Mr. Gordon noted that on the basis of Secretary McNamara's superb analysis of our strategic force requirements, which had accompanied his budget submission, the Bureau of the Budget had concluded that the addition of these 50 missiles would not effect any significant increase in the strategic power of the United States and was, therefore, not justified in view of the tight budget which the President had set as an objective. This action would save $150 million of new obligational authority from the FY 65 budget.

Secretary McNamara observed that there was no real disagreement concerning the need for these missiles in that Mr. Gordon had merely recommended postponement of procurement rather than cancellation. Further, he noted that proceeding with his program for these 50 missiles would result in an FY 65 expenditure of about $70 million despite the FY 65 NOA of $150 million and the over-all cost of $250 million associated with these missiles. He estimated that such postponement would increase the over-all cost of the missiles by some $35 million because of the “break” both in missile engine production-line programming and in the construction of missile sites. The Secretary also called attention to the fact that, while he felt it necessary for these 50 missiles to remain in the budget, General LeMay's view was that these 50 missiles were the minimum essential number and that, additionally, 150 more missiles would be desirable. General LeMay agreed with the Secretary and stated that he favored a 1400 Minuteman force by the end of FY 69 as opposed to the Secretary's recommended force level of 1200 Minuteman missiles.

Mr. Gordon stated that he would accept the Secretary's judgment regarding the additional costs that would be engendered by postponement of the funding for the 50 missiles in question; thus, he would agree with the program proposed by DOD.

The President stated that it just did not make good sense to increase the over-all cost of this program by $35 million in order to save $70 million in expenditures in FY 65. He noted, too, that it would be possible for General LeMay to defend the budget as best he could if the number of missiles he considered minimum essential were included even though he realized that General LeMay considers it desirable to have 150 additional missiles. Thereupon, it was generally agreed that these 50 Minuteman missiles should be included in the FY 65 budget.

General LeMay then went on to state that his greatest worry was due to the absence of anything new coming along in the way of a manned strategic system. Under present force programming and aircraft utilization rates, it was apparent that the B-52s would have an average of more than 6000 airframe hours before they were phased out. Modifications were already being made to the B-52 fleet due to the structural stress imposed by the increasing use of low-level tactics. In contrast, he noted that previous aircraft in the strategic fleet had been phased out with an average airframe time of 2000 to 3000 hours. This problem, in conjunction with the diminishing capability of the B-52 aircraft for effective mission performance in the increasingly sophisticated Soviet air defense environment, had convinced General LeMay that it was essential to develop a new manned bomber to replace the B-52.

The President observed that this increasing trend toward relying solely on missiles as our means for strategic delivery was a matter which had worried him over the past several years. He then queried General LeMay as to his recommendations.

General LeMay called attention to the fact that over the last year various study groups within the Air Force, including Project Forecast, had been studying the requirement; from this effort a new proposal for an improved manned strategic system had evolved. He was not referring to the B-70, which he considered “dead”, but rather to an aircraft to be designed primarily for low-level penetrations at subsonic speeds with a capability for high performance at high altitude, i.e., speeds in excess of Mach 2. The advanced state of the art which only now permitted such a design was mainly due to the availability of the new variable geometry wing. The basic armament would consist of short-range air-to-surface missiles in addition to weapons now in the inventory; integral to this system, there would also be a reconnaissance subsystem consisting of the necessary radar, infra-red, and photographic sensors. He estimated that it would require $5 million of FY 64 funds and $50 million of FY 65 funds to get the design studies, program definition, and advanced development of long-lead items proceeding in an orderly fashion. To the President's query as to whether this represented the money required for studies as to what should be done to replace the B-52s, the Secretary noted that the proposal was not merely a study, but the initiation of development of a new aircraft. He estimated that the ultimate cost of this new weapons system would probably be on the order of $10 billion. General LeMay generally agreed in that he estimated the ultimate cost would be close to $9 billion.

The President noted again that he was interested in this problem and wished to explore it further. However, he pointed out that at this stage he did not wish to become committed to a $9 billion project; he then asked what course of action was open if a follow-on bomber were not provided.

The Secretary indicated that, following the phaseout of the present bomber fleet, delivery of our strategic weapons could be handled by the employment of land-based ballistic missiles and the sea-based Polaris missiles.

General LeMay then reaffirmed his belief that it was necessary to maintain a proper “mix” in our strategic forces. He presented his misgivings in regard to an all-missile force which would not have the discrimination nor the reliability of the manned strategic systems and which could not furnish to the decisionmakers the flexibility of response or the multiple options so necessary in our strategic forces. Further, the missiles did not have the reliability of the manned systems because of the vulnerability of the total capability of the missile system to a single, unforeseen system deficiency. On the other hand, should the system not be working properly in a manned bomber, the crew could fly to the target, identify it, and drop their weapons thereon.

The Secretary indicated the actions under way, in line with the Joint Chiefs recommendations, for appropriate tests to increase the reliability of our ballistic missiles. He expressed confidence that the $500 million program which he had proposed for this purpose would meet with such success that, in the timeframe General LeMay was addressing, the reliability of our missiles would meet the objectives which had been set. The Secretary detailed the reasons as to why he was not at all sure that the Air Force proposal was the answer to the problem which was causing the concern expressed by the President and by General LeMay. He noted that this proposal was not for a traditional bomber but for an airborne platform from which missiles could be launched. Such a low-level penetrator would be extraordinarily complex and a very expensive system to develop. The air-to-surface missiles it carried would represent an advanced state of the art and, in his opinion, would almost certainly be “unreliable”—if the missiles in our present inventory could be so termed. The testing program for such a system would meet with the same problems with which we are confronted today, e.g., the difficulty of finding a way to test-fire the complete system to include the nuclear warhead. He expressed doubts as to the capability of this system to “gravity drop” weapons inasmuch as it had not been specifically designed for this function. The Secretary summarized by stating his opinion that the proposed system would be unreliable; notwithstanding, should the system turn out to be a reliable one, the Air Force did not as yet have a plan or a concept for its employment in wartime. In the ensuing discussion, Secretary McNamara and General LeMay set forth the pros and cons on these points.

To the President's query regarding his support of the cited $55 million figure for FY 64 and FY 65, the Secretary responded that he was absolutely against it until such time as both he and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were given a chance to study the proposal in detail. General Taylor noted that the Joint Chiefs had been unaware of the proposal and were not prepared to support it until they had the opportunity to consider it carefully.

The President noted that there was no need to make a decision right at the moment, though it was of the utmost necessity that he have a firm budget by the 8th of January so that he could complete preparations for its submission to the Congress. There was nothing to preclude a later request to Congress for funds which were deemed necessary. He suggested that General LeMay get busy and formally forward his proposal to the Secretary who had indicated that he did not have the benefit of advice from the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General LeMay pointed out that his proposal was contained in the letter he had just delivered, both to the President and to the Secretary. Further, he was not requesting an increase in the over-all Air Force budget; he proposed to obtain the necessary funds by reprogramming his Air Force budget, as necessary, from items of lower priority. The Secretary remarked that he did not think it feasible, or necessary, to come to a decision by the 8th of January. He indicated it would be wise to stand on the present budget and to study the Air Force proposal later.

The President summed up by requesting General LeMay to submit his proposal to the Secretary and to the Joint Chiefs. Then, after it had been “worked over”, this matter should again be brought up to him as he wished to explore it further inasmuch as he knew many of his old colleagues on the Hill were worried over this trend toward an all-missile force. He closed by stating that he wished everyone to stand by him on this budget in their appearances before Congress.

General LeMay then turned to the subject of air defense wherein he stated that the picture was dismal. True, intelligence estimates indicated a slight degradation of the threat. However, our available intelligence was not too good and the Russians had been successful in hiding their new developments. He referred to several aircraft that the Russians had built and, in some cases, had flown in air shows before we had been aware of their existence. He saw no great reason to believe that we would do much better in the future in this respect.

Meanwhile, according to General LeMay, our air defense capabilities were going downward. He delineated several reasons: our radar and control systems were deteriorating, in that portions of the SAGE system were being phased out prior to appropriate replacement by the new BUIC system; our current interceptors were becoming obsolete, and even these aircraft were gradually being phased out by attrition; further, we had terminated production of our air defense interceptors.

For these reasons, General LeMay felt it was urgent to get on with the development of an improved manned interceptor. He observed that in his letter to the President he had proposed the development of a long-range aircraft which could intercept and destroy enemy bombers before they had reached the stand-off range from which they could launch air-to-surface missiles at the continental United States. The current interceptor force did not have that capability. He noted that considerable funds had already been expended and that $40 million in FY 65 funds would enable the Air Force to proceed with the orderly development of long-lead items for the interceptor and its fire control system. Thus, he was requesting the authority to reprogram $90 million, from the FY 65 Air Force budget, for both the improved manned strategic aircraft and the manned interceptor.

The Secretary, after alluding to a classified project, stated that the basic issue was not whether such an aircraft should be developed but, rather, whether such an interceptor should be produced and deployed. This issue was related to General Wheeler's remarks regarding the ABM. He noted that if, next fall, the decision were made not to deploy the Nike-X units, it would not be reasonable to proceed with production and deployment of improved interceptors inasmuch as the country could be destroyed by ballistic missile attacks. Mr. Gilpatric observed that there was a further interrelation in this issue, i.e., the decision as to whether or not to press forward on civil defense. Secretary McNamara summed up by stating that all three of these matters would be up for decision in the latter part of 1964.

General LeMay voiced his opinion that the decision on the improved interceptor should not be contingent on these other decisions. He pointed out that it was also necessary to protect the sovereignty of this country's air space and that, without such an improved interceptor, this requirement could not be met once supersonic transports became operational. He also observed that the Soviets had indicated that they were working on such an aircraft and that the British, working in concert with the French, had announced that their supersonic transport would be flying in 1968.

At this point the President changed the subject of discussion to the development of a supersonic transport aircraft by the United States. He stated that, in his opinion, the Secretary of Defense was the proper person in our government to supervise this gigantic and expensive project. Further, he indicated that he was thinking of a Board to consist of Mr. Halaby, Mr. Black,5 Mr. McCone, and Secretary Dillon, with Secretary McNamara as Chairman; such a Board should “run with the ball” until it encountered real trouble. The Secretary laughingly noted that this would not take very long.

The meeting adjourned at 1328 hours CST.

* Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Records, CJCS 031.1, Meetings with the President. Top Secret. Attached to a note by Brigadier General M. J. Ingelido, Secretary of the JCS, who drafted the memorandum. McNamara's brief handwritten notes of this conference are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Budget Memos to the President. According to the notes, all the Joint Chiefs attended the meeting, as did McNamara, Gilpatric, Clifton, and Kermit Gordon, Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

1 Chancellor Ludwig Erhard of the Federal Republic of Germany was the President's guest at the LBJ Ranch December 28-29. Documentation on the visit is in Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, vol. XV, Documents 242 and 248.

2 The quotation is from a December 16 memorandum from the JCS to McNamara that was prepared in response to McNamara's request, in a November 30 memorandum to the Chiefs, for a statement of concurrence in his recommended program. The full sentence begins: “Although the force structure does not include all the forces recommended by members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, or by the Chiefs of Staff in their service capacities, the Joint Chiefs of Staff agree . . .” The December 16 memorandum includes an appendix listing those JCS recommendations that McNamara did not accept. (Both in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470, McNamara Final)

3 Not found.

4 Gordon recommended this deferment in a December 9 memorandum. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Back-Up for Discussion with the President)

5 Najeeb Halaby, Administrator of the FAA, and Eugene Black, former President of the IBRD.

Index Index

Acheson, Dean, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 85]

Air defense. See Strategic defense programs.

Air Force, U.S. Department of the. See Joint Chiefs of Staff; Limited war capability; Military budget.

Airlift/sealift capability, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 8], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 53]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 53] Defense Department recommendations, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 50]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 50], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 115]

JCS discussions, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 121], 453n [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121]

Amory, Robert, Jr., 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99]

Anderson, Adm. George W., Jr., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121]-449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 121], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

ANZUS Pact, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]

Arms control, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 149] Basic national security policy review, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 90]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 93]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 93]

Army, U.S. Department of the. See Joint Chiefs of Staff;Limited war capability; Military budget.

Atlantic Community, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 62], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 78]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78]

Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

B-52 bomber force. See Strategic defense programs; Strategic retaliatory forces.

B-70 bomber force. See Strategic defense programs; Strategic retaliatory forces.

Ball, George W., 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 95], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131]

Ballistic missile defense (see also Strategic defense programs), 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101] Defense-Budget memorandum, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 20]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 20]

Defense Department recommendations, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 48], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 111], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 145]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 145]

JCS discussions, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 154]

JCS position, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 111]-396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 111]

State Department position, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 53], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 114]-422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 114]

Taylor position, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 58]

Basic national security policy review (BNSP), 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 37], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 70], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 90]-305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 136] Bundy position, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 21]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 77]

Camp David meeting, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Defense Department position, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 38]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 39], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 78]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78]

JCS position, 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]n, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 39], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 76]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 76], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 78]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 78], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 119], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 136]n

Kaysen position, 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 30]-105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 79]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 79]

Kennan position, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Nitze position, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 89]

Policy Planning Council drafts, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 62]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 62], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 93]

Publicity, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 95]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

State Department position, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 35], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Stevenson position, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 75]

Taylor position, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Belk, Samuel, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Bell, David E., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 225n [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 63], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131] Counterinsurgency capability, 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]

Military budget, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 8], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Berle, Adolf A., Jr., 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

Berlin crisis, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 458n [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125] Military budget and, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 50], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 50], 195n [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 54], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 57], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61]

NSC discussions, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69]

Bissell, Richard M., Jr., 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]

Blouin, Rear Adm. F. J., 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Bohlen, Charles E., 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Bowles, Chester, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Brazil, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8]

Brown, Harold, 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Bruce, David K. E., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Budget, U.S. Bureau of the, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147]-537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Bundy, McGeorge, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 462n [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135] Ballistic missile defense, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58]

Basic national security policy review, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 21]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 77], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]

Counterinsurgency capability, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 59], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105] NSC Special Groups, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]

Paramilitary operations, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 34], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91]

General war strategy, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 141], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 141]

Johnson NSC speech, 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Military budget, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Budget Department position, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 147], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

National security policy planning structure, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 6], 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

NSC organization, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

State Department role, 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Soviet military capability, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 129], 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 147]

Burke, Adm. Arleigh A., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18]

Burma, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Cambodia, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Cameroon, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 31], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64], 381n [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Central Treaty Organization (CENTO), 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]

Chapla, Col. Benjamin C., 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Chemical/biological weapons, 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 93]

China, People's Republic of, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 70], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 142], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 153]-570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 153] Nuclear capability, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Civil and Defense Mobilization, Office of (OCDM), 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

Civil defense measures (see also Strategic defense programs), 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 93]-317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 93], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 103]-378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 103], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 147] Defense Department recommendations, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

State Department position, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 53]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 53]

Cleveland, Harlan, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73]

Clifton, Maj. Gen. Chester V., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 27n [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 48n [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40], 130n [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44], 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67] Counterinsurgency capability, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]n, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 133]

Limited war capability, 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27]

Military budget, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

National security policy planning structure, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Coast Guard, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4]

Coffin, Frank, 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99]

Colombia, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Congo, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11]

Congress, U.S.: Basic national security policy review, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 95]

Berlin crisis, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40]

Jackson Subcommittee, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Senate Armed Services Committee, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40]

Connally, John, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 8]n, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 27]

Contingency Freedom Fund, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Conventional forces. See Limited war capability.

Counterinsurgency capability: Army Special Forces, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 133], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Basic national security policy review, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 90], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 93]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 93]

Bundy position, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71]

Civic action, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 74], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 128]

Defense Department recommendations, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]-43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17]

JCS discussions, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Kennedy position, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]

NSC discussions, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]

NSC Special Group (5412), 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64]

NSC Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 106], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 139]

Paramilitary operations, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 102]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 128]

Police assistance programs, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 74], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102], 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128]

Progress report, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

State Department position, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 10]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 53]

State Department review, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 59]

Taylor appointment, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

“U.S. Overseas Internal Defense Policy” paper, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105]-383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Cuba, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 120] JCS discussions, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121]

NSC discussions, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]-242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125], 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Davis, Thomas W., Jr., 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122], 464n [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

De Gaulle, Charles, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 121], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 125], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 141], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Decker, Gen. George H., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67] Counterinsurgency capability, 29n [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]

Limited war capability, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 115]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Defense Department headings under other subjects; McNamara, Robert S.; Military budget), 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Deterrence, 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]-6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 69], 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 82]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] Basic national security policy review, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 89]

Defense Department recommendations, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 112]

Soviet strategies, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 103]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 103]

Dillon, C. Douglas, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 141], 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Dirksen, Everett, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

Disarmament. See Arms control.

Draper Report, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73]

Dulles, Allen W., 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23] Counterinsurgency capability, 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 34], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105]

Dungan, Ralph A., 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Dynosoar. See Strategic defense programs; Strategic retaliatory forces.

Eastern Europe, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 70], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]

Ecuador, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Educational exchange program, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

Edwards, William, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 95]

Egypt, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Ellsberg, Daniel, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28]

Emrick, Maj. Gen. Paul S., 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 86]

Enthoven, Alain, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87]n, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]

European integration, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 78]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 85]-288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 85], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 125]

Evans, Allan, 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Ewell, Col. Julian J., 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94] Military budget, 178n [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 51], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 234n [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66]

Executive branch reorganization, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Export-Import Bank, Brazil, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8]

Feldman, Myer, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

Felt, Adm. Harry D., 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]

First-strike capability (see also General war strategy; Strategic retaliatory forces), 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 109], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 112]-405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 112], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 132], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Ford, John, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]

Forrestal, Michael V., 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 133]

Fowler, Henry H., 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

France, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 121], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 125], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 141], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Gallois, Gen. Pierre, 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Garthoff, Raymond L., 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100]

Gates, Thomas S., Jr., 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

General nuclear war, unintentional (see also General war strategy; Nuclear weapons policy), 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2]-9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7], 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 17]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 75]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 75], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 112], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 145]

General purpose forces. See Limited war capability.

General war strategy (see also Deterrence; General nuclear war, unintentional; Strategic retaliatory forces): Basic national security policy review, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 84], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 90]

Defense Department position, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39]

JCS discussions, 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44]

JCS position, 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 52]

McNamara speech before North Atlantic Council, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 82]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 82]

Net Evaluation Subcommittee Report, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Response strategy, 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 30], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 82]

Single Integrated Operational Plan, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 52], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

Strategic retaliatory forces and, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 151]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 151], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 151]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 125]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125]

Gilpatric, Roswell, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 24], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 27], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132] Basic national security policy review, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 38], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 78]

Military budget, 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Gold drain, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11]

Good, Robert C., 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Goodpaster, Gen. Andrew J., 11n [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 132]

Goodwin, Richard N., 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

Gordon, Kermit, 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125] n, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 147] n, 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 154]

Great Britain. See United Kingdom.

Guatemala, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Guerrilla capability. See Counterinsurgency capability.

Hamilton, Fowler, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72]

Hansen, Kenneth R., 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 148]-539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 148]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D., 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 74]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 74]

Harriman, W. Averell, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Heintges, Maj. Gen. John A., 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Herter, Christian A., 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

Hickey Report, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 54]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 92n [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 29], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 29]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 29], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Hitch, Charles J., 196n [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 54], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Holtoner, Gen., 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100]

Hoskot, Col., 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67]

Hound Dog program. See Strategic retaliatory forces.

Howze, Lt. Gen. Hamilton H., 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 86], 423n [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 115]

Hughes, Thomas L., 250n [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

India, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125]

Indonesia, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Ingelido, Brig. Gen. M. J., 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Intelligence, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 31], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]

Interagency Committee on Police Assistance Programs, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99]

Intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs). See Military budget; Strategic retaliatory forces.

Iran, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 153]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 153]

Israel, 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2]

Jackson, Henry M., 32n [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Japan, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70]

Johnson, Charles, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Johnson, Gen. Leon, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 154] Military budget, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 151], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 153]

Johnson, Robert H., 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 352n [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102], 381n [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 494n [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] Basic national security policy review, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 119]

Counterinsurgency capability, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 133]

Military budget, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61]

NSC Standing Group, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Soviet military capability, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) (see also JCS headings under other subjects), 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 32], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39] Meetings, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 154]

Single Integrated Operational Plan, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 52], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

Joint Strategic Capabilities Plan (JSCP), 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 25], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28]

Joint Strategic Survey Council, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 39]

Kaysen, Carl, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127] Basic national security policy review, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 30]-105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 37], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 79]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 79], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]

Military budget, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 57], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 30]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 57], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 63]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 63], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 107], 429n [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 116], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 147]

Keeny, Spurgeon, 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147]-537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Kennan, George F., 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Kennedy, John F., 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124] Assassination, 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147]

Ballistic missile defense, 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121]

Basic national security policy review, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Berlin crisis, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]-54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69]

Counterinsurgency capability, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69]-241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105]

Army Special Forces, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 133], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

JCS discussions, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]

NSC Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 307n [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Paramilitary operations, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Police assistance programs, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]

Cuba, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]-242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125]

Eisenhower meeting, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

General war strategy, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

JCS meetings, 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66]

Limited war capability, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 60], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 115]

Military budget, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 116]

JCS discussions, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121]

National security policy planning structure, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 32], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]

Executive branch reorganization, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

NSC meetings, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69], 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Soviet military capability, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Interdepartmental Committee Report, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Soviet strategies, 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 104]

Strategic defense programs, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 51], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 145]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 63], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 112], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 140]-499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

U.S. military aid, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69]

Vietnam, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]

Kennedy, Robert F., 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141] Counterinsurgency capability, 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Kent, Sherman, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 29], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 29]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 29], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 56], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 56]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 56], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 130], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 142]

Kistiakowsky, George, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Kitchen, Jeffrey, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101] n, 494n [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Kohler, Foy D., 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Komer, Robert W., 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] Counterinsurgency capability, 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 248n [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99]

National security policy planning structure, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Korean war, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 35], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 153]-580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 153]

Lansdale, Gen. Edward G., 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]

Laos, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 153] JCS discussions, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18]

Latin America (see also Counterinsurgency capability; Cuba; Nonaligned countries), 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18]

Legere, Col. Lawrence J., 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

LeMay, Gen. Curtis E., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]-492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138] Military budget, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 121]-451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 121], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 154]

Lemnitzer, Gen. Lyman L., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40], 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66] Basic national security policy review, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 76]-262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 76]

Counterinsurgency capability, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 307n [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105]

Cuba, 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18]

General war strategy, 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Military budget, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66]

Soviet military capability, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Soviet strategies, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 103]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 54]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

Tactical nuclear capability/strategy, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 24]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Limited war capability (see also Airlift/sealift capability; Counterinsurgency capability; Limited war strategy; Tactical nuclear capability/strategy): Basic national security policy review, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 38]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70]-245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80]-273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]-283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 93]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 93], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 132]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132]

Defense Department recommendations, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 38], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 39], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 50], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 78], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 115]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 115], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 153]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Dual capability forces, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]

General Purpose Forces Study, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 86], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87]

Hyannis Port discussions, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61]

JCS discussions, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121]

JCS position, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 132]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132]

Kaysen position, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 57], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 107]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

Kennedy-Eisenhower meeting, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

McNamara speeches before the North Atlantic Council, 279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 82]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 120]-441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 120], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 120]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 120]

National Intelligence Estimates, 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]

State Department position, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 10], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 35], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 53]-192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 53], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 114]

Taylor position, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 60]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84]

WSEG report, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Limited war strategy (see also Limited war capability; Tactical nuclear capability/strategy), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 10]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 56]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 56], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 93], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 120]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 120]

Lippmann, Walter S., 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 149]

Local war. See Limited war capability; Limited war strategy.

Logistic guidance, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 50]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 50]

Macmillan, Harold, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 121]

Maechling, Charles W., Jr., 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]n, 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 139]

Malaya, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]

Marshall, Burton, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27]

McCloy, John J., 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

McCone, John A., 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 103], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132] General war strategy, 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 141], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 141]

Soviet military capability, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 544n [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

McDonald, Adm., 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154]

McGhee, George C., 24n [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 113n [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 62], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 108]

McGovern, George, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

McHugh, Gen., 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

McNamara, Robert S., 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 24], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125] Ballistic missile defense, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 48], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-397 [Pg. 397 is part of Doc. 111], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121]

Basic national security policy review, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 78], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 78], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 89], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 136]

Bundy proposal, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

JCS position, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 76], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

State Department position, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Counterinsurgency capability, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 34], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

General war strategy, 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 25], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 141]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 141], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 141]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Single Integrated Operational Plan, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Limited war capability, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50]-170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 50], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 115]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 115], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 153]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

Military budget, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 8], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 107], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Defense-Budget memorandum, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Defense Department recommendations, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 50], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 116]-431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

JCS discussions, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 154], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 154], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 154]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 154]

National security policy, 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

North Atlantic Council speeches, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 82]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 120]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 120]

Soviet military capability, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 129]n, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Soviet strategies, 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 103]

Strategic defense programs, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 50]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 51]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 145]-533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 54], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 63], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 110], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147], 535n [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 147]

Defense Department recommendations, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17]-45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 17], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 50]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 50], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 112]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 116]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 140]-499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 151]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

McQuade, Lawrence, 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Middle East, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 153]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 153]

Military budget (see also National security policy; Strategic retaliatory forces; specific topics), 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 8], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17] Budget Bureau position, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147]-537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Bundy position, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21]

Defense-Budget memorandum, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Defense Department recommendations, 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 50], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 116]-431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Hyannis Port discussions, 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 61]

JCS discussions, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 18], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 154]

Kaysen position, 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

State Department position, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 114]

Taylor position, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 60]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Millikan, Max, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73]

Minuteman program. See Strategic retaliatory forces.

Murrow, Edward R., 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 11-4-60, 47n [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 17]

NIE 1-61, “Estimate of the World Situation,” 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

NIE 11-61, “Probable Intelligence Warning of Soviet Attack on the U.S.,” 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

NIE 11-3-61, “Sino-Soviet Air Defense Capabilities Through Mid-1966,” 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 36]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 36]

NIE 11-5-61, “Soviet Technical Capabilities in Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles,” 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 29]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 29]

NIE 11-8-61, Annex C, “The Soviet ICBM Program-Evidence and Analysis,” 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 29]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 29]

NIE 11-8/1-61, “Strength and Deployment of Soviet Long Range Ballistic Missile Forces,” 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

NIE 11-2A-62, “The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 88]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 88]

NIE 11-3-62, “Soviet Bloc Air and Missile Defense Capabilities Through Mid-1967,” 118n [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 36]

NIE 11-8-62, “Soviet Military Capabilities for Long Range Attack” (see also Interdepartmental Committee Report under Soviet strategies), 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

NIE 11-14-62, “Capabilities of the Soviet Theater Forces,” 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 117]

NIE 13-2-62, “Chinese Communist Advanced Weapons Capabilities,” 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

NIE 11-4-63, “Soviet Military Capabilities and Policies, 1962-1967,” 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 130], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 153]

NIE 11-8-63, “Soviet Military Capabilities for Strategic Attack,” 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 144]

NIE 11-9-63, “Soviet Military Capabilities and Intentions To Orbit Nuclear Weapons,” 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 134]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

SNIE 11-14-61, “The Soviet Strategic Military Posture, 1961-1967,” 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 56]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

SNIE 13-2-63, “Communist China's Advanced Weapons Program,” 492 [Pg. 492 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

National Security Action Memoranda (NSAM): Creation of, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

No. 1, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

No. 2, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

No. 3, 20n [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8]

No. 5, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

No. 6, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

No. 55, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 32]

No. 56, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 67], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

No. 57, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 34]-113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

No. 114, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 59]

No. 118, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 74]

No. 119, 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 74]

No. 124, 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

No. 131, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 74], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 128]

No. 132, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72]-250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

No. 162, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91]

No. 182, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105]

National Security Council (NSC): Actions:

No. 2400, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

No. 2407, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

No. 2446, 242n [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69]

No. 2453, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

No. 2460, 462n [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Basic national security policy review, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

Counter-Guerrilla Warfare Task Force, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]

Documents:

NSC 5412/2, “Covert Operations,” 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]

NSC 5906/1 (see also Basic national security policy review), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 24], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Johnson speech, 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Meetings, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-242 [Pg. 242 is part of Doc. 69], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Organization, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 31], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Role of, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19], 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Special Group (5412), 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64]

Special Group (Counterinsurgency), 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 91], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 106], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 139]

Standing Group, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

National security policy (see also Basic national security policy review); General war strategy; Limited war strategy; National security policy planning structure; Nuclear weapons policy; specific topics): Defense Department position, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Foreign policy considerations, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

McNamara speeches before the North Atlantic Council, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 82]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 120]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 120]

National Security Policy Committee, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

National security policy planning structure (see also Special Group (Counterinsurgency) under National Security Council): Bundy appointment as Special Assistant, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Executive branch reorganization, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

Jackson Subcommittee, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

JCS role, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]-110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 32], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 52]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 52]

NSAM creation, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]

NSC organization, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 31], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

NSC role, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19], 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32]

NSC Special Group (5412), 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64]

OCB abolishment, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

State Department role, 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

National Strategic Targeting and Attack Policy, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 25]

Navy, U.S. Department of the. See Joint Chiefs of Staff; Limited war capability; Military budget.

Neustadt, Richard E., 16n [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 6]

Neutral countries. See Nonaligned countries.

Nike-X system (see also Ballistic missile defense), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 111]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 111], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 114], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 114]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 114], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 145]-529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 145], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 154]

Nike-Zeus system (see also Ballistic missile defense), 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 58], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 111], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114] Bundy position, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58]

Defense-Budget memorandum, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 20]-63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 20]

Defense Department recommendations, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 17], 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 48], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 111], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 145], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 145]

JCS discussions, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121]

Soviet military capability and, 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101]

State Department position, 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 53], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 114], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 114]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 114]

Nitze, Paul H., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]n, 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 469n [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130] Basic national security policy review, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 73]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 89], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94], 480 [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 481n [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 132]

Cuba, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Soviet strategies, 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

Nonaligned countries (see also Counterinsurgency capability; U.S. economic aid; U.S. military aid), 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 124]-457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125] Basic national security policy review, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 75]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 75], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 79]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 79], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 85]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 85]

Norstad, Gen. Lauris C., 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 120]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (see also Limited war capability), 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 104] Basic national security policy review, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 85]

McNamara speeches before the North Atlantic Council, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 82]-281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 120]-445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 120]

Nuclear weapons policy, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 82]-279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 82]

U.S. policy, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 10]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 125]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 142]

Defense Department position, 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 153]-576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 153]

Nuclear capability (see also Nuclear weapons policy; Strategic retaliatory forces; Tactical nuclear capability/strategy), 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 39], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 82]-277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 82]

Nuclear proliferation, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 142]

Nuclear weapons policy (see also Deterrence; General nuclear war, unintentional; General war strategy;Nuclear capability; Strategic retaliatory forces; Tactical nuclear capability/strategy), 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 17], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] Basic national security policy review, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70]

Holifield Report, 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18]

JCS discussions, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40]

Kennan position, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 85]-289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 85]

McNamara speech before the North Atlantic Council, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 120]-440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 120]

NATO use, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 40], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 80], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 82]-279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 82]

O'Donnell, Lawrence, 55n [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

Offshore Islands, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Operations Coordinating Board (OCB), 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 6], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]

Organization of American States (OAS), 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69]

Overseas bases, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 17], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 93]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 93]

Owen, Henry D., 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94]

Pakistan, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125]

Parrott, Thomas A., 248n [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Payne, Fred A., 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]

Polaris program. See Strategic retaliatory forces.

Power, Gen., 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44]

Prisoners of war, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4]

Ramsey, Henry C., 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]

Rayburn, Sam, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 149]

Research and development (see also specific topics), 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 53]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 93], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 132]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133] Defense Department position, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 50]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 50]

Soviet activities, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 56]-203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 56]

Reserve forces (see also Military budget), 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 4], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 50], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 53], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 93]

Retaliatory capability. See General war strategy; Strategic retaliatory forces).

Riley, Herbert D., 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 76], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 425n [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 115]

ROAD, 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 27]

Rostow, Walt Whitman, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64], 253n [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 494n [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] Basic national security policy review, 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 62], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 77], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 136], 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Kaysen position, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 79]

Kennan position, 285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Publicity, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 95]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Stevenson position, 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Taylor position, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84]

National security policy planning structure, 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]-540 [Pg. 540 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

Strategic situation, 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Rovere, Richard, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 129]

Rowen, Henry S., 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87]n, 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 99]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 99] Basic national security policy review, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 30], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 37], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 78]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 78], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Rusk, Dean, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Ballistic missile defense, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 114]-422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 114]

Basic national security policy review, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 94], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 490n [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 136], 533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Camp David meeting, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 70], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 73]

Defense Department draft, 113 [Pg. 113 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 35], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 38]

Counterinsurgency capability, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Paramilitary operations, 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 34], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

State Department review, 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 59]

General war strategy, 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 141], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 141]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Military budget, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53]-194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 114]

National security policy, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23]

Planning structure, 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131], 539n [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 148]

Soviet strategies, 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 103]

Russell, Vice Adm., 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40]

Salinger, Pierre E. G., 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 6], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 19]

Saunders, Harold, 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65]

Schaetzel, J. Robert, 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 86]

Schlesinger, Arthur M., Jr., 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31]-107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31]

Seaborg, Glenn, 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Sealift capability. See Airlift/sealift capability.

Shepard, Capt. Tazewell, Jr., 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

Shoup, Gen. David M., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40], 141n [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 46], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154]

Single Integrated Operational Plan (SIOP), 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 28], 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 52], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 92]-309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

Skybolt program. See Strategic retaliatory forces.

Smith, Gen., 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66]

Smith, Bromley, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 31], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 141]

Smith, William Y., 188n [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53], 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 283n [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84], 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 86], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 88]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 88], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 480n [Pg. 480 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 513n [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 537n [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Sorensen, Theodore C., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 31], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 227n [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 63], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 83]

Soviet military capability (see also Intelligence; Soviet strategies), 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 57] Ballistic missile defense and, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 111], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 114]-422 [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 114]

First-strike capability and, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 112]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 112]

Interdepartmental Committee Report, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 103]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 103], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 103]-363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 103], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 103]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 103], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 104]

JCS memoranda, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Military budget and, 145 [Pg. 145 is part of Doc. 46]-146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 46], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 46]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 46], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 50]

Missile gap, 32 [Pg. 32 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 67 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 21], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 129]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

National Intelligence Estimates, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 29]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 29], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 36]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 36], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 88]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 88], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 117], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 130]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 130], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 134]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]-524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 144]

NSC discussions, 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Reaction time, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Soviet strategies and, 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 29]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 29], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 56], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 56]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 56], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 96]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 103]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 103], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 103]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 103], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 144]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 144]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 56], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 56]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 56], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 56]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 56], 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 56]

Strategic Air Command position, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Strategic retaliatory forces and, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 17]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 112]-407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 112], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 151]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 151]

Tactical nuclear weapons, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87]

U.S. capability comparison, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 17]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 153]-573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 153]

Soviet strategies (see also Soviet military capability), 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2]-8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 2], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 69], 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 93] Interdepartmental Committee Report, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 98], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 101], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 104]

Kennan position, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 85]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 85]

National Intelligence Estimates, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 2]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 29]-92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 29], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 96]-342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 130], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 144]-525 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 144]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 56]-209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]

Soviet Union (see also Soviet military capability; Soviet strategies), 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 142]

Special National Intelligence Estimates. See National Intelligence Estimates.

Staats, Elmer B., 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Stahr, Elvis, 423n [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 115]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 75]

Stoertz, Howard, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Stoessel, Walter J., Jr., 31n [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

Strategic Air Command (SAC), 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 11], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 40], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 50]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 50], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Strategic defense programs (see also Ballistic missile defense; Military budget), 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 20]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 93]-317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 93], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 147] Defense Department recommendations, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 17]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 50]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 50], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 51]-181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 145]-533 [Pg. 533 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

JCS discussions, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 121], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 154]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 154]

State Department position, 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 53]-191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 53]

Strategic retaliatory forces (see also General war strategy; Military budget): Basic national security policy review, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 30]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 70], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 89], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 93]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 93], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 119], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 132]

Budget Bureau position, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 147]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 147]

Defense Department recommendations, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 17]-45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 17], 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 30]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 50]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 50], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 112]-416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 116]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 140]-499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 151]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

General war strategy and, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 25], 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 151]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 151], 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 151]-564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

Hyannis Port discussions, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61]

JCS discussions, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66]-234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 66], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 121], 590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154]-593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 154]

JCS position, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 25], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 54]-197 [Pg. 197 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 109], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 119], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 132]

Kaysen position, 103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 30]-104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 57], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 63]-228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 63], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 107]

McNamara speech before the North Atlantic Council, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 120]-444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 120]

National Security Policy Committee position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

Net Evaluation Subcommittee Report, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 141]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 141]

Soviet military capability and, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 17]-48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 49]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 112]-407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 112], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 151]-553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 151]

State Department position, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 10], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 53]

Taylor position, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 110]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

WSEG Report, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Strategic situation (see also Soviet strategies; specific topics), 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 2]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Tactical nuclear capability/strategy, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 2], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87] Basic national security policy review, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84]-284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 84], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 93]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 93]

Defense Department recommendations, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 17], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 30], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 153]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 153]

JCS position, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 23]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

McNamara speeches before the North Atlantic Council, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 82]-279 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 82], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 120]

McNamara study, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]-299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 110n [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 32], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 33], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 44], 152n [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 458n [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 125] Ballistic missile defense, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 58]-215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 58], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 116], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121]

Basic national security policy review, 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 76], 267n [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 78], 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 80]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 84]-285 [Pg. 285 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 119]

Counterinsurgency capability, 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 64]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 64], 231n [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 65], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 105], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137]

NSC Special Group (Counter-insurgency), 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 74], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 122]

Police assistance programs, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 71], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 72]

Progress reports, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 102]-355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 128]

General war strategy, 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 141], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 141]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 141]

Limited war capability, 571n [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 153]

Military budget, 178n [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 51], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 53], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 60]-219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

JCS discussions, 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 121], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 154]-589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 154], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 154]

National security policy planning structure, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 131]-479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131]

Soviet military capability, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 87]-301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 88]

Soviet strategies, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 100], 379 [Pg. 379 is part of Doc. 104]-380 [Pg. 380 is part of Doc. 104]

Strategic retaliatory forces, 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 43], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 110]-392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Thailand, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 74], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 153]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 131]

Titan program. See Strategic retaliatory forces.

Underdeveloped countries. See Nonaligned countries.

United Kingdom, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 85], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 109]

United Nations, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 2], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 62], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 75], 291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 85]-292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 85]

U.S. economic aid, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 8], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]-23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 125], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8]

U.S. military aid (see also Counter-insurgency capability), 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 66], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 70], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]-489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Vance, Cyrus, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 115]

Venezuela, 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Vietnam, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 69], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 74], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 149], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 153] Basic national security policy review, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 70]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 70]

Counterinsurgency programs, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 11]-30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 11], 49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 18]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 18], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18]-53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 18], 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 74]-256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 74], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 102]-354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 102]

Weapons Systems Evaluation Group (WSEG), Report No. 50, “Evaluation of Strategic Offensive Weapons Systems,” 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Webb, James E., 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 150]

Weiss, Seymour, 194n [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 53], 219 [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 61]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 94], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 121], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 121]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 121], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 137], 589 [Pg. 589 is part of Doc. 154]-590 [Pg. 590 is part of Doc. 154], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 154]

White, Gen. Thomas D., 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 4], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 18]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 18]

Wiesner, Jerome B., 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 7]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 7], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 8], 219n [Pg. 219 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 300n [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 87], 431 [Pg. 431 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 457n [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125] Strategic retaliatory forces, 429n [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 116], 499n [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Yarmolinsky, Adam, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 129]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]
